MADEIRA, OHIO
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CHARTER
Chapter
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
10. General Provisions
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
30. City Council
31. City Officials
32. Police and Fire Protection
33. City Boards and Commissions
34. Civil Service
35. Mayor’s Court
36. Civil Actions Against the Municipality
37. Public Records Policy
38. Finances
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
50. Sewage System
51. Surface Water Runoff
52. Stormwater Regulations
53. Minority Business Enterprise Association
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
70. General Provisions
71. Licensing Provisions
72. Traffic Rules
73. Motor Vehicle Crimes
74. Equipment and Loads
75. Bicycles, Motorcycles, Snowmobiles and All-Purpose Vehicles
76. Parking Regulations
1
2 Madeira - Table of Contents
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
90. Animals
91. Fire Prevention
92. Junk; Rubbish; Littering; Weeds
93. Streets and Sidewalks
94. City Parks
95. Trees
96. Waters and Watercourses
97. Income Tax
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
110. Amusement Devices
111. Circus, Carnival or Show
112. Dance Halls, Nightclubs and Restaurants; Noise
113. Charitable and Commercial Solicitation
114. Advertising; Signs and Handbills
115. Video Service Provider
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
130. General Provisions
131. Offenses Against Property
132. Offenses Against Public Peace
133. Offenses Against Morals
134. Gambling
135. Offenses Against Persons
136. Offenses Against Justice and Administration
137. Weapons Control
138. Drug Offenses
139. Miscellaneous
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
150. Zoning Code
151. Subdivision Regulations
152. Building Code and Regulations
153. Excavating, Filling and Grading of Land
154. Planning Commission
Table of Contents 3
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE (Cont’d)
155. Comprehensive Park and Recreation Plan
156. Swimming Pool Construction
157. House and Building Numbering Regulations
158. Property Maintenance Code
159. Signs
160. Flood Hazard Reduction
161. Architectural Review Office
162. Home Sales
163. Central Business District Regulations
164. Location of Sexually Oriented Businesses Regulated
165. Schedule of Fees for Land Usage Applications and Appeals
166. Main Street Core District Zoning Regulations
167. Residential-Scale Business Overlay District Regulations
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
Table
I. Acceptances and Dedications
II. Acquisition and Disposal of Real Property
III. Annexations and Detachments
IV. Contracts for City Services; Franchises
V. Easements
VI. Street Names
VII. Vacations of Streets and Alleys
VIII. Zoning
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Ohio Revised Code
References to 1985 Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
INDEX
4 Madeira - Table of Contents

TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter
10. GENERAL PROVISIONS
1
2 Madeira - General Provisions
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
10.01 Short titles
10.02 Definitions
10.03 Rules of construction
10.04 Revivor; effect of amendment or repeal
10.05 Construction of section references
10.06 Conflicting provisions
10.07 Severability
10.08 Reference to offices
10.09 Errors and omissions
10.10 Ordinances repealed
10.11 Ordinances unaffected
10.12 Ordinances saved
10.99 General penalty
§ 10.01 SHORT TITLES.
(A) All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the municipality, as revised, codified,
rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component codes, titles, chapters and sections, shall be
known and designated as the “Madeira municipal code,” for which designation “code of ordinances,”
“codified ordinances” or “code” may be substituted. Code title, chapter and section headings do not
constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.
(R.C. § 1.01)
(B) All references to codes, titles, chapters and sections are to such components of the code unless
otherwise specified. Any component code may be referred to and cited by its name, such as the “Traffic
Code.” Sections may be referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by the number, such as
“§ 10.01.” Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and section numbers,
are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.
(1985 Code, § 10.01)
3
4 Madeira - General Provisions
§ 10.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning.
AND/OR. The word “and” may be read as “or,” and the word “or” may be read as “and,” if the
sense requires it.
(R.C. § 1.02(F))
ANOTHER. When used to designate the owner of property which is the subject of an offense,
includes not only natural persons but also every other owner of property.
(R.C. § 1.02(B))
CITY, TOWN, VILLAGE, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION or MUNICIPALITY. When used in
this code shall denote the municipality of Madeira irrespective of its population or legal classification.
COUNCIL. The legislative authority of the municipality.
COUNTY. Hamilton County, Ohio.
IMPRISONED. Imprisoned in another residential facility under R.C. § 2929.16.
(R.C. § 1.05(D)) (Ord. 88-39, passed 10-3-1988)
INTERNET. The international computer network of both federal and non-federal interoperable
packet switched data networks, including the graphical subnetwork known as the world wide web.
KEEPER or PROPRIETOR. Includes all persons, whether acting by themselves or as a servant,
agent or employee.
LAND or REAL ESTATE. Includes rights and easements of incorporeal nature.
(R.C. § 701.01(F))
MAY. Is permissive.
MUNICIPALITY or CITY. The City of Madeira, Ohio.
O.A.C. Refers to the Ohio Administrative Code.
OATH. Includes affirmation and SWEAR includes affirm.
(R.C. §§ 1.59, 701.01)
OWNER. When applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner or tenant in common of
the whole or part of such property.
General Provisions 5
PERSON. Includes an individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust, partnership and
association.
(R.C. §§ 1.59(C), 701.01)
PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes all property except real.
PLAN OF SEWERAGE, SYSTEM OF SEWERAGE, SEWER and SEWERS. Includes sewers,
sewage disposal works and treatment plants, and sewage pumping stations, together with facilities and
appurtenances necessary and proper therefor.
(R.C. § 701.01)
PREMISES. As applied to property, includes land and buildings.
PROPERTY. Includes real, personal, mixed estates and interests.
(R.C. § 701.01(E))
PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Includes boards of education; the municipal, county, state or federal
government, its officers or an agency thereof; or any duly authorized public official.
PUBLIC PLACE. Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school yard, body of water or
watercourse, public conveyance, or any other place for the sale of merchandise, public accommodation,
or amusement.
R.C. or REVISED CODE. Refers to the Revised Code of Ohio.
REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
REGISTERED MAIL. Includes certified mail and CERTIFIED MAIL includes registered mail.
(R.C. § 1.02(G))
SHALL. Is mandatory.
SIDEWALK. The portion of the street between the curb line and the adjacent property line intended
for the use of pedestrians.
STATE. The State of Ohio.
STREET. Includes alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads, highways, viaducts and all other
public thoroughfares within the municipality.
TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to premises, includes any person holding a written or oral
lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of such premises, alone or with others.
WEEK. Seven consecutive days.
(R.C. § 1.44)
6 Madeira - General Provisions
WHOEVER. Includes all persons, natural and artificial; partners; principals, agents and employees;
and all officials, public or private.
(R.C. § 1.02(A))
WRITTEN or IN WRITING. Includes printing and any representation of words, letters, symbols
or figures; this provision does not affect any law relating to signatures.
(R.C. §§ 1.59, 701.01 (J))
YEAR. Twelve consecutive months.
(R.C. § 1.44)
(1985 Code, § 10.02)
§ 10.03 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
(A) Common and technical usage. Words and phrases shall be read in context and construed
according to the rules of grammar and common usage. Words and phrases that have acquired a technical
or particular meaning, whether by legislative definition or otherwise, shall be construed accordingly.
(R.C. § 1.42)
(B) Singular and plural; gender; tenses. As used in the code, unless the context otherwise requires:
(1) The singular includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular;
(2) Words of one gender include the other genders; and
(3) Words in the present tense include the future tense.
(R.C. § 1.43)
(C) Calendar; computation of time.
(1) The time within which an act is required by law to be done shall be computed by excluding
the first and including the last day; except that when the last day falls on Sunday or a legal holiday, then
the act may be done on the next succeeding day that is not a Sunday or a legal holiday.
(2) When a public office, in which an act required by law is to be performed, is closed to the
public for the entire day that constitutes the last day for doing the act or before its usual closing time on
that day, the act may be performed on the next succeeding day that is not Saturday, Sunday or other days
the city is closed.
(4) When an act is to take effect or become operative from and after a day named, no part of
that day shall be included. If priority of legal rights depends upon the order of events on the same day,
the priority shall be determined by the times in the day at which they respectively occurred.
(R.C. § 1.15)
General Provisions 7
(5) If a number of months is to be computed by counting the months from a particular day, the
period ends on the same numerical day in the concluding month as the day of the month from which the
computation is begun, unless there are not that many days in the concluding month, in which case the
period ends on the last day of that month.
(R.C. § 1.45)
(6) In all cases where the law shall require any act to be done in a reasonable time or
reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or notice shall mean such time only as may be necessary
for the prompt performance of the duty or compliance with the notice.
(D) Numbers. If there is a conflict between figures and words in expressing a number, the words
govern.
(R.C. § 1.46)
(E) Authority. When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as well be done by an
agent as by the principal, the requirement shall be construed to include all such acts when done by an
authorized agent.
(F) Joint authority. All words purporting to give joint authority to three or more municipal officers
or other persons shall be construed as giving that authority to a majority of the officers or other persons,
unless it shall be otherwise expressly declared in the law giving the authority, or it is inconsistent with
state law or municipal Charter provisions.
(G) Exceptions. The rules of construction shall not apply to any law which contains any express
provision excluding the construction, or when the subject matter or context of the law is repugnant
thereto.
(1985 Code, § 10.03)
§ 10.04 REVIVOR; EFFECT OF AMENDMENT OR REPEAL.
(A) The repeal of a repealing statute does not revive the ordinance originally repealed nor impair
the effect of any saving clause therein.
(R.C. § 1.57)
(B) The re-enactment, amendment or repeal of an ordinance does not, except as provided in division
(C) of this section:
(1) Affect the prior operation of the ordinance or any prior action taken thereunder;
(2) Affect any validation, cure, right, privilege, obligation or liability previously acquired,
accrued, accorded or incurred thereunder;
(3) Affect any violation thereof or penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect thereto,
prior to the amendment or repeal; or
8 Madeira - General Provisions
(4) Affect any investigation, proceeding or remedy in respect of any privilege, obligation,
liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment; and the investigation, proceeding or remedy may be
instituted, continued or enforced, and the penalty, forfeiture or punishment imposed, as if the ordinance
had not been repealed or amended.
(C) If the penalty, forfeiture or punishment for any offense is reduced by a re-enactment or
amendment of an ordinance, the penalty, forfeiture or punishment, if not already imposed, shall be
imposed according to the ordinance as amended.
(R.C. § 1.58)
(D) An ordinance which is re-enacted or amended is intended to be a continuation of the prior
ordinance and not a new enactment, so far as it is the same as the prior ordinance.
(R.C. § 1.54)
(1985 Code, § 10.04)
§ 10.05 CONSTRUCTION OF SECTION REFERENCES.
(A) Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a section or an inclusive group
of sections, or of divisions or subdivisions of a section, the reference shall be construed to mean a
violation of any provision of the section, sections or divisions included in the reference.
(B) References in the code to action taken or authorized under designated sections of the code
include, in every case, action taken or authorized under the applicable legislative provision which is
superseded by this code.
(R.C. § 1.23)
(C) A reference to any portion of a provision of this code applies to all re-enactments or
amendments thereof.
(R.C. § 1.55)
(D) If a section refers to a series of numbers or letters, the first and the last numbers or letters are
included.
(R.C. § 1.56)
(E) Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, the reference shall extend
and apply to the section referred to as subsequently amended, revised, recodified or renumbered, unless
the subject matter has been changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
(1985 Code, § 10.05)
§ 10.06 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
(A) If a general provision conflicts with a special or local provision, they shall be construed, if
possible, so that effect is given to both. If the conflict between the provisions is irreconcilable, the special
General Provisions 9
or local provision prevails as an exception to the general provision, unless the general provision is the
later adoption and the manifest intent is that the general provision prevail.
(R.C. § 1.51)
(B) If amendments to the same ordinance are enacted at different meetings of the legislative
authority, one amendment without reference to another, the amendments are to be harmonized, if
possible, so that effect may be given to each. If the amendments are substantively irreconcilable, the
latest in date of enactment prevails. The fact that a later amendment restates language deleted by an
earlier amendment, or fails to include language inserted by an earlier amendment, does not of itself make
the amendments irreconcilable. Amendments are irreconcilable only when changes made by each cannot
reasonably be put into simultaneous operation.
(R.C. § 1.52)
(C) In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of this code, or between any of the
provisions of this code and any standard code adopted by the municipality pursuant to R.C. § 731.231,
the provision that establishes the higher or stricter standard shall control.
(1985 Code, § 10.06)
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
If any provisions of a section of this code or the application thereof to any person or circumstance
is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of the section or related
sections which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the
provisions are severable.
(R.C. § 1.50) (1985 Code, § 10.07)
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer or employee
of the city exercising the powers, duties or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
(1985 Code, § 10.08)
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
If a manifest error is discovered consisting of the misspelling of any words, the omission of any
words necessary to express the intention of the provisions affected, the use of words to which no
meaning can be attached, or the use of a word when another word was clearly intended to express the
intention, the spelling shall be corrected, and the words supplied, omitted or substituted shall conform
with the manifest intention, and the provision shall have the same effect as though the correct words were
10 Madeira - General Provisions
contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question
exists regarding the nature or extent of the error.
(1985 Code, § 10.09)
§ 10.10 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
With the exception of any ordinances specifically saved by the city, this code, from and after its
effective date, shall contain all of the provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein
enumerated and embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code shall be
deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code of ordinances.
(1985 Code, § 10.10)
§ 10.11 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
All ordinances of a temporary or special nature, all other ordinances pertaining to subjects not
enumerated and embraced in this code of ordinances, and all ordinances specifically saved by the city
shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
(1985 Code, § 10.11)
§ 10.12 ORDINANCES SAVED.
Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the legislative body, or a certain
municipal officer or employee, to make additional ordinances or regulations for the purpose of carrying
out the intention of the ordinance, all ordinances and regulations of a similar nature serving the purpose,
effected prior to the codification and not inconsistent thereto, shall remain in effect and are saved.
(1985 Code, § 10.12)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
(A) Whenever, in this municipal code or in any ordinance of the municipality, any act is prohibited
or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever the doing of any act
is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is otherwise
provided, whoever violates any such provision shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $150. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation continues or occurs.
(B) The failure of any officer or employee of the municipality to perform any official duty imposed
by this code shall not subject the officer or employee to the penalty imposed for a violation unless a
penalty is specifically provided for the failure.
(1985 Code, § 10.99)

TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
Chapter
30. CITY COUNCIL
31. CITY OFFICIALS
32. POLICE AND FIRE PROTECTION
33. CITY BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
34. CIVIL SERVICE
35. MAYOR’S COURT
36. CIVIL ACTIONS AGAINST THE MUNICIPALITY
37. PUBLIC RECORDS POLICY
38. FINANCES
1
2 Madeira - Administration
CHAPTER 30: CITY COUNCIL
Section
30.01 City Council
30.02 Procedure and rules of Council
30.03 Ordinances and resolutions
§ 30.01 CITY COUNCIL.
(A) Members and terms, see Charter Art. III, § l.
(B) Qualifications, see Charter Art. III, § 2.
(C) Quorum and voting, see Charter Art. III, § 4.
(D) Removals and vacancies, see Charter Art. III, § 5.
(E) Salaries, see Charter Art. III, § 6.
(1985 Code, § 30.01)
§ 30.02 PROCEDURE AND RULES OF COUNCIL.
(A) Council meetings.
(1) Regular Council meetings shall be held on the second and fourth Mondays of each month
at the City Municipal Building, or at such other location within the city as may be deemed appropriate
by the majority of City Council, except that during the months of June, July and August only one regular
meeting per month shall be held which will be held on the fourth Monday of the month. In December
there shall be one regular meeting of Council which shall be held during the first week of the month on
the day designated by Council or, in an election year, as provided in division (A)(3) below. Notice of
any change in location from the Municipal Building shall be provided at least 72 hours in advance of the
meeting. If a holiday falls on a scheduled Monday, that meeting shall be held on Tuesday of the same
week.
(2) Regular Council meetings shall convene at 7:30 p.m.
3
4 Madeira - Administration
(3) Council, following its election, shall hold an installation and organizational meeting on the
first day of December following such election. Unless notice is provided to the contrary, that meeting
shall be at 7:30 p.m. at the Municipal Building.
(4) Special meetings, called pursuant to § 3, Art. III, of the City Charter shall be limited to
those agenda items as listed on the notice of special meeting. All reasonable efforts shall be made to
provide at least 72 hours’ notice of a special meeting, but less advance notice shall not invalidate any
action taken at the special meeting unless there is less than 24 hours’ advance notice.
(B) Executive sessions.
(1) All official action shall be taken, and all deliberations upon official business shall be
conducted by Council only in open meetings, except that Council may hold an executive session at a
regular or special meeting by either placing the item on the agenda or, if not, previously placed on the
agenda, by motion of Council and consent of majority present (but at least five votes to consent at a
special meeting) and voting (notwithstanding any provisions under R.C. § 121.22), for the sole purpose
of considering any of the following matters:
(a) To consider the appointment, employment, dismissal, discipline, promotion, demotion
or compensation of a public employee or official, or the investigation of charges or complaints against
a public employee or official;
(b)1. To consider the purchase of property for public purposes, or for the sale of
property at competitive bidding, if premature disclosure of information would give an unfair competitive
or bargaining advantage to a person whose personal or private interest is adverse to the general public
interest. No public employee or official shall use this division (B)(1) as a subterfuge for providing covert
information to prospective buyers or sellers. A purchase or sale of public property is void if the seller
or buyer of the public property has received covert information from a member that has not been
disclosed to the general public in sufficient time for other prospective buyers and sellers to prepare and
submit offers; and
2. If the minutes of Council show that all meetings and deliberations of Council have
been conducted in compliance with this section, any instrument executed by Council purporting to
convey, lease or otherwise dispose of any right, title or interest in any public property shall be
conclusively presumed to have been executed in compliance with this section insofar as title or other
interest of any bona fide purchasers, lessors or transferees of the property is concerned.
(c) Conferences with any attorney for the city concerning disputes involving the city that
are subject of pending, possible or imminent court action, or to discuss legal opinions of the Law
Director on such matters that could reasonably involve future litigation;
(d) Preparing for, conducting or renewing negotiations or bargaining sessions with public
employees concerning their compensation or other terms and conditions of their employment, as well
as all other personnel matters where disclosure of the information is deemed detrimental to the city or
an employee;
City Council 5
(e) Matters which are required to be kept confidential by federal law, federal rules or state
statutes; and
(f) Specialized details of security arrangements where disclosure of the matters discussed
might reveal information that could be used for the purpose of committing, or avoiding prosecution for,
a violation of the law.
(2) Executive sessions shall be limited to Council members, except that those public officials
or other persons who are necessary or helpful for the discussion of the subject matter of the executive
session may be included upon invitation of the Council members requesting the executive session with
the consent of a majority of Council.
(3) No Council member shall disclose or use, without appropriate authorization by the majority
of Council members, any information acquired in the course of his or her official duties which has been
clearly designated by the majority of Council members to him or her as confidential. Such confidential
designation is warranted whenever the status of the proceedings, the circumstances under which the
information was received or the nature of the information necessitates that its confidentiality is necessary
to the proper conduct of governmental business.
(C) Rules of procedure of Council meetings. In addition to any legislative procedure prescribed by
the City Charter, the following additional rules are hereby adopted for the expeditious functioning of
Council.
(1) The agenda for all regular meetings of Council shall be prepared under the direction of the
City Manager, who shall be responsible for its preparation and distribution. Those items on the Council
agenda which are considered routine by the City Manager shall be marked with an asterisk (*) which
shall signify that it is part of the consent agenda. All matters so marked shall be considered to be routine
by the Council and will be enacted by one motion. There will be no separate discussion of these items
unless a Council member, citizen or interested party so requests, in which case, the item will be removed
from the consent agenda and shall be acted upon as a separate matter, subject to discussion and debate.
Such request to remove a matter from the consent agenda must be made prior to the Council vote
approving all matters on the consent agenda. The matters listed with an asterisk (*) are considered to be
routine and noncontroversial and no discussion or debate shall occur regarding any such matter unless
it is removed from the consent agenda as stated above.
(2) A preliminary agenda for each regular meeting of Council shall be available to each Council
member by 3:00 p.m. on the Wednesday before such regular meeting. A Council member may have
additional items of business included on the agenda by requesting the City Manager to so include them,
but should notify the City Manager no later than 12:00 noon on the Thursday preceding the regular
meeting. The City Manager, on his or her own initiative, may include on the agenda any item of business
he or she considers a proper subject for Council consideration so long as it appears on the agenda which
was delivered to the Council members as set forth herein. The Law Director may have topics or
legislation placed on the agenda which are required by law or are within his or her special knowledge
as being essential for the proper operation of the city. Any revision of the agenda shall be available to
Council members at the Municipal Building no later than 3:00 p.m. on the Friday before the regular
6 Madeira - Administration
meeting. All documents, including ordinances, resolutions and such written reports of the City Manager
and committees of Council shall be available with this agenda.
(3) In order to provide reasonable advance notice to the public about matters to be considered,
members of Council may not introduce ordinances or resolutions which were not included on the agenda
which was available on the Friday preceding the Council meeting unless in compliance with the following
procedures:
(a) The proposed legislation must be reviewed by the Law Director and the City Manager.
If they shall determine that it would be detrimental to the interests of the city not to permit the matter
to be added to the agenda, then the City Manager shall cause the notification described in division
(C)(3)(b) below to occur;
(b) Notification of the additional item is made to all interested parties without undue delay
and notice is also provided by posting at the Municipal Building; and
(c) The legislation shall be introduced as a motion to amend the agenda. That motion must
receive the votes of four Council members (even if less than seven members are present). Only then will
the legislation be added to the agenda for consideration at the meeting.
(4) Minutes of previous meetings need not be read in full, but any member may suggest
corrections of such minutes which shall be acted upon by Council before approval of the entire minutes.
After such corrections are considered, the Chair shall announce that the minutes stand approved as
written. Thereafter, corrections to the minutes may only be made by a vote of not less than five Council
members.
(5) Ordinances and resolutions shall be read aloud by title only unless any Council member
requests that it be read in full. Attachments or exhibits to ordinances or resolutions need not be read
aloud in full unless specifically requested by any Council member. The Clerk of Council shall read
ordinances and resolutions as directed by the Chair. The vote on any ordinance, resolution or motion
shall be by voice on roll call. The vote on the election or confirmation of the appointment of any person
to any office shall be by voice on roll call as aforesaid. The Clerk shall call the roll in order that alters
the sequence of votes by Council members.
(D) The Chair; powers and duties.
(1) Roll call. The Mayor, or in his or her absence, the Vice-Mayor, shall take the chair at the
hour appointed for Council to meet, and shall immediately call the members to order. The roll shall then
be called by the Clerk, or shall enter in the minutes of the meeting the names of the members present.
In the absence of a quorum at the time appointed for a meeting, the members present may, by a majority
vote of those present, take a recess or recesses and direct the Clerk to procure the attendance of absent
members.
City Council 7
(2) Temporary Chairperson. In case of absence of the Mayor and Vice-Mayor, the Clerk shall
call Council to order and call the roll of the members. If a quorum is found to be present, Council shall
proceed to elect, by a majority vote of those present, a Chairperson of the meeting, to act until the
Mayor or Vice-Mayor appears.
(3) Decision of the Chair. The Chair shall preserve decorum and decide all questions of order.
The Chair may call such recesses during a Council meeting as the Chair may deem appropriate.
(4) Votes. All questions shall be stated and put by the Chair and it shall not be in order for
members to explain their votes during the call of the roll.
(5) Presiding officer; leaving Chair. The presiding officer at a meeting may call any other
member to take his or her place in the Chair, but the substitution shall not extend beyond adjournment.
PRESIDING OFFICER means either the Mayor, Vice-Mayor or Chairperson of the meeting.
(6) Motions to be stated by withdrawal. When a motion is made and seconded, it shall be
stated by the Clerk before debate. Any member may demand that it be reduced to writing. A motion may
not be withdrawn by the mover without the consent of the member who seconded it.
(E) Members: duties and privileges.
(1) Addressing Chair. Every member speaking to a question or making a motion, shall address
the Chair. Members addressing Council shall confine themselves to the question under debate and avoid
personalities.
(2) Voting. Every member present when a question is put shall vote either yes, no or abstain.
(3) Excusal during meeting. Any member desiring to be excused while Council is in session,
shall obtain such permission from the Chair.
(F) The agenda.
(1) Transaction of Council business. Council shall transact its business in the following order:
(a) Call to order by Mayor or Vice-Mayor;
(b) Invocation;
(c) Pledge of Allegiance;
(d) Roll call by Clerk;
(e) Approval of agenda, including adoption of consent agenda items;
8 Madeira - Administration
(f) At regular Council meetings, approval of minutes of preceding meetings or meetings
of special Council meeting has been held;
(g) Presentation of notices of other meetings or events;
(h) Permission to address Council by members of audience. The Chairperson may limit
addresses to five minutes per person. Persons shall identify themselves and provide their residential
address in writing delivered to the Clerk before being recognized by the Chair. At meetings with
unusually large attendance, the Chair may impose such additional rules as are deemed appropriate from
time to time based on business before Council and the number of persons wishing to address Council.
The Chair shall discourage debate between Council members and members of the audience, but shall
refer matters raised during this session to the appropriate committee, or public official. The Chair shall,
whenever possible, announce at the outset any guidelines or limitations to be imposed during this part
of the agenda;
(i) Communications received:
1. Mayor;
2. Members of Council; and
3. Other officers.
(j) Reports of standing committees:
1. Administration and Personnel;
2. Budget and Finances;
3. Public Works;
4. Safety and Senior Services;
5. Legislative Review and Insurance;
6. Economic Development;
7. Parks and Recreation;
8. Reports of any special committees; and
9. Additional reports or announcements of Council members.
City Council 9
(k) Ordinances;
(1) Resolutions;
(m) Old business;
(n) New business;
(o) An executive session may be placed on the agenda in any order deemed appropriate
for the orderly conduct of business by Council; and
(p) Adjournment.
(2) Special order. Any subject may be placed in a special order on the agenda of Council with
the consent of a majority of the members present.
(G) Committees.
(1) Appointment. The Mayor shall appoint all committees of Council. The Mayor shall consult
individually with all members of Council prior to any such appointments.
(2) Standing committee. Standing committees shall consist of a Chairperson and two members.
An alternative member may be appointed to each committee but shall not attend committee meetings
unless specifically invited by other committee members, provided the total Council members present do
not exceed three. The duties of the standing committees of Council shall be established by the Mayor but
shall in no event delegate to any committee any decision-making or rule-making power vested in Council
as a whole. The duties and responsibilities shall be limited to fact finding, investigation and
recommendation to Council. The standing committees shall be as follows:
(a) Administration and Personnel. Responsible for reviewing staff levels, contract issues,
salary benefit packages; include the performance review of Council’s appointed employees and Civil
Service Commission;
(b) Budget and Finances. Responsible for working with the Treasurer in reviewing the
annual budget, capital improvement financing and other finance-related matters;
(c) Public Works. Responsible for reviewing all city proposed capital improvements
projects, Public Works Department procedures/programs and other public works related matters;
(d) Law and Safety. Responsible for reviewing all Police/Fire Department issues and
services, staffing levels and other related matters; responsible for reviewing all proposed legislation of
counsel having the force and effect of law; and responsible for reviewing the city’s insurance coverage;
10 Madeira - Administration
(e) Economic Development. Responsible for reviewing any project, zone changes, other
issue or concept as it relates to the impact on expanding the city’s economic base; to include but not be
limited to subdivisions, commercial developments or expansions and annexations; and
(f) Parks and Recreation. Responsible for reviewing any issues regarding park and/or
recreation services, recreation programs, park development and planning park capital improvement
projects. Responsible for senior citizen services.
(3) Special committee.
(a) The Chair may, at its discretion or, upon action of a majority of Council members (four
votes) establish special committees of Council for a temporary time period.
(b) Special committees shall consist of not more than three members of Council and may
be established for any purpose not in conflict with the responsibilities of standing committees.
(4) Meetings of standing and special committees. Standing and special committees shall meet
on call of the committee Chairperson or any two members.
(5) Limitation of powers. Standing and special committees shall not be vested with the rulemaking or decision-making power of Council, but shall function as an investigative body that shall report
and recommend to Council regarding the matters referred to it.
(6) Reports. The committees will study and report back to Council its findings and
recommendations regarding any issue referred to the committees by Council. Reports are to be in
writing. Minority reports are permitted.
(7) Relieving from further consideration. Upon motion, Council may, by a majority vote,
relieve a standing or special committee of further consideration of a matter referred to it, and order the
same placed on the agenda.
(8) Major public improvement. Any committee investigating or studying any project that could
lead to a major public improvement shall consult with the Planning Commission.
(H) General.
(1) Procedure in absence of rule. In the absence of a rule to govern a point of procedure the
Council shall establish the rule.
(2) Tie vote. In case of a tie in votes on any proposal, the proposal shall be considered lost.
(3) Anonymous communications. Unsigned communications shall not be introduced in Council
meetings.
City Council 11
(4) Recognition by Chair. No Council member, official or member of the audience shall speak
during a Council meeting without having first been recognized by the Chair, except at the beginning of
a meeting as provided elsewhere in this section.
(1985 Code, § 30.02) (Ord. 89-92, passed 2-19-1990; Ord. 94-04, passed 2-7-1994; Ord. 95-78, passed
12-11-1995; Ord. 96-08, passed 1-22-1996; Ord. 96-40, passed 8-26-1996; Ord. 97-27, passed
7-28-1997)
Cross-reference:
Meetings of Council, see Charter Art. III, § 3
§ 30.03 ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.
Time of taking effect, see Charter Art. XI, § l.
(1985 Code, § 30.03)
12 Madeira - Administration
CHAPTER 31: CITY OFFICIALS
Section
City Officials
31.01 Mayor
31.02 Vice-Mayor
31.03 Manager and Deputy Manager
31.04 Authority when Manager position is vacant
31.05 Clerk-Treasurer
31.06 Law Director
31.07 Architectural Review Officer
31.08 Finance Director
General Provisions
31.20 Appointment and removal of officials
31.21 Creation and abolishment of offices
31.22 Personal interest
31.23 Official bonds
31.24 Temporary absence from office
CITY OFFICIALS
§ 31.01 MAYOR.
Election and powers, see Charter Art. III, § 7.
(1985 Code, § 31.01)
§ 31.02 VICE-MAYOR.
Election, see Charter Art. III, § 8.
(1985 Code, § 31.02)
13
14 Madeira - Administration
§ 31.03 MANAGER AND DEPUTY MANAGER.
(A) Manager. Appointment and duties, see Charter Art. IV.
(B) Deputy Manager. Appointment and duties, see Charter Art. VI, § 2. The City Manager is
hereby authorized to fill the vacancy and employ said person in accordance with the terms attached to
Ordinance 89-02 as Schedule A which is hereby adopted by reference as if fully set out herein. Copies
are on file in the City Manager’s office at the City Municipal Building.
(1985 Code, § 31.03) (Ord. 89-02, passed 1-25-1989)
§ 31.04 AUTHORITY WHEN MANAGER POSITION IS VACANT.
During the period after the effective date of the Charter of this municipality and prior to the
appointment of a Manager as required by the Charter, and during all subsequent periods between the end
of term of any particular Manager (whether the termination is by reason of death, resignation, removal
or otherwise) and the appointment of his or her successor:
(A) It shall not be necessary for warrants for the expenditure of municipal funds to be
countersigned;
(B) Council shall have authority to make appointments, suspensions and removals of the Chief of
Police and the heads of all departments, and all personnel subordinate to it, but subject to such
restrictions as may be imposed by the Charter relative to civil service; and to authorize expenditures; and
(C) The Clerk shall prepare the annual budget and appropriation ordinance if then necessary, and
shall have authority to issue licenses and permits required by ordinance, and to execute and deliver
contracts and to make purchases as directed by Council.
(1985 Code, § 31.04)
§ 31.05 CLERK-TREASURER.
(A) The offices and duties of the Clerk and of the Treasurer of the municipality are combined into
a single office, to be known as the office of Clerk-Treasurer.
(B) The salary of the Clerk-Treasurer for performance of all the duties of that office shall be as set
from time to time by Council.
(1985 Code, § 31.05)
Charter reference:
Clerk, see Charter Art. V, § l
Treasurer, see Charter Art. V, § 2
Combination of offices, see Charter Art. V, § 4
City Officials 15
§ 31.06 LAW DIRECTOR.
Appointment and duties, see Charter Art. V, § 3.
(1985 Code, § 31.06)
§ 31.07 ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW OFFICER.
For provisions concerning the Architectural Review Officer, see Ch. 161.
(1985 Code, § 31.07)
§ 31.08 FINANCE DIRECTOR.
The position of Finance Director/Tax Commissioner is hereby created.
(1985 Code, § 31.08) (Ord. 89-28, passed 6-3-1989)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.20 APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL OF OFFICIALS.
See Charter Art. VI, § l.
(1985 Code, § 31.10)
§ 31.21 CREATION AND ABOLISHMENT OF OFFICES.
See Charter Art. VI, § 2.
(1985 Code, § 31.11)
§ 31.22 PERSONAL INTEREST.
See Charter Art. XIV, § 2.
(1985 Code, § 31.12)
§ 31.23 OFFICIAL BONDS.
See Charter Art. XIV, § 3.
(1985 Code, § 31.13)
16 Madeira - Administration
§ 31.24 TEMPORARY ABSENCE FROM OFFICE.
(A) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for the continuity of governmental functions
when either the Clerk-Treasurer or Manager of the city is temporarily absent from office. The intent of
this section is to provide a mechanism that will allow designated persons to perform the functions of the
Clerk-Treasurer or Manager in a manner that is consistent with the City Charter and which clarifies the
responsibility for actions taken when either the City Manager or the Clerk-Treasurer is not available.
(B) Manager.
(1) The Manager, in accordance with § 2, Art. IV of the Charter, may by letter filed with the
Clerk, designate a qualified person, subject to the approval of Council, to perform the duties of Manager
during his or her temporary absence from office. If the Manager does not designate a person or
designates a person or persons other than those approved by this section, then the City Council, in
accordance with the Charter, may either approve the alternative appointment or appoint a qualified
person to perform the duties of the Manager until the Manager returns or the disability ends.
(2) While it is not the intent of this section to in any way limit the Charter authority of the City
Manager to designate any qualified person, Council hereby approves the appointment of the Chief of
Police and the City Tax Commissioner, if so designated by the Manager, during the Manager’s
temporary absence from office, subject to the following limitations and guidelines.
(a) Copies of the required letter of designation which is filed with the Clerk shall be
concurrently delivered to all Council members. A letter shall be deemed delivered when posted in the
Clerk’s and each Council member’s mailbox in the Municipal Building. Additional telephonic notice is
recommended but not required. Such letter shall provide that the Chief of Police and the Tax
Commissioner are designated to perform the duties of the City Manager during his or her temporary
absence or disability and he or she shall perform the duties in accordance with the guidelines and
limitations set forth in this section. If the letter of designation authorizes any deviation from this section,
then Council must consider by separate action whether it so approves.
(b) The letter of designation shall limit authority of designees to perform only such duties
as are essential and which duties or actions cannot be reasonably deferred until the return of the
Manager. The Tax Commissioner shall be designated as the responsible person for signing checks and
approving purchase orders during the Manager’s absence. All other duties and decisions of the City
Manager shall be performed by the Chief of Police.
(c) The letter of designation shall withhold authority of the Tax Commissioner to approve
expenditures or sign checks unless such action has been specifically authorized in said letter or is deemed
essential for the preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the community and its citizens or
employees of the city by both the Tax Commissioner and the Chief of Police.
(d) The designees shall maintain a file or a log of all actions taken in the performance of
the duties of the City Manager as well as those matters specifically deferred until the return of the
City Officials 17
Manager. The designees may consult with other public officials and advise Council members or request
Council action as the designees deem appropriate.
(3) The Manager shall review all actions taken on his or her behalf. The Manager is hereby
authorized to ratify and affirm any action of any public official if it is determined that it was the City
Manager’s responsibility or duty. Such ratification and affirmation shall be in writing and shall validate
the action as if the City Manager had acted in the first instance. Any such ratification and affirmation
shall be reported to Council without undue delay. However, it is not the intent of this section to require
that the City Manager ratify or affirm any specific action taken by any public official if the action is
deemed inappropriate or illegal.
(C) Clerk-Treasurer.
(1) Council recognizes that the Charter makes no specific provisions for the transfer of the
duties of the Clerk-Treasurer when the Clerk-Treasurer is temporarily absent from office or disabled.
(2) Subject to the provisions and limitations set forth here, Council hereby designated the
Assistant to the Clerk-Treasurer to perform certain duties if the Clerk-Treasurer is temporarily absent
from office or is deemed disabled. The Clerk-Treasurer shall be considered temporarily absent from
office during such times as is identified in writing which is delivered to the City Manager and/or the
Mayor. Council may also designate the Clerk-Treasurer as temporarily absent from office or disabled
if it has received reasonable information that permits Council to make that determination. In such event,
Council hereby designates the Assistant to the Clerk-Treasurer as the Acting Clerk-Treasurer to perform
such duties as are necessary to maintain continuity of the performance of the duties required to be
performed by the Clerk-Treasurer.
(3) Upon the return of office by the Clerk-Treasurer, the Clerk-Treasurer shall review all
actions taken on his or her behalf by the Acting Clerk-Treasurer. The Clerk-Treasurer is hereby
authorized to ratify and affirm any action of any public official if it is determined that it was the ClerkTreasurer’s responsibility or duty. Such ratification and affirmation shall be in writing and shall validate
the action as if the Clerk-Treasurer had acted in the first instance. Any such ratification and affirmation
shall be reported to Council without undo delay. However, it is not the intent of this action to require
the Clerk-Treasurer to ratify or affirm any specific action taken by any public official including the
Acting Clerk-Treasurer, if the action is deemed inappropriate or illegal.
(1985 Code, § 31.14) (Ord. 91-93, passed 12-2-1991; Ord. 96-09, passed 2-26-1996)
18 Madeira - Administration
CHAPTER 32: POLICE AND FIRE PROTECTION
Section
Police Protection
32.01 Police Department authorized
32.02 Duties and functions
32.03 Chief of Police
32.04 Lieutenants of police
32.05 Patrol officer
32.06 Police Clerk Dispatcher
32.07 Police Clerk
32.08 School guard
32.09 Auxiliary police unit established
Fire Protection
32.20 Fire protection
POLICE PROTECTION
§ 32.01 POLICE DEPARTMENT AUTHORIZED.
The Police Department is established in accordance with Art. IX,§§ 1 and 2, of the City Charter and
in accordance with the Constitution and the laws of the state.
(1985 Code, § 32.01) (Ord. 90-85, passed 12-17-1990)
§ 32.02 DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS.
The Police Department shall provide police services within the jurisdictional limits of the
municipality, including the preservation of the peace, the protection of persons and property and the
enforcement of law. The Department shall be under the direction of the Chief of Police, who shall report
to the Manager for administrative purposes.
(1985 Code, § 32.02) (Ord. 90-85, passed 12-17-1990)
19
20 Madeira - Administration
§ 32.03 CHIEF OF POLICE.
The position of the Chief of Police is in the unclassified service of the city. The Chief shall be well
qualified to do and perform the duties of supervising the Police Department, preparing the rules and
regulations of the Department, securing the proper training of the patrol officers and carrying out such
other duties as are appropriate for the proper supervision of the operation of the Police Department.
(1985 Code, § 32.03) (Ord. 90-85, passed 12-17-1990)
§ 32.04 LIEUTENANTS OF POLICE.
There shall be positions of Lieutenants of police. Such Lieutenants shall be well qualified to do and
perform the duties of first line shift supervisors. The positions of Lieutenants of police shall be in the
classified service of the city. Such Lieutenants shall perform such other duties and assume such
responsibilities as shall be designated or assigned by the Chief of Police.
(1985 Code, § 32.04) (Ord. 90-85, passed 12-17-1990)
§ 32.05 PATROL OFFICER.
There shall be positions of patrol officers in the Police Department. Such positions shall be created
in the classified service of the city. Patrol officers shall be well qualified to perform the duties of a patrol
officer and shall perform such other duties and assume such responsibilities as shall be designated or
assigned by his or her superiors.
(1985 Code, § 32.05) (Ord. 90-85, passed 12-17-1990)
§ 32.06 POLICE CLERK DISPATCHER.
There is hereby created a position of Police Clerk Dispatcher which shall be in the classified service
of the city. The Police Clerk Dispatcher shall be well qualified to do and perform the duties of this
position and shall perform such other duties and assume such responsibilities as shall be designated or
assigned by his or her superiors.
(1985 Code, § 32.06) (Ord. 90-85, passed 12-17-1990)
§ 32.07 POLICE CLERK.
There is hereby created in the unclassified service of the city the part-time position of Police Clerk.
The Police Clerk shall be well qualified to do and perform the duties of a Police Clerk and shall perform
such other duties and assume such other responsibilities as shall be designated or assigned by the Chief
of Police or his or her superiors.
(1985 Code, § 32.07) (Ord. 90-85, passed 12-17-1990)
Police and Fire Protection 21
§ 32.08 SCHOOL GUARD.
There is hereby created in the unclassified service of the city the position of school guard. The
school guard shall be well qualified to do and perform such duties as assigned by the Chief of Police
which provide for the safe conduct of school children at roadway crossings. This shall be a part-time
position.
(1985 Code, § 32.08) (Ord. 90-85, passed 12-17-1990)
§ 32.09 AUXILIARY POLICE UNIT ESTABLISHED.
(A) An auxiliary police unit is established within the Police Department of the city. The City
Manager shall be the executive head of the unit and shall make all appointments of officers to and
removals of officers from the unit. The Manager shall prescribe rules and regulations for the
organization, training, administration, control and conduct of the unit and the members thereof. The
members of the unit shall be volunteers and shall not be entitled to receive compensation as officers
thereof or for any services or duties performed by them while acting as officers thereof except for
reimbursement of expenses as may be specifically prescribed by the Manager, and, in such event, the
Manager shall also prescribe the amount of reimbursement for such expenses.
(B) Officers of the auxiliary police unit shall and are hereby vested with all police powers including
the power to pursue, arrest and detain persons violating the law of the state and ordinances of the city
in accordance with such written policies and regulations as may be approved by the City Manager and
Chief of Police.
(C) The City Manager shall state the period for which the officer or officers are to serve and the
power vested in the officers. However, the Manager shall have the authority to re-deputize any officer
upon expiration of the term.
(1985 Code, § 32.09) (Ord. 90-85, passed 12-17-1990; Ord. 92-14, passed 4-6-1992)
FIRE PROTECTION
§ 32.20 FIRE PROTECTION.
(A) Authority to organize Fire Department, see Charter Art. IX, § 3.
(B) Contracts with other municipalities, see Charter Art. IX, § 3.
(1985 Code, § 32.10) (Ord. 90-85, passed 12-17-1990)
Cross-reference:
Fire Prevention Code, see Ch. 91
22 Madeira - Administration
CHAPTER 33: CITY BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Section
Parks and Recreation Board
33.01 Land set aside for public playground, swimming pool and park
33.02 Parks and Recreation Board established
33.03 Terms of Board
33.04 Recommendations of Board
33.05 Recreation and park employees; scope of authority
33.06 Concession privileges; changes and fees
Planning Commission
33.20 Appointment
33.21 Powers and duties
33.22 Action of Council necessary
33.23 Appeals
Community Reinvestment Area Housing Council
33.35 Establishment and appointment
33.36 Reinvestment Area No. 1
33.37 Tax exemptions
Senior Commission
33.50 Establishment and composition
33.51 Authority
33.52 Chair; agenda; meetings
Charter reference:
Planning Commission, see Charter Art. VII
Cross-reference:
City parks, see Ch. 94
Comprehensive park and recreation plan, see Ch. 155
Planning Commission, see Ch. 154
23
24 Madeira - Administration
PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD
§ 33.01 LAND SET ASIDE FOR PUBLIC PLAYGROUND, SWIMMING POOL AND PARK.
The land conveyed to the city by the Board of Education of the Madeira City School District by deed
recorded in Deed Book 2705, page 120, of the records of Hamilton County, Ohio, and the land acquired
by the city, known as the McDonald Commons, and the land acquired by the city known as the Nellie
V. Hosbrook Bird Sanctuary, are hereby designated and set apart for use as a public playground,
playfield, swimming pool and for other public park and recreational purposes. Any additional land
acquired by the city for recreational purposes shall be subject to this subchapter.
(1985 Code, § 33.01) (Ord. 1552, passed 10-5-1981; Ord. 05-02, passed 1-24-2005)
Cross-reference:
City parks, see Ch. 94
Comprehensive park and recreation plan, see Ch. 155
§ 33.02 PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD ESTABLISHED.
There is hereby established a Parks and Recreation Board to be known as the Parks and Recreation
Board of the city. Said Board shall consist of not more than 15 voting members and one non-voting
member. All of the members shall be appointed by the City Council. One of those appointments shall
be the Chairperson of the City Council’s Parks and Recreation Committee, who shall be the only member
of Council on the Board. The Recreation Director or the City Manager shall be an ex officio non-voting
member of the Board.
(1985 Code, § 33.02) (Ord. 1552, passed 10-5-1981; Ord. 89-50, passed 9-5-1989; Ord. 90-68, passed
9-17-1990; Ord. 91-85, passed 11-4-1991; Ord. 11-23, passed 10-10-2011)
§ 33.03 TERMS OF BOARD.
(A) All members of the Parks and Recreation Board shall hereafter be appointed for a term of two
years. Council shall appoint or reappoint members upon expiration of the present terms of office. If a
member resigns or a membership on the Board becomes vacant for any reason, Council shall appoint a
member for the unexpired balance of the term. The Parks and Recreation Board shall elect a Chairperson
annually.
(B) All voting members of the Board shall serve without pay. Each vacancy on the Board, occurring
otherwise than by expiration of a term, shall be for the unexpired portion of the term and shall be filled
in the same manner as though it had been created by expiration of a term. Any member missing three
consecutive meetings may be removed from the Board by the Chairperson’s recommendation to Council.
City Boards and Commissions 25
Council, at the next regular meeting after receipt of the Chairperson’s recommendation, may veto such
recommendation or it shall become final.
(1985 Code, § 33.03) (Ord. 1552, passed 10-5-1981; Ord. 89-50, passed 9-5-1989; Ord. 90-68, passed
9-17-1990; Ord. 91-85, passed 11-4-1991; Ord. 05-02, passed 1-24-2005)
§ 33.04 RECOMMENDATIONS OF BOARD.
(A) The Parks and Recreation Board shall, from time to time, prepare and submit plans, programs
and recommendations relative to public recreation and public parks, and any and all other recreational
facilities of the city, whether on or in public grounds or buildings owned or hereafter acquired by the
city or on or in privately owned lands or buildings, the right to the use of which for public recreational
purposes is granted by the owners thereof, of public play and recreational activities at such facilities and
on such grounds and in such buildings under the control of the Board of Education as such Board of
Education may permit to be used for such activities.
(B) The Board shall in addition, make studies upon its own initiative or at the request of City
Council and/or at the request of the Council Parks and Recreation Committee. All recommendations and
reports are to be directed to the City Council Parks and Recreation Committee. All reports and
recommendations must then be submitted to the City Council within 90 days of their receipt by the Parks
and Recreation Committee of Council.
(1985 Code, § 33.04) (Ord. 1552, passed 10-5-1981)
§ 33.05 PARKS AND RECREATION EMPLOYEES; SCOPE OF AUTHORITY.
All public recreational and park employees of the city shall be hired by the City Manager and shall
be under his or her control as fully as the employees of any other department of the city. The Board shall
have only such functions as are described in this subchapter and shall have no powers not granted or
provided by the ordinances of the city.
(1985 Code, § 33.05) (Ord. 1552, passed 10-5-1981)
§ 33.06 CONCESSION PRIVILEGES; CHANGES AND FEES.
(A) The City Manager shall have the power and authority to grant concession privileges at the
various grounds and other places of public recreation where games, entertainment and recreational affairs
are held, and to charge fees for the use of an attendant to assist with city-owned recreational equipment
and cleaning the park shelters and/or concession stands.
(B) In accordance with division (A) above, the following rules and regulations shall be established
for reserving the park shelters at McDonald Commons and Sellman Park and the concession stand at
Sellman Park.
26 Madeira - Administration
(1) Reservations shall be accepted as of January 1 for the current calendar year.
(2) Shelter houses and concession stand may be reserved beginning the first weekend in May
through the last weekend in October.
(3) Reservations are on a first come/first serve basis. However, no reservation is approved until
a written application and appropriate fees have been received.
(4) Cancellations must be made at least two weeks prior to the date the shelter or concession
stand is to be used in order to receive a refund of the fee paid.
(C) Shelter fees are as follows if the applicant chooses to pay a fee for the use of city-owned
recreational equipment which includes the provision of an attendant on duty to assist with the signing out
of this equipment and cleaning:
(1) Reservation of four to six hours: $35.
(2) Reservation of six to eight hours: $60.
(3) Reservation of eight or more hours: $80.
(4) The city reserves the right to recover the cost for damages to the shelter and/or park
properties.
(D) Concession stand attendant fees are as follows.
(1) A mandatory deposit of $50 is required for reservation of the Sellman Park concession
stand. This deposit covers the provision of a concession stand attendant that must be on duty to assist
with the usage of the equipment and to ensure the proper clean-up procedures are followed once the
usage time of the concession stand has expired. Upon evaluation and inspection of the concession stand
area following the applicant’s requested reservation, and deeming the area satisfactory for future usage,
one-half of the deposit amount ($25) will be refunded.
(2) It is required by the city that every applicant carry his or her own liability insurance policy
in the amount of $100,000, which will cover any property damage arising out of the use of the facility.
The applicant will provide proof of insurance and provide a certificate which names the city as an
additional insured. This provision may be waived at the discretion of the City Manager.
(E) Proof of residency or employment shall be required at the time reservation applications are
submitted.
(1985 Code, § 33.06) (Ord. 1552, passed 10-5-1981; Ord. 91-18, passed 2-20-1991; Ord. 04-17, passed
4-26-2004; Ord. 05-02, passed 1-24-2005)
Cross-reference:
City parks, see Ch. 94
City Boards and Commissions 27
PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 33.20 APPOINTMENT.
See Charter Art. VII, § l.
(1985 Code, § 33.10)
§ 33.21 POWERS AND DUTIES.
See Charter Art. VII, § 2.
(1985 Code, § 33.11)
§ 33.22 ACTION OF COUNCIL NECESSARY.
See Charter Art. VII, § 3.
(1985 Code, § 33.12)
§ 33.23 APPEALS.
See Charter Art. VII, § 4.
(1985 Code, § 33.13)
Cross-reference:
Planning Commission, see Ch. 154
COMMUNITY REINVESTMENT AREA HOUSING COUNCIL
§ 33.35 ESTABLISHMENT AND APPOINTMENT.
(A) There is hereby established a Community Reinvestment Area Housing Council for Community
Reinvestment Area No. 1.
(B) The Mayor shall appoint two members, the City Council shall appoint two members and the
Planning Commission shall appoint one member. The majority of the foregoing members shall appoint
two additional members who shall be residents within the city. Their term shall be for three years. An
unexpired term resulting from a vacancy in the Housing Council shall be filled in the same manner as
28 Madeira - Administration
the initial appointment was made. The Housing Council shall make an annual inspection of any properties
in the area for which an exemption has been granted under R.C. § 3735.67.
(C) City Council shall appoint the Housing Officer for the city.
(1985 Code, § 33.20) (Res. 21-91, passed 10-7-1991)
§ 33.36 REINVESTMENT AREA NO. 1.
(A) Community Reinvestment Area No. 1 is established as described in Exhibit A attached to
Resolution 21-91, passed October 7, 1991 and incorporated by reference.
(B) Community Reinvestment Area No. 1 is one in which housing facilities or structures of
historical significance are located and new housing and repair of existing facilities or structures are
discouraged.
(1985 Code, § 33.21) (Res. 21-91, passed 10-7-1991)
§ 33.37 TAX EXEMPTIONS.
Within Community Reinvestment Area No. 1, tax exemptions for improvements to real property as
described in R.C. § 3735.67 may be granted. For the construction of improvements to every existing
dwelling, or commercial or industrial structure located in the area, Council has determined that an
exemption may be granted for up to ten years.
(1985 Code, § 33.22) (Res. 21-91, passed 10-7-1991)
SENIOR COMMISSION
§ 33.50 ESTABLISHMENT AND COMPOSITION.
The Senior Commission of the city is hereby established for the purposes and in accordance with
the guidelines set forth herein. The Commission shall be comprised of 11 members serving for two-year
terms, however six of the original appointees shall serve for three years during the initial term.
Thereafter, all terms will be for two years. The appointment for initial terms or for the balance of
unexpired terms shall be by a majority of Council members present at a Council meeting. While
consideration shall be given to including occupational therapists, physical therapists, social workers,
individuals trained in geriatrics and possibly a school representative on the Commission, appointees shall
be at the sole discretion of the decision of City Council. All such appointees shall serve at the pleasure
of the City Council.
(1985 Code, § 33.30) (Res. 02-08, passed 5-27-2008)
City Boards and Commissions 29
§ 33.51 AUTHORITY.
The Senior Commission shall be an advisory body to City Council and, as such, it shall have no
budget or policy-making authority. The Senior Commission may also, from time to time, be consulted
with and provide advice to both the Planning Commission, the Parks and Recreation Board and the
general public on matters related to senior issues. The Commission will be involved in investigation,
communication, advising and education of issues related to seniors in the city.
(1985 Code, § 33.31) (Res. 02-08, passed 5-27-2008)
§ 33.52 CHAIR; AGENDA; MEETINGS.
The members of the Senior Commission shall elect from its members a Chair of the Senior
Commission whose duty shall be to chair the meetings of the Senior Commission. The Senior
Commission shall initiate its own agenda consistent with identifying problems and recommending
solutions to senior related matters. In addition, it shall address, investigate and provide recommendations
to matters referred to it by City Council from time to time. The Senior Commission shall be a public
body and hold all meeting in accordance with the Ohio Sunshine Laws. The Senior Commission shall,
as it deems necessary, develop its own by-laws and other guidelines for establishing the agenda for its
meetings as well as other rules for conducting its meetings as it determines to be necessary. The City
Council reserves unto itself, as it does with all committees, commissions and boards, to reconstitute or
otherwise provide goals and objectives for the Senior Commission as it may determine to be necessary
for the good of the community from time to time.
(1985 Code, § 33.32) (Res. 02-08, passed 5-27-2008)
30 Madeira - Administration
CHAPTER 34: CIVIL SERVICE
Section
34.01 Civil service rules and regulations adopted by reference
Charter reference:
Civil service, see Charter Art. VIII
§ 34.01 CIVIL SERVICE RULES AND REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
The City Civil Service Commission will be governed by the civil service rules and regulations
attached to Ordinance 88-31, passed June 6, 1988, and which are adopted by reference and incorporated
as a part of this code as if fully set out herein. A copy of the civil service rules and regulations are on
file with the City Clerk.
(1985 Code, § 34.01)
31
32 Madeira - Administration
CHAPTER 35: MAYOR’S COURT
Section
35.01 Witness fees
35.02 “Half-day’s attendance” defined
35.03 Contempt of court
35.04 Electronically monitored house arrest
35.05 Police and/or Mayor’s Court Computer Fund
§ 35.01 WITNESS FEES.
Each witness in a criminal case shall receive the following fees:
(A) Six dollars for each half day’s attendance at Mayor’s Court, to be taxed in the bill of costs; and
(B) Each witness shall also receive $0.10 for each mile necessarily traveled to and from his or her
place of residence to the place of giving testimony, to be taxed in the bill of costs.
(1985 Code, § 35.01) (Ord. 1590, passed 6-7-1982)
§ 35.02 “HALF-DAY’S ATTENDANCE” DEFINED.
As used in this chapter, a HALF-DAY’S ATTENDANCE means a day on which a witness is
required or requested to be present at a proceeding, regardless of whether or not he or she actually
testifies.
(1985 Code, § 35.02) (Ord. 1590, passed 6-7-1982)
§ 35.03 CONTEMPT OF COURT.
Any person appearing before the Mayor’s Court who acts unruly or disobeys a direct order of the
court shall be guilty of contempt of court and may be fined for such contempt. The contempt will be
treated as a fourth degree misdemeanor and punished according to § 130.99.
(1985 Code, § 35.03) (Ord. 1634, passed 5-16-1983) Penalty, see § 130.99
33
34 Madeira - Administration
§ 35.04 ELECTRONICALLY MONITORED HOUSE ARREST.
(A) Any or all of the term of imprisonment authorized under the ordinances of the city may be
served by means of electronically monitored house arrest, in the sole discretion of the Mayor. In such
case, the Mayor shall determine the number of days of actual imprisonment, the number of days of
electronically monitored house arrest, and whether any of the days of actual imprisonment shall be
suspended on the condition of successful completion of the incarceration by electronically monitored
house arrest. The sum of the days of actual imprisonment plus the days of electronically monitored house
arrest shall not exceed the stated maximum number of days of imprisonment for that particular offense.
(B) No individual may serve a term of imprisonment by electronically monitored house arrest unless
he or she first executes an appropriate agreement made available to all such defendants, whereby the
defendant agrees to pay the cost of the system (or, in the sole discretion of the Mayor, such portion of
the cost as he or she can afford to pay) and agrees to abide by all of the rules and regulations of the
electronically monitored house arrest procedure. The agreement shall provide that no credit for
suspended days of actual incarceration shall be granted unless the defendant successfully completes all
of the days of the electronically monitored house arrest.
(C) Any person, knowing that he or she is under the restrictions of electronically monitored house
arrest, shall not purposely break or attempt to break such detention, or purposely violate any of the
requirements of the detention. Whoever violates this section shall be deemed to have violated the terms
of the suspended sentence, both fines and incarceration, and shall be required to appear in court and
show cause why the full suspended sentence should not be imposed.
(1985 Code, § 35.04) (Ord. 90-82, passed 2-20-1991)
§ 35.05 POLICE AND/OR MAYOR’S COURT COMPUTER FUND.
(A) A special revenue fund, Police and/or Mayor’s Court Computer Fund is hereby established to
enable the city to collect $5 from every ticket issued in conjunction with the Mayor’s Court.
(B) The City Manager is hereby authorized to make expenditures from the Fund for any lawful
purpose in furtherance of purchasing, operating and maintaining the Mayor’s Court and/or Police
Department computer system.
(1985 Code, § 35.05) (Ord. 04-20, passed 6-28-2004)
CHAPTER 36: CIVIL ACTIONS AGAINST THE MUNICIPALITY
Section
36.01 Definitions
36.02 Nonliability of municipality; exceptions
36.03 Defenses and immunities
36.04 Limitation of actions
36.05 Satisfaction of judgments
36.06 Provision of employees’ defense; consent judgments
36.07 Liability insurance
36.08 Certain actions unaffected
§ 36.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
EMERGENCY CALL. A call to duty, including but not limited to communications from citizens,
police dispatches and personal observations by peace officers of inherently dangerous situations that
demand an immediate response on the part of a peace officer.
EMPLOYEE. An officer, agent, employee or servant, whether or not compensated or full-time or
part-time, who is authorized to act and is acting within the scope of his or her employment for a political
subdivision. The term does not include an independent contractor and does not include any individual
engaged by a school district pursuant to R.C. § 3319.301. The term includes any elected or appointed
official of a political subdivision. The term also includes a person who has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a criminal offense and who has been sentenced to perform community service work in a political
subdivision whether pursuant to R.C. § 2951.02 or otherwise, and a child who is found to be a
delinquent child and who is ordered by a juvenile court pursuant to R.C. § 2152.19 or 2152.20 to
perform community service or community work in a political subdivision.
GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTION.
(1) A function of a political subdivision that is specified in division (2) of this definition or that
satisfies any of the following:
(a) A function that is imposed upon the state as an obligation of sovereignty and that is
performed by a political subdivision voluntarily or pursuant to legislative requirement;
35
36 Madeira - Administration
(b) A function that is for the common good of all citizens of the state; or
(c) A function that promotes or preserves the public peace, health, safety or welfare, that
involves activities that are not engaged in or not customarily engaged in by nongovernmental persons,
and that is not specified in this section as a proprietary function.
(2) The term includes but is not limited to the following:
(a) The provision or nonprovision of police, fire, emergency medical, ambulance and
rescue services or protection;
(b) The power to preserve the peace; to prevent and suppress riots, disturbances and
disorderly assemblages; to prevent, mitigate and clean up releases of oil and hazardous and extremely
hazardous substances as defined in R.C. § 3750.01; and to protect persons and property;
(c) The provision of a system of public education;
(d) The provision of a free public library system;
(e) The regulation of the use of, and the maintenance and repair of, roads, highways,
streets, avenues, alleys, sidewalks, bridges, aqueducts, viaducts and public grounds;
(f) Judicial, quasi-judicial, prosecutorial, legislative and quasi-legislative functions;
(g) The construction, reconstruction, repair, renovation, maintenance and operation of
buildings that are used in connection with the performance of a governmental function, including but not
limited to office buildings and courthouses;
(h) The design, construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair, maintenance and operation
of jails, places of juvenile detention, workhouses or any other detention facility, as defined in R.C.
§ 2921.01;
(i) The enforcement or nonperformance of any law;
(j) The regulation of traffic and the erection or non-erection of traffic signs, signals or
control devices;
(k) The collection and disposal of solid wastes, as defined in R.C. § 3734.01, including
but not limited to the operation of solid waste disposal facilities as “facilities” is defined in that section,
and the collection and management of hazardous waste generated by households. As used in this division
(2)(k), HAZARDOUS WASTE GENERATED BY HOUSEHOLDS means solid waste originally
generated by individual households that is listed specifically as hazardous waste in or exhibits one or
more characteristics of hazardous waste as defined by rules adopted under R.C. § 3734.12, but that is
excluded from regulation as a hazardous waste by those rules;
Civil Actions Against the Municipality 37
(l) The provision or nonprovision, planning or design, construction or reconstruction of
a public improvement, including but not limited to a sewer system;
(m) The operation of a job and family services department or agency, including but not
limited to the provision of assistance to aged and infirm persons and to persons who are indigent;
(n) The operation of a health board, department or agency, including but not limited to any
statutorily required or permissive program for the provision of immunizations or other inoculations to
all or some members of the public; provided that a governmental function does not include the supply,
manufacture, distribution or development of any drug or vaccine employed in any such immunization
or inoculation program by any supplier, manufacturer, distributor or developer of the drug or vaccine;
(o) The operation of mental health facilities, mental retardation or developmental
disabilities facilities, alcohol treatment and control centers and children’s homes or agencies;
(p) The provision or nonprovision of inspection services of all types, including but not
limited to inspections in connection with building, zoning, sanitation, fire, plumbing and electrical codes,
and the taking of actions in connection with those types of codes, including but not limited to the
approval of plans for the construction of buildings or structures and the issuance or revocation of
building permits or stop work orders in connection with buildings or structures;
(q) Urban renewal projects and the elimination of slum conditions;
(r) Flood control measures;
(s) The design, construction, reconstruction, renovation, operation, care, repair and
maintenance of a township cemetery;
(t) The issuance of revenue obligations under R.C. § 140.06;
(u) The design, construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair, maintenance and operation
of any school athletic facility, school auditorium or gymnasium or any recreation area or facility,
including but not limited to any of the following:
1. A park, playground or playfield;
2. An indoor recreational facility;
3. A zoo or zoological park;
4. A bath, swimming pool, pond, water park, wading pool, wave pool, water slide
or other type of aquatic facility;
5. A golf course;
38 Madeira - Administration
6. A bicycle motocross facility or other type of recreational area or facility in which
bicycling, skating, skate boarding or scooter riding is engaged;
7. A rope course or climbing walls; and
8. An all-purpose vehicle facility in which all-purpose vehicles, as defined in R.C.
§ 4519.01, are contained, maintained or operated for recreational activities.
(v) The provision of public defender services by a county or joint county public defender’s
office pursuant to R.C. Chapter 120;
(w) 1. At any time before regulations prescribed pursuant to 49 U.S.C. § 20153 become
effective, the designation, establishment, design, construction, implementation, operation, repair or
maintenance of a public road rail crossing in a zone within a municipal corporation in which, by
ordinance, the legislative authority of the municipal corporation regulates the sounding of locomotive
horns, whistles or bells;
2. On and after the effective date of regulations prescribed pursuant to 49 U.S.C.
§ 20153, the designation, establishment, design, construction, implementation, operation, repair or
maintenance of a public road rail crossing in such a zone or of a supplementary safety measure, as
defined in 49 U.S.C. § 20153, at or for a public road rail crossing, if and to the extent that the public
road rail crossing is excepted, pursuant to subsection (c) of that section, from the requirement of the
regulations prescribed under subsection (b) of that section; and
(x) A function that the General Assembly mandates a political subdivision to perform.
LAW. Any provision of the Constitution, statutes or rules of the United States or of this state,
provisions of charters, ordinances, resolutions and rules of political subdivisions and written policies
adopted by boards of education. When used in connection with the “common law,” this definition does
not apply.
MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION or SUBDIVISION. A municipal corporation, township, county,
school district or other body corporate and politic responsible for governmental activities in a geographic
area smaller than that of the state. The term includes, but is not limited to, a county hospital commission
appointed under R.C. § 339.14, board of hospital commissioners appointed for a municipal hospital
under R.C. § 749.04, board of hospital trustees appointed for a municipal hospital under R.C. § 749.22,
regional planning commission created pursuant to R.C. § 713.21, county planning commission created
pursuant to R.C. § 713.22, joint planning council created pursuant to R.C. § 713.231, interstate regional
planning commission created pursuant to R.C. § 713.30, port authority created pursuant to R.C.
§ 4582.02 or 4582.26 or in existence on December 16, 1964, regional council established by political
subdivisions pursuant to R.C. Chapter 167, emergency planning district and joint emergency planning
district designated under R.C. § 3750.03, joint emergency medical services district created pursuant to
R.C. § 307.052, a fire and ambulance district created pursuant to R.C. § 505.375, joint interstate
Civil Actions Against the Municipality 39
emergency planning district established by an agreement entered into under that section, and a county
solid waste management district and joint solid waste management district established under R.C.
§ 343.01 or 343.012, a community school established under R.C. Chapter 3314, the county or counties
served by a community-based correctional facility and program or district community-based correction
facility and program established and operated under R.C. §§ 2301.51 through 2301.58, a
community-based correctional facility and program or district community-based correctional facility and
program that is so established and operated, and the facility governing board of a community-based
correctional facility and program or district community-based correctional facility and program that is
so established and operated.
PROPRIETARY FUNCTION.
(1) A function of a political subdivision that is specified in division (2) of this definition or that
satisfies both of the following:
(a) The function is not one described in divisions (1)(a) or (1)(b) of the definition of
“governmental function” contained in this section, and is not one specified in division (2) of the
definition of “governmental function” contained in this section; and
(b) The function is one that promotes or preserves the public peace, health, safety or
welfare and that involves activities that are customarily engaged in by nongovernmental persons.
(2) The term includes, but is not limited to, the following:
(a) The operation of a hospital by one or more political subdivisions;
(b) The design, construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair, maintenance and operation
of a public cemetery other than a township cemetery;
(c) The establishment, maintenance and operation of a utility, including but not limited to
a light, gas, power or heat plant, a railroad, a busline or other transit company, an airport and a
municipal water supply system;
(d) The maintenance, destruction, operation and upkeep of a sewer system; and
(e) The operation and control of a public stadium, auditorium, civic or social center,
exhibition hall, arts and crafts center, band or orchestra or off-street parking facility.
PUBLIC ROADS. Public roads, highways, streets, avenues, alleys and bridges within a political
subdivision. The term does not include berms, shoulders, rights-of-way or traffic-control devices unless
the traffic-control devices are mandated by the Ohio Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
STATE. The State of Ohio, including but not limited to the General Assembly, the Supreme Court,
the offices of all elected state officers, and all departments, boards, offices, commissions, agencies,
40 Madeira - Administration
colleges and universities, institutions and other instrumentalities of the state. The term does not include
political subdivisions.
(R.C. § 2744.01) (1985 Code, § 36.01) (Ord. 87-44, passed 9-8-1987; Ord. 88-39, passed 10-3-1988)
§ 36.02 NONLIABILITY OF MUNICIPALITY; EXCEPTIONS.
(A) Classifications of functions; nonliability; jurisdiction of the courts.
(1) For the purposes of this chapter, the functions of political subdivisions are classified as
governmental functions and proprietary functions. Except as provided in division (B) of this section, a
political subdivision is not liable in damages in a civil action for injury, death or loss to person or
property allegedly caused by any act or omission of the political subdivision or an employee of the
political subdivision in connection with a governmental or proprietary function.
(2) The defenses and immunities conferred under this chapter and R.C. Chapter 2744 apply
in connection with all governmental and proprietary functions performed by the political subdivision and
its employees, whether performed on behalf of the political subdivision or on behalf of another political
subdivision.
(3) Subject to statutory limitations upon its monetary jurisdiction, the Courts of Common Pleas,
the Municipal Courts and the County Courts have jurisdiction to hear and determine civil actions
governed by or brought pursuant to this chapter.
(B) Exceptions. Subject to § 36.03 and R.C. §§ 2744.03 and 2744.05, a political subdivision is
liable in damages in a civil action for injury, death or loss to person or property allegedly caused by an
act or omission of the political subdivision or of any of its employees in connection with a governmental
or proprietary function, as follows.
(1) Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), political subdivisions are liable for injury,
death or loss to person or property caused by the negligent operation of any motor vehicle by its
employees when the employees are engaged within the scope of their employment and authority. The
following are full defenses to that liability:
(a) A member of a municipal Police Department or any other police agency was operating
a motor vehicle while responding to an emergency call and the operation of the vehicle did not constitute
willful or wanton misconduct;
(b) A member of a municipal Fire Department or any other firefighting agency was
operating a motor vehicle while engaged in duty at a fire, proceeding toward a place where a fire is in
progress or is believed to be in progress, or answering any other emergency alarm and the operation of
the vehicle did not constitute willful or wanton misconduct; and
(c) A member of an emergency medical service owned or operated by a political
subdivision was operating a motor vehicle while responding to or completing a call for emergency
Civil Actions Against the Municipality 41
medical care or treatment, the member was holding a valid commercial driver’s license issued pursuant
to R.C. Chapter 4506 or a driver’s license issued pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4507, the operation of the
vehicle did not constitute willful or wanton misconduct, and the operation complies with the precautions
of R.C. § 4511.03.
(2) Except as otherwise provided in R.C. §§ 3314.07 and 3746.24, political subdivisions are
liable for injury, death or loss to person or property caused by the negligent performance of acts by its
employees with respect to proprietary functions of the political subdivisions.
(3) Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 3746.24, political subdivisions are liable for injury,
death or loss to person or property caused by its negligent failure to keep public roads in repair and other
negligent failure to remove obstructions from public roads, except that it is a full defense to that liability,
when a bridge within a municipality is involved, that the municipality does not have the responsibility
for maintaining or inspecting the bridge.
(4) Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 3746.24, political subdivisions are liable for injury,
death or loss to person or property that is caused by the negligence of its employees and that occurs
within or on the grounds of, and is due to physical defects within or on the grounds of, buildings that
are used in connection with the performance of a governmental function, including but not limited to
office buildings and courthouses, but not including jails, places of juvenile detention, workhouses or any
other detention facility, as defined in R.C. § 2921.01.
(5) In addition to the circumstances described in divisions (B)(1) through (B)(4) of this section,
a political subdivision is liable for injury, death or loss to person or property when civil liability is
expressly imposed upon the political subdivision by a section of the Ohio Revised Code, including but
not limited to R.C. §§ 2743.02 and 5591.37. Civil liability shall not be construed to exist under another
section of this code or the Ohio Revised Code merely because that section imposes a responsibility or
mandatory duty upon a political subdivision, because that section provides for a criminal penalty, because
of a general authorization in that section that a political subdivision may sue and be sued, or because that
section uses the term “shall” in a provision pertaining to a political subdivision.
(C) Final order. An order that denies a political subdivision or an employee of a political
subdivision the benefit of an alleged immunity from liability as provided in this chapter or any other
provision of the law is a final order.
(R.C. § 2744.02) (1985 Code, § 36.02)
§ 36.03 DEFENSES AND IMMUNITIES.
(A) In a civil action brought against a political subdivision or an employee of a political subdivision
to recover damages for injury, death or loss to person or property allegedly caused by any act or
omission in connection with a governmental or proprietary function, the following defenses or
immunities may be asserted to establish nonliability:
42 Madeira - Administration
(1) The political subdivision is immune from liability if the employee involved was engaged
in the performance of a judicial, quasi-judicial, prosecutorial, legislative or quasi-legislative function;
(2) The political subdivision is immune from liability if the conduct of the employee involved,
other than negligent conduct, that gave rise to the claim of liability was required by law or authorized
by law, or if the conduct of the employee involved that gave rise to the claim of liability was necessary
or essential to the exercise of powers of the political subdivision or employee;
(3) The political subdivision is immune from liability if the action or failure to act by the
employee involved that gave rise to the claim of liability was within the discretion of the employee with
respect to policy making, planning or enforcement powers by virtue of the duties and responsibilities of
the office or position of the employee;
(4) The political subdivision is immune from liability if the action or failure to act by the
political subdivision or employee involved that gave rise to the claim of liability, resulted in injury or
death to a person who had been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a criminal offense and who, at the time
of the injury or death, was serving any portion of his or her sentence by performing community service
work for or in the political subdivision whether pursuant to R.C. § 2951.02 or otherwise, or resulted in
injury or death to a child who was found to be a delinquent child and who, at the time of the injury or
death, was performing community service or community work for or in a political subdivision in
accordance with the order of a juvenile court entered pursuant to R.C. § 2152.19 or 2152.20, and if, at
the time of that person’s or child’s injury or death, the person or child was covered for purposes of R.C.
Chapter 4123 in connection with the community service or community work for or in the political
subdivision;
(5) The political subdivision is immune from liability if the injury, death or loss to person or
property resulted from the exercise of judgment or discretion in determining whether to acquire, or how
to use, equipment, supplies, materials, personnel, facilities and other resources, unless the judgment or
discretion was exercised with malicious purpose, in bad faith or in a wanton or reckless manner;
(6) In addition to any immunity or defense referred to in division (A)(7) of this section and in
circumstances not covered by that division or R.C. §§ 3314.07 and 3746.24, the employee is immune
from liability unless one of the following applies:
(a) His or her acts or omissions were manifestly outside the scope of his or her
employment or official responsibilities;
(b) His or her acts or omissions were with malicious purpose, in bad faith or in a wanton
or reckless manner;
(c) Civil liability is expressly imposed upon the employee by a section of the Ohio Revised
Code. Civil liability shall not be construed to exist under another section of the Ohio Revised Code
merely because that section imposes a responsibility or mandatory duty upon an employee, because that
Civil Actions Against the Municipality 43
section provides for a criminal penalty, because of a general authorization in that section that an
employee may sue and be sued, or because the section uses the term “shall” in a provision pertaining
to an employee.
(7) The political subdivision, and an employee who is the Chief Legal Officer of a political
subdivision, an assistant of any such person, or a judge of a court of this state, is entitled to any defense
or immunity available at common law or established by the Ohio Revised Code.
(B) Any immunity or defense conferred upon, or referred to in connection with, an employee by
division (A)(6) or (A)(7) of this section does not affect or limit any liability of a political subdivision for
an act or omission of the employee as provided in § 36.02 above.
(R.C. § 2744.03) (1985 Code, § 36.03) (Ord. 87-44, passed 9-8-1987)
§ 36.04 LIMITATION OF ACTIONS.
(A) An action against a political subdivision to recover damages for injury, death or loss to person
or property allegedly caused by any act or omission in connection with a governmental or proprietary
function, whether brought as an original action, cross-claim, counterclaim, third-party claim or claim
for subrogation, shall be brought within two years after the cause of action accrues, or within any
applicable shorter period of time for bringing the action provided by the Ohio Revised Code. The period
of limitation contained in this division (A) shall be tolled pursuant to R.C. § 2305.16. This section
applies to actions brought against political subdivisions by all persons, governmental entities and the
state.
(B) In the complaint filed in a civil action against a political subdivision or an employee of a
political subdivision to recover damages for injury, death or loss to person or property allegedly caused
by an act or omission in connection with a governmental or proprietary function, whether filed in an
original action, cross-claim, counterclaim, third-party claim or claim for subrogation, the complainant
shall include a demand for a judgment for the damages that the judge in a nonjury trial or the jury in a
jury trial finds that the complainant is entitled to be awarded, but shall not specify in that demand any
monetary amount for damages sought.
(R.C. § 2744.04) (1985 Code, § 36.04)
§ 36.05 SATISFACTION OF JUDGMENTS.
(A) Real or personal property, and monies, accounts, deposits or investments of a political
subdivision are not subject to execution, judicial sale, garnishment or attachment to satisfy a judgment
rendered against a political subdivision in a civil action to recover damages for injury, death or loss to
person or property caused by an act or omission of the political subdivision or any of its employees in
connection with a governmental or proprietary function. Those judgments shall be paid from funds of
the political subdivisions that have been appropriated for that purpose, but, if sufficient funds are not
currently appropriated for the payment of judgments, the Fiscal Officer of a political subdivision shall
certify the amount of any unpaid judgments to the taxing authority of the political subdivision for
44 Madeira - Administration
inclusion in the next succeeding budget and annual appropriation measure and payment in the next
succeeding fiscal year as provided by R.C. § 5705.08, unless any judgment of that nature is to be paid
from the proceeds of bonds issued pursuant to R.C. § 133.14 or pursuant to annual installments
authorized by divisions (B) or (C) of this section.
(B) (1) (a) As used in this section, THE ACTUAL LOSS OF THE PERSON WHO IS
AWARDED THE DAMAGES includes all of the following:
1. All wages, salaries or other compensation lost by the person injured as a result of
the injury, as of the date of judgment;
2. All expenditures of the person injured or of another person on behalf of the person
injured for medical care or treatment, for rehabilitation services or for other care, treatment, services,
products or accommodations that were necessary because of the injury;
3. All expenditures of a person whose property was injured or destroyed or of another
person on behalf of the person whose property was injured or destroyed in order to repair or replace the
property that was injured or destroyed;
4. All expenditures of the person injured or whose property was injured or destroyed
or of another person on behalf of the person injured whose property was injured or destroyed in relation
to the actual preparation or presentation of the claim involved; and
5. Any other expenditure of the person injured or whose property was injured or
destroyed or of another person on behalf of the person injured or of the person whose property was
injured or destroyed that the court determines represent an actual loss experienced because of the
personal or property injury or property loss.
(b) As used in this section, THE ACTUAL LOSS OF THE PERSON WHO IS
AWARDED THE DAMAGES does not include any of the following:
1. Wages, salaries or other compensation lost by the person injured as a result of the
injury that are future expected earnings of that person;
2. Expenditures to be incurred in the future, as determined by the court, by the
person injured or by another person on behalf of the person injured for medical care or treatment, for
rehabilitation services or for other care, treatment, services, products or accommodations that will be
necessary because of the injury;
3. Any fees paid or owed to an attorney for any services rendered in relation to a
personal or property injury or property loss; and
4. Any damages awarded for pain and suffering, for the loss of society, consortium,
companionship, care, assistance, attention, protection, advice, guidance, counsel, instruction, training
or education of the person injured, for mental anguish or for any other intangible loss.
Civil Actions Against the Municipality 45
(2) (a) Except as specifically provided to the contrary in this section, a court that renders a
judgment against a political subdivision as described in division (A) of this section and that is not in favor
of the state may authorize the political subdivision, upon the motion of the political subdivision, to pay
the judgment or a specified portion of the judgment in annual installments over a period not to exceed
ten years, subject to the payment of interest at the rate specified in R.C. § 1343.03(A). A court shall not
authorize the payment in installments under this division of any portion of a judgment or entire judgment
that represents the actual loss of the person who is awarded the damages.
(b) Additionally, a court shall not authorize the payment in installments under this division
(B) of any portion of a judgment or entire judgment that does not represent the actual loss of the person
who is awarded the damages unless the court, after balancing the interests of the political subdivision and
of the person in whose favor the judgment was rendered, determines that installment payments would
be appropriate under the circumstances and would not be unjust to the person in whose favor the
judgment was rendered. If a court makes that determination, it shall fix the amount of the installment
payments in a manner that achieves for the person in whose favor the judgment was rendered the same
economic result over the period as that person would have received if the judgment or portion of the
judgment subject to the installment payments had been paid in a lump sum payment.
(C) At the option of a political subdivision, a judgment as described in division (A) of this section
and that is rendered in favor of the state may be paid in equal annual installments over a period not to
exceed ten years, without the payment of interest.
(R.C. § 2744.06) (1985 Code, § 36.05)
§ 36.06 PROVISION OF EMPLOYEES’ DEFENSE; CONSENT JUDGMENTS.
(A) Defense of actions against employees.
(1) Except as otherwise provided in this division (A), a political subdivision shall provide for
the defense of an employee, in any state or federal court, in any civil action or proceeding which contains
an allegation for damages for injury, death or loss to person or property caused by an act or omission
of the employee in connection with a governmental or proprietary function. The political subdivision has
the duty to defend the employee if the act or omission occurred while the employee was acting in good
faith and not manifestly outside the scope of his or her employment or official responsibilities. Amounts
expended by a political subdivision in the defense of its employees shall be from funds appropriated for
this purpose or from proceeds of insurance. The duty to provide for the defense of an employee specified
in this division (A) does not apply in a civil action or proceeding that is commenced by or on behalf of
a political subdivision.
(2) Except as otherwise provided in this division (A), a political subdivision shall indemnify
and hold harmless an employee in the amount of any judgment, other than a judgment for punitive or
exemplary damages, that is obtained against the employee in a state or federal court or as a result of a
law of a foreign jurisdiction and that is for damages for injury, death or loss to person or property caused
46 Madeira - Administration
by an act or omission in connection with a governmental or proprietary function, if at the time of the act
or omission the employee was acting in good faith and within the scope of his or her employment or
official responsibilities.
(B) Consent judgments.
(1) A political subdivision may enter into a consent judgment or settlement and may secure
releases from liability for itself or an employee, with respect to any claim for injury, death or loss to
person or property caused by an act or omission in connection with a governmental or proprietary
function.
(2) No action or appeal of any kind shall be brought by any person, including any employee
or a taxpayer, with respect to the decision of a political subdivision pursuant to division (B)(1) of this
section whether to enter into a consent judgment or settlement or to secure releases, or concerning the
amount and circumstances of a consent judgment or settlement. Amounts expended for any settlement
shall be from funds appropriated for this purpose.
(C) Failure to provide defense. If a political subdivision refuses to provide an employee with a
defense in a civil action or proceeding as described in division (A)(1) of this section, upon the motion
of the political subdivision, the court shall conduct a hearing regarding the political subdivision’s duty
to defend the employee in that civil action. The political subdivision shall file the motion within 30 days
of the close of discovery in the action. After the motion is filed, the employee shall have not less than
30 days to respond to the motion. At the request of the political subdivision or the employee, the court
shall order the motion to be heard at an oral hearing. At the hearing on the motion, the court shall
consider all evidence and arguments submitted by the parties. In determining whether a political
subdivision has a duty to defend the employee in the action, the court shall determine whether the
employee was acting both in good faith and not manifestly outside the scope of employment or official
responsibilities. The pleadings shall not be determinative of whether the employee acted in good faith
or was manifestly outside the scope of employment or official responsibilities. If the court determines
that the employee was acting both in good faith and not manifestly outside the scope of employment or
official responsibilities, the court shall order the political subdivision to defend the employee in the
action.
(R.C. § 2744.07) (1985 Code, § 36.06)
§ 36.07 LIABILITY INSURANCE.
(A) (1) A political subdivision may use public funds to secure insurance with respect to its and its
employees’ potential liability in damages in civil actions for injury, death or loss to persons or property
allegedly caused by an act or omission of the political subdivision or any of its employees in connection
with a governmental or proprietary function. The insurance may be at the limits, for the circumstances,
and subject to the terms and conditions, that are determined by the political subdivision in its discretion.
The insurance may be for the period of time that is set forth in specifications for competitive bids or,
Civil Actions Against the Municipality 47
when competitive bidding is not required, for the period of time that is mutually agreed upon by the
political subdivision and insurance company. The period of time does not have to be, but can be, limited
to the fiscal cycle under which the political subdivision is funded and operated.
(2) (a) Regardless of whether a political subdivision procures a policy of liability insurance
pursuant to division (A)(1) of this section or otherwise, the political subdivision may establish and
maintain a self-insurance program relative to its and its employees’ potential liability in damages in civil
actions for injury, death, or loss to persons or property allegedly caused by an act or omission of the
political subdivision or any of its employees in connection with a governmental or proprietary function.
The political subdivision may reserve such funds as it deems appropriate in a special fund that may be
established pursuant to an ordinance or resolution of the political subdivision and not subject to R.C.
§ 5705.12. The political subdivision may allocate the costs of insurance of a self-insurance program, or
both, among the funds or accounts in the subdivision’s treasury on the basis of relative exposure and loss
experience. The political subdivision may require any deductibles under an insurance or self-insurance
program, or both, to be paid from funds or accounts in the subdivision’s treasury from which a loss was
directly attributable. If it so chooses, the political subdivision may contract with any person, other
political subdivision, or regional council of governments for purposes of the administration of the
program.
(b) Political subdivisions that have established self-insurance programs relative to their and
their employees’ potential liability as described in division (A)(2)(a) of this section may mutually agree
that their self-insurance programs will be jointly administered in a specific manner.
(B) The purchase of liability insurance, or the establishment and maintenance of a self-insurance
program, by a political subdivision does not constitute a waiver of any immunity or defense of the
political subdivision or its employees, except that the political subdivision may specifically waive any
immunity or defense to which it or its employees may be entitled if a provision to that effect is
specifically included in the policy of insurance or in a written plan of operation of the self-insurance
program, or if any, the legislative enactment of the political subdivision authorizing the purchase of the
insurance or the establishment and maintenance of the self-insurance program. Such a specific waiver
shall be only to the extent of the insurance or self-insurance program coverage.
(C) The authorizations for political subdivisions to secure insurance and to establish and maintain
self-insurance programs in this section are in addition to any other authority to secure insurance or to
establish and maintain self-insurance programs that is granted pursuant to the Ohio Revised Code or the
Ohio Constitution, and they are not in derogation of any other authorization.
(R.C. § 2744.08)
(D) If a political subdivision, pursuant to division (A)(2)(a) of this section or a joint self-insurance
pool pursuant to R.C. § 2744.081, has allocated costs to, or required the payment of deductibles from,
funds or accounts in the subdivision’s treasury, the subdivisions’s fiscal officer, pursuant to ordinance
or resolution of the Legislative Authority, shall transfer amounts equal to those costs or deductibles from
the funds or accounts of the subdivision’s General Fund if both of the following occur:
48 Madeira - Administration
(1) The subdivision requests payment from the employee responsible for the funds or accounts
for those costs or deductibles;
(2) The employee receiving the request fails to remit payment within 45 days after the date of
receipt of the request.
(E) The provisions of R.C. §§ 5705.14, 5705.15, and 5705.16 do not apply to transfers made
pursuant to division (D) of this section.
(R.C. § 2744.082)
(1985 Code, § 36.07)
Statutory reference:
Joint municipal self-insurance pools, see R.C. § 2744.081
§ 36.08 CERTAIN ACTIONS UNAFFECTED.
This chapter does not apply to, and shall not be construed to apply to, the following:
(A) Civil actions that seek to recover damages from a political subdivision or any of its employees
for contractual liability;
(B) Civil actions by an employee, or the collective bargaining representative of an employee, against
his or her political subdivision relative to any matter that arises out of the employment relationship
between the employee and the political subdivision;
(C) Civil actions by an employee of a political subdivision against the political subdivision relative
to wages, hours, conditions or other terms of his or her employment;
(D) Civil actions by sureties and the rights of sureties, under fidelity or surety bonds; or
(E) Civil claims based upon alleged violations of the Constitution or statutes of the United States,
except that the provisions of § 36.07 shall apply to such claims or related civil actions.
(R.C. § 2744.09) (1985 Code, § 36.08)
CHAPTER 37: PUBLIC RECORDS POLICY
Section
37.01 Introduction
37.02 Public records
37.03 Record requests
37.04 Costs for public records
37.05 E-mail
37.06 Failure to respond to public records request
§ 37.01 INTRODUCTION.
The city adopts this public records policy to reflect its belief that openness leads to a better informed
citizenry, which leads to better government and better public policy. It is the policy of the city to strictly
adhere to the state’s Public Records Act. All exemptions to openness are to be construed in their
narrowest sense and any denial of public records in response to a valid request must be accompanied by
an explanation, including legal authority, as outlined in the Ohio Revised Code. If the request is in
writing, the explanation must also be in writing.
(1985 Code, § 37.01) (Res. 05-08, passed 6-23-2008)
§ 37.02 PUBLIC RECORDS.
(A) The city, in accordance with the Ohio Revised Code, defines RECORDS as including the
following: any document, paper, electronic (including but not limited to e-mail) or other format that is
created or received by, or comes under the jurisdiction of a public office that documents the
organization, functions, policies, decisions, procedures, operations or other activities of the office. All
records of the city are public unless they are specifically exempt from disclosure under the Ohio Revised
Code.
(B) It is the policy of the city that, as required by state law, records will be organized and
maintained so that they are readily available for inspection and copying (See § 37.05 for the e-mail
record policy). Record retention schedules are to be updated regularly and posted prominently.
(1985 Code, § 37.02) (Res. 05-08, passed 6-23-2008)
49
50 Madeira - Administration
§ 37.03 RECORD REQUESTS.
Each request for public records should be evaluated for a response using the following guidelines.
(A) Although no specific language is required to make a request, the requester must at least identify
the records requested with sufficient clarity to allow the public office to identify, retrieve and review the
records. If it is not clear what records are being sought, the records custodian must contact the requester
for clarification, and should assist the requestor in revising the request by informing the requester of the
manner in which the office keeps its records.
(B) The requester does not have to put a records request in writing, and does not have to provide
his or her identity or the intended use of the requested public record. It is the city’s general policy that
this information not be requested.
(C) Public records are to be available for inspection during regular business hours, with the
exception of published holidays. Public records must be made available for inspection promptly. Copies
of public records must be made available within a reasonable period of time. “Prompt” and “reasonable”
take into account the volume of records requested; the proximity of the location where the records are
stored; and the necessity for any legal review of the records requested.
(D) Each request should be evaluated for an estimated length of time required to gather the records.
Routine requests for records should be satisfied immediately, if feasible to do so. Routine requests
include but are not limited to meeting minutes (both in draft and final form), budgets, salary information,
forms and applications, personnel rosters and the like. If fewer than 20 pages of copies are requested or
if the records are readily available in an electronic format that can be e-mailed or downloaded easily,
these should be made as quickly as the equipment allows. If more copies are requested, an appointment
should be made with the requester on when the copies or computer files can be picked up. Each public
official or employee responsible for responding to a public records request shall prepare, make available
for inspection, and shall make copies of, if requested, the requested public records promptly, subject to
that person’s duties to respond to calls for other important city services, including emergency calls for
services which relate to the preservation of the health and safety of people, and the preservation of
property, within the community. All requests for public records must either be satisfied or be
acknowledged in writing by the public office within a reasonable time following the office’s receipt of
the request. If a request is deemed significantly beyond “routine,” such as seeking a voluminous number
of copies or requiring extensive research, the acknowledgment must include the following:
(1) An estimated number of business days it will take to satisfy the request;
(2) An estimated cost if copies are requested; and
(3) Any items within the request that may be exempt from disclosure.
Public Records Policy 51
(E) Any denial of public records requested must include an explanation, including legal authority.
If portions of a record are public and portions are exempt, the exempt portions are to be redacted and
the rest released. If there are redactions, each redaction must be accompanied by a supporting
explanation, including legal authority.
(1985 Code, § 37.03) (Res. 05-08, passed 6-23-2008)
§ 37.04 COSTS FOR PUBLIC RECORDS.
Those seeking public records will be charged only the actual cost of making copies.
(A) The charge for paper copies is $0.05 per page.
(B) The charge for downloaded computer files to a compact disc is $1 per disc.
(C) There is no charge for documents e-mailed.
(D) Requesters may ask that documents be mailed to them. They will be charged the actual cost of
the postage and mailing supplies.
(1985 Code, § 37.04) (Res. 05-08, passed 6-23-2008)
§ 37.05 E-MAIL.
Documents in electronic mail format are records as defined by the Ohio Revised Code when their
content relates to the business of the office. E-mail is to be treated in the same fashion as records in other
formats and should follow the same retention schedules.
(A) Records in private e-mail accounts used to conduct public business are subject to disclosure, and
all employees or representatives of the city are instructed to retain their e-mails that relate to public
business (see § 37.02 Public Records) and to copy them to their business e-mail accounts and/or to the
office’s records custodian.
(B) The records custodian is to treat the e-mails from private accounts as records of the public
office, filing them in the appropriate way, retaining them per established schedules and making them
available for inspection and copying in accordance with the Public Records Act.
(1985 Code, § 37.05) (Res. 05-08, passed 6-23-2008)
§ 37.06 FAILURE TO RESPOND TO PUBLIC RECORDS REQUEST.
The city recognizes the legal and non-legal consequences of failure to properly respond to a public
records request. In addition to the distrust in government that failure to comply may cause, the city’s
52 Madeira - Administration
failure to comply with a request may result in a court ordering the city to comply with the law and to
pay the requester attorney’s fees and damages.
(1985 Code, § 37.06) (Res. 05-08, passed 6-23-2008)
CHAPTER 38: FINANCES
Section
Finance Department
38.01 Assistant Treasurer/Tax Commissioner, Finance/Tax Clerk and Finance/Tax Clerk II
Investment and Depository Policy
38.15 Scope
38.16 Objectives and guidelines
38.17 Authorized financial institutions and dealers and investments
38.18 Investments Advisory Committee
38.19 Safekeeping and custody
38.20 Authorization to sign policy
Funds
38.35 Police Explorer Donation Fund
38.36 Centennial Celebration Fund
38.37 Capital Improvement Water Distribution Fund
FINANCE DEPARTMENT
§ 38.01 ASSISTANT TREASURER/TAX COMMISSIONER, FINANCE/TAX CLERK AND
FINANCE/TAX CLERK II.
(A) There is hereby created effective March 1, 2012 the positions of Assistant Treasurer/Tax
Commissioner, Finance/Tax Clerk I and Finance/Tax Clerk II for the purpose of restructuring the
Finance and Tax Departments of the city.
(B) The position descriptions for these new positions shall be as provided in the attached Exhibits
A, B and C, which are adopted by reference and incorporated as a part of this code as if fully set out
herein. A copy is on file with the City Clerk.
(Ord. 12-10, passed 2-27-2012)
53
54 Madeira - Administration
INVESTMENT AND DEPOSITORY POLICY
§ 38.15 SCOPE.
The Investment Advisory Committee hereby directs that the investing authority of this public entity
shall reside with the Treasurer of the city in accordance with this investment policy. This policy is
designed to cover all monies under the control of the city and those that comprise the core investment
portfolio. Notwithstanding the policies detailed below, R.C. Chapter 135 will be adhered to at all times.
(Res. 07-10, passed 7-26-2010)
§ 38.16 OBJECTIVES AND GUIDELINES.
The following investment objectives will be applied in the management of this public entity’s funds.
(A) The primary objective shall be the preservation of capital and protection of principal while
earning investment interest.
(B) In investing public funds, the Treasurer will strive to achieve a fair and safe average rate of
return on the investment portfolio over the course of budgetary and economic cycles, taking into account
state law, safety considerations and cash flow requirements.
(C) The investment portfolio shall remain sufficiently liquid to enable the Treasurer to meet
reasonably anticipated operating requirements.
(D) The investment portfolio should be diversified in order to avoid incurring potential losses
regarding individual securities which may not be held to maturity, whether by erosion of market value
or change in market conditions.
(E) Investments may be redeemed or sold prior to maturity if the Treasurer determines that:
(1) Other more suitable investments can be obtained which would better serve the city’s needs;
and/or
(2) The city has experienced an unexpected need for greater liquidity.
(F) Investments shall be made with the exercise of that degree of judgment and care, under
circumstances then prevailing, which persons of prudence, discretion and intelligence exercise in the
management of their own affairs, not for speculation but for investment, considering the probable safety
of their capital as well as the probable income to be derived.
Finances 55
(G) Bank account relations will be managed in order to secure adequate services while minimizing
costs. Deposits should be concentrated in single accounts except where audit control considerations
dictate otherwise.
(Res. 07-10, passed 7-26-2010)
§ 38.17 AUTHORIZED FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS AND DEALERS AND
INVESTMENTS.
(A) Investment accounts may be maintained at financial institutions, United States Department of
Treasury or dealers who are members of the National Association of Security Dealers (NASD).
Allowable investments with maturities of five years or less include United States and federal agency and
instrumentality obligations, money market accounts, repurchase agreements, banker acceptances,
certificates of deposit and commercial paper (rated by two agencies in their two highest categories).
Investment account holdings are not subject to public depository or collateral requirements as described
in R.C. Chapter 135. Investment accounts should be protected by FDIC, FSLIC or SIPC.
(B) Permitted investments also include the State Treasurer’s investment pool (Star Ohio) or other
State Treasurer investment instruments.
(C) Securities purchased directly from a financial institution, United States Treasury or dealer under
the terms of this policy and held by the city are not considered interim funds under a depository
agreement as described in R.C. Chapter 135.
(D) Collateral pledged to secure repayment of public monies shall be those acceptable under R.C.
§§ 135.18 and 135.181, with the exception that letters of credit issued by federal government agencies
or instrumentalities shall not be acceptable collateral for city depositories.
(E) A list of authorized institutions and dealers shall be maintained with the investing authority.
Additions and deletions to this list shall be made when deemed in the best interest of the investing
authority.
(Res. 07-10, passed 7-26-2010)
§ 38.18 INVESTMENTS ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
The Budget and Finance Committee appointed by the Mayor of the city shall serve as the
Investments Advisory Committee for the city and shall meet no fewer than two times a year. Specific
areas of review include investment inventory, transactions and realized income. Changes to the
investment policy shall be submitted to City Council for approval, and a copy filed with the State
Auditor.
(Res. 07-10, passed 7-26-2010)
56 Madeira - Administration
§ 38.19 SAFEKEEPING AND CUSTODY.
(A) Securities purchased for the city may be held in safekeeping by a qualified trustee (hereinafter
referred to as a “custodian”), as provided in R.C. § 135.37. Securities held in safekeeping by a custodian
will be evidenced by a statement describing such securities.
(B) The Treasurer or custodian may keep the city’s securities in:
(1) Federal Reserve Bank book entry form;
(2) Depository Trust Company (DTC) book entry form in the account of the custodian or the
custodian’s correspondent bank; or
(3) Non-book entry (physical) securities held by the custodian or the custodian’s correspondent
bank.
(C) All securities transactions will settle using standard delivery versus payment (DVP) procedures.
The records of the custodian shall identify such securities in the name of the city.
(Res. 07-10, passed 7-26-2010)
§ 38.20 AUTHORIZATION TO SIGN POLICY.
The Treasurer is granted the authority to approve the investment policy on behalf of the city.
(Res. 07-10, passed 7-26-2010)
FUNDS
§ 38.35 POLICE EXPLORER DONATION FUND.
(A) Special Revenue Fund SR-54 Police Explorer Donation Fund is hereby established to enable
the city to collect donations for said purpose of supporting the Police Explorer program.
(B) The City Manager is hereby authorized to make expenditures from the Fund for any lawful
purpose in furtherance of training and supplies for the Police Explorer program.
(Ord. 08-40, passed 12-8-2008)
Finances 57
§ 38.36 CENTENNIAL CELEBRATION FUND.
(A) Special Revenue Fund SR-55 Madeira Centennial Celebration Fund is hereby established to
enable the city to collect donations for said purpose of supporting the centennial celebration.
(B) The City Manager is hereby authorized to make expenditures from the fund for any approved
centennial celebration expense.
(Ord. 09-31, passed 12-1-2009)
§ 38.37 CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT WATER DISTRIBUTION FUND.
(A) There is hereby created the SR-87 Capital Improvement Water Distribution Fund to enable the
city to account for the funds received from the Village of Indian Hill Water District.
(B) The City Manager is hereby authorized to make expenditures from this fund for the purpose of
replacing and maintaining the water distribution system within the Indian Hill Water District.
(Ord. 13-07, passed 1-14-2012)
58 Madeira - Administration

TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
Chapter
50. SEWAGE SYSTEM
51. SURFACE WATER RUNOFF
52. STORMWATER REGULATIONS
53. MINORITY BUSINESS ENTERPRISE ASSOCIATION
1
2 Madeira - Public Works
CHAPTER 50: SEWAGE SYSTEM
Section
50.01 Hamilton County Metropolitan Sewer District rules adopted
50.02 Shawnee Run tap-in fee
§ 50.01 HAMILTON COUNTY METROPOLITAN SEWER DISTRICT RULES ADOPTED.
The city is a participating member of the Hamilton County Metropolitan Sewer District and all
sewage facilities, services and rates pertaining to sewage handling shall be covered by the rules and
regulations of the Hamilton County Metropolitan Sewer District agreement.
(1985 Code, § 50.01)
§ 50.02 SHAWNEE RUN TAP-IN FEE.
Prior to issuing a building permit for sewer construction, a tap-in fee of $500 shall be paid to the
City Manager through the City Manager’s office.
(1985 Code, § 50.02)
3
4 Madeira - Public Works
CHAPTER 51: SURFACE WATER RUNOFF
Section
51.01 Discharge of surface water and other runoff
51.02 Inspection of tests of drains and downspouts
51.03 Notice of violations
51.99 Penalty
Cross-reference:
Grading of land, see § 153.24
Storm drainage in subdivisions, see § 151.084
Water distribution system in subdivisions, see § 151.088
Waters and watercourses, see Ch. 96
Resolution reference:
Adopting rules and regulations for the Hamilton County Stormwater District, see Res. 03-09
§ 51.01 DISCHARGE OF SURFACE WATER AND OTHER RUNOFF.
(A) (1) Surface water, rain water from roofs, subsoil drainage water, building foundation drainage
water, cistern overflow water, clean water from condensers, wastewater from water motors and
elevators, and any other clean and unobjectionable wastewater shall be discharged into a stormwater
sewer whenever and wherever a sewer is available to receive the water.
(2) Where a sewer is not available, the water shall be discharged into street gutters or natural
watercourses.
(3) However, the water shall not be discharged into a sanitary sewer.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge this water into a house sewer or drain, driveway
approach, downspout or other rain water leader connected to or with a sanitary sewer, or to tap a house
drain or sewer so connected for the purpose of discharging this water into it. Any existing connection
in violation of the provisions of this section shall be abandoned and removed.
(C) Wherever a stormwater sewer is available to receive this water, downspouts shall be connected
thereto with four-inch sealed joint tile.
5
6 Madeira - Public Works
(D) A stormwater sewer shall be deemed to be available to receive this water from the land of each
particular person owning real property in the city wherever the sewer is located within the property or
within 100 feet from any boundary of the property.
(1985 Code, § 51.01) Penalty, see § 51.99
Cross-reference:
Changing natural drainage, see § 153.24
§ 51.02 INSPECTION OF TESTS OF DRAINS AND DOWNSPOUTS.
The City Manager or any deputy designated by him or her is authorized and empowered, at any and
all reasonable times, to enter and inspect any premises, building or structure within the city with regard
to the existence of any violation of this chapter which may constitute a health hazard or create a hazard
in case of rain; and with regard to the condition, capacity, arrangements, efficiency and connections of
all devices on or in the premises, building or structure, for the disposition of this water. In pursuance
of this inspection, he or she is authorized and empowered, without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing, to make or cause to be made, on behalf of the city, a dye test or other reasonable test on the
house drains, driveway approaches, downspouts and other facilities and means for the disposition of this
water, or on any premises, building or structure.
(1985 Code, § 51.02) Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.03 NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS.
The City Manager shall notify by certified mail the person having the right to the possession of the
premises, building or structure where a determination has been made that drains, approaches,
downspouts, facilities or means are faulty, improperly constructed or connected, or otherwise in violation
of §§ 51.01 and 51.02. The notice shall apprise the person of the conditions and violations found to exist
and shall require correction of the violation within 30 days from the mailing of the notice. Such person
shall comply with the requirement within 30 days. Failure to receive any notice shall not, however,
relieve any person from compliance with each and all the provisions of §§ 51.01 and 51.02.
(1985 Code, § 51.03) Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, on conviction, be fined not more than
$50 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed each period of 24
hours the violation continues after a period of 30 days following the first conviction.
(1985 Code, § 51.99)
CHAPTER 52: STORMWATER REGULATIONS
Section
52.01 Establishment
52.02 General regulations
52.03 Master plan
52.04 Permits and plan review
52.05 Application for permit
52.06 Permits issued
52.07 Permit limitations
52.08 Permit and inspection fees
52.09 Posting of permit
52.10 Revocation of permit
52.11 Inspection and surveillance
52.12 Notice of violations
52.13 Right of entry for survey and examination
52.14 Funding
52.15 Stormwater Fund
52.16 Classification of property
52.17 Land use intensity of development factors
52.18 Rates
52.19 Delinquent charges
52.20 Notice to correct drainage
52.21 Emergencies and abatement
52.22 Abatement costs
52.23 Appeals and variances
52.24 Contents of petition
52.25 Filing fee
52.26 Board of Appeals
52.27 Emergency situations
52.28 Flooding; liability
52.29 Severability
52.30 Violation of sections
52.31 Accessories
52.32 Definitions
7
8 Madeira - Public Works
52.99 Penalty
Cross-reference:
Grading of land, see § 153.24
Resolution reference:
Adopting rules and regulations for the Hamilton County Stormwater District, see Res. 03-09
§ 52.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
(A) Whereas, there is currently no systematic program for the management of stormwater drainage
in the city;
(B) Whereas, circumstances dictate that a systematic approach to the management of stormwater
drainage be implemented in the city;
(C) Whereas, Council finds that the repair, replacement, improvement, management and regulation
of the stormwater system is necessary to prevent further deterioration of the existing system, to prevent
or reduce the potential for flooding and to prevent water pollution;
(D) Whereas, it may be necessary, desirable and in the best interest of the stormwater system to
establish a special charge for the facility, which charge shall be designated to the stormwater drainage
charge and shall be imposed and collected as provided by separate ordinance when necessary; and
(E) Now therefore, be it ordained by the City Council that a Madeira Stormwater Management
Authority (MSMA) is established for the control of stormwater which affects the city.
(1985 Code, § 52.01) (Ord. 87-29, passed 10-5-1987)
§ 52.02 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
(A) The city shall establish engineering projects to correct flooding of the city property owners.
(B) The city may accept from the property owner natural and/or altered watercourse easements for
the purpose of maintenance.
(C) Natural watercourse easements may not be disturbed without approval of the city. The city shall
approve each altered watercourse.
(D) The property owner shall maintain natural and altered watercourses unless this property owner
gives to the city the maintenance easement. Upon the receipt and acceptance of the maintenance
easement, the city shall have the authority to maintain the natural and altered watercourse.
(E) The city has the authority to procure private property or maintenance easements through its
more general right of eminent domain for the construction and maintenance of stormwater projects.
Stormwater Regulations 9
(F) The value of procured property shall be the fair market value.
(G) The value of procured maintenance easements shall be $l.
(H) During property development within the city, effective erosion and sediment controls shall be
planned and applied according to the following principles.
(1) The smallest practical area of land should be exposed at any one time during development.
(2) When land is exposed, time exposure should be kept to the shortest practical period of time.
(3) Temporary vegetation and/or mulching should be used to protect critical areas exposed
during development.
(4) Sediment basins (debris basin or silt traps) should be installed and maintained to remove
sediment from runoff water from the land under development.
(5) Permanent final vegetation and structures should be installed as soon as practical in the
development.
(6) The development should be fitted to the topography and soils so as to create the least
erosion potential.
(7) Wherever feasible, natural vegetation should be retained and protected.
(I) The erosion, watercourse and sedimentation plan shall be included in the general plan.
(J) The water runoff rate of newly developed property shall be no greater than that which existed
prior to said development. This provision shall be included in the development’s general plan.
(K) Private stormwater maintenance shall not be done in a way which affects other property owners
or the natural or altered watercourses that exist without the approval of the city.
(1985 Code, § 52.02) (Ord. 87-29, passed 10-5-1987)
§ 52.03 MASTER PLAN.
(A) The City Engineer shall establish and maintain a master plan for a stormwater system designed
to handle the stormwater runoff.
(B) The master plan shall provide or be accompanied by maps or other descriptive material
showing, at a minimum, the following:
(1) An inventory of the existing stormwater facilities plus the extent and area of each watershed
tributary to the main drainage channels in the city;
10 Madeira - Public Works
(2) An inventory of all natural and altered watercourse easements, including ingress and egress
easements from and to public streets;
(3) The street storm sewers and other storm drains to be built; the basis of their design; the
outfall, inlet and outlet locations; the receiving stream or channel and its high water elevation; and the
functioning of the systems and facilities during high water conditions;
(4) The parts of the proposed street system where pavements are planned to be depressed
sufficiently to convey or temporarily store overflow from storm sewers and runoff over the curb
resulting from the heavier rainstorms and the outlets for such overflow;
(5) Existing streams and floodplains to be maintained, enlarged, altered, eliminated and
constructed, and their locations, cross-sections and profiles;
(6) Existing culverts and bridges, drainage areas and adequacy of waterway openings; new
culverts and bridges to be built; and waterway openings and the basis of their design;
(7) Existing detention ponds and basins to be maintained;
(8) For all detention/retention basins, a tabulation of storage volumes with corresponding water
surface elevations and of the basin outflow rates for those water surface elevations;
(9) For all detention/retention basins, design hydrographs of inflow and outflow for the design
year under developed conditions and the calculated frequency peak flows from the site under natural and
developed conditions;
(10) Estimates of cost of proposed projects; and
(11) The City Engineer shall submit a master plan draft to the Public Works Committee within
two years following the approval of this chapter.
(1985 Code, § 52.03) (Ord. 87-29, passed 10-5-1987)
Resolution reference:
Adoption of the master plan, see Res. 21-88A
§ 52.04 PERMITS AND PLAN REVIEW.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person or organization to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, relocate
or demolish a storm sewer, natural watercourse or other drainage facility, without first filing an
application and obtaining a proper permit.
(B) Permits are required and may be granted by the city for the following improvement categories:
(1) Connection into the public stormwater system, except unimproved creeks or streams;
Stormwater Regulations 11
(2) Improvements which are or will become public facilities;
(3) Improvements within dedicated but unimproved street rights-of-way; and
(4) Improvements which require retention or detention facilities.
(C) Plans for all improvements made within the city that require stormwater facilities or changes
or alterations to existing stormwater facilities must be submitted to the City Engineer for review and
approval. Plans and applications are to be submitted through the building permit process. All
improvements must conform to the provisions of this chapter or rules or regulations promulgated
hereunder and the master plan. The City Engineer shall have 30 days after the date of application to
review each plan submitted. Plans that are not approved may be resubmitted after revisions are made.
No permit shall be issued until a plan is approved or the need for a permit is waived by the City
Engineer.
(D) Every improvement shall be provided with a stormwater system capable of handling stormwaters
flowing onto the improvement site from other areas as well as stormwater from the site itself. The
drainage system shall be designed to discharge into a watercourse, drainage channel or other existing
stormwater facility.
(E) For developed lots and where new structures, additions or changes are to be made, adequate
surface grading shall be extended or runoff shall be collected in inlets and then connected to sewers or
drains. This grading, and the drains where necessary, shall be shown on the building permit plan. The
plan shall then be reviewed by the City Engineer.
(F) Where plans are being developed, all areas shall be graded and drained to prevent the standing
of stormwater, except lakes, lagoons or retention reservoirs approved by the City Engineer. Where
necessary, drainage channels or sewers shall be provided to convey the water to an existing watercourse
or outlet. The method and means of drainage, including the handling of both paved and unpaved areas,
shall be subject to approval by the City Engineer.
(G) Facilities shall be provided to drain all street intersections, and to care for roof downspouts and
drains from yards and driveway aprons. Where foundation drains are installed, the foundation drains
must discharge to the surface water drainage system directly or through a sump pump installation.
(H) Except for existing combined sewers, the stormwater drainage system shall not be combined
with any part of the sanitary sewer system, nor shall sanitary wastewater be discharged thereto.
(I) Connection into a storm sewer shall be performed only by sewer tappers who meet the following
requirements.
(1) They are licensed by the City of Cincinnati.
(2) They have posted a bond with the city in the amount of $5,000.
(1985 Code, § 52.04) (Ord. 87-29, passed 10-5-1987) Penalty, see § 52.99
12 Madeira - Public Works
§ 52.05 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
(A) An application shall be made by the owner of the property involved, or an authorized agent
employed in connection with the proposed work.
(B) The application shall be prepared in writing on printed forms prescribed by the City Engineer
and shall contain the full names and addresses of the owner, applicant and contractor; the street and
house number of the building or structure; a brief description of the proposed work; the estimated cost
thereof; a statement on behalf of the owner that the proposed work will be in accordance with this code
and all laws and ordinances applying to the premises; and such other information as may be required by
the City Engineer.
(C) All applications for permits shall be accompanied by three sets of plans and two sets of
specifications. Plans and specifications shall be prepared in accordance with the City Engineer’s
requirements. In addition to the plans and specifications, the applicant shall provide any statements,
calculations, drawings and other supporting data regarding the manner in which stormwater runoff from
the project site on the proposed development area will be controlled.
(D) The applicant shall provide a bond equal to the cost of the proposed project.
(1985 Code, § 52.05) (Ord. 87-29, passed 10-5-1987) Penalty, see § 52.99
§ 52.06 PERMITS ISSUED.
(A) The City Engineer shall examine the applications as described in the plan review process. The
proposed stormwater drainage system must be designed so as to fit into the existing or planned
stormwater drainage system as prepared by the City Engineer. The design, materials and construction
of all parts of the drainage system shall satisfy the requirements of the City Engineer and, when
involving highways and freeways, the requirements of the Department of Transportation of the state.
(B) If the examination reveals no objections to the proposed plan and it appears that the proposed
work will be in compliance with the master plan, codes, laws and ordinances applicable thereto and the
proposed construction or work will be in conformance with this chapter, such application shall be
approved and a permit issued, as soon as practicable, for the proposed work. If the examination reveals
otherwise, such application shall be rejected and the findings shall be communicated in writing to the
applicant.
(1985 Code, § 52.06) (Ord. 87-29, passed 10-5-1987)
§ 52.07 PERMIT LIMITATIONS.
(A) A permit shall expire when no work is started within 180 days from the date of issuance;
provided, however, that one renewal, which shall be valid from 180 days commencing upon expiration
Stormwater Regulations 13
of the original permit, shall be granted upon written application made prior to the expiration of the
original permit and payment of the fee prescribed in § 52.08.
(B) A permit shall be revoked when work is discontinued for a period of one year or when, in the
opinion of the City Engineer, the completion of the work has been unduly delayed. No revoked permit
may be revived until the plans and uncompleted work are made to comply with all the requirements of
all laws, codes, regulations and ordinances then in effect.
(1985 Code, § 52.07) (Ord. 87-29, passed 10-5-1987)
§ 52.08 PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEES.
(A) A permit fee and an inspection fee shall be paid as detailed herein for all stormwater facilities
to be constructed. The fees shall be determined by the City Engineer in accordance with the guidelines
herein.
(B) Permit fees for connections into the public stormwater system, except unimproved creeks and
streams, shall be $40.
(C) Inspection fees and plan review fees for other permits required as set forth in the rules and
regulations, shall be based on an hourly rate reasonably related to the cost to the city. The owner is
responsible for all plan, review and inspection fees. A deposit shall be required to provide for inspection
fees.
(1985 Code, § 52.08) (Ord. 87-29, passed 10-5-1987)
§ 52.09 POSTING OF PERMIT.
(A) The permit shall be posted in a conspicuous location at the project site if possible. If not, the
owner or contractor shall retain the permit and have it readily available upon request by the Utility
Division.
(B) The owner or contractor shall preserve the permit until completion of the work. Upon
application by the owner or contractor, the City Engineer shall issue a duplicate permit to replace one
destroyed by vandals or one which is accidentally destroyed.
(1985 Code, § 52.09) (Ord. 87-29, passed 10-5-1987) Penalty, see § 52.99
§ 52.10 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
The City Engineer may revoke the permit or stop work for any of the following reasons:
(A) Whenever there is a violation of any provision of this chapter, any ordinance of the city or
statute of the state relating to the project;
14 Madeira - Public Works
(B) Whenever the continuance of any work becomes dangerous to life or property;
(C) Whenever there is a violation of any condition on which the issuance of the permit was based;
or
(D) Whenever any false statement or misrepresentation has been made upon the application, plans
or specifications on which the issuance of the permit or approval was based.
(1985 Code, § 52.10) (Ord. 87-29, passed 10-5-1987)
§ 52.11 INSPECTION AND SURVEILLANCE.
(A) The City Engineer shall inspect the permit premises and enforce all laws relating to
construction, alteration, repair, removal, demolition, equipment, use, location and maintenance of the
drainage facilities, except as may be otherwise provided for. The City Engineer shall, when the interests
of the city so require, make investigations in connection with matters referred to in this code and render
written reports on the same. For the purpose of enforcing compliance with the law, the City Engineer
shall issue such notices or orders as may be necessary.
(B) The City Engineer shall keep careful and comprehensive records of applications, permits,
inspections, reports rendered, notices, orders issued and approvals. All such records shall be open for
public inspection.
(1985 Code, § 52.11) (Ord. 87-29, passed 10-5-1987)
§ 52.12 NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS.
(A) When the City Engineer finds the drainage facility or the construction thereof is contrary to the
approved plans, or presents an unsafe or dangerous condition in connection with the provisions of this
code or of any law or ordinance relating to the same subject matter, the Engineer shall give notice to the
owner of the premises. The notice shall state where and in what respect the work does not conform to
the approved plans, or state the defective condition and law violated, and shall specify a reasonable
period of time in which to conform to the plans or this code.
(B) In every instance, a revocation notice of the permit shall be in writing and shall be served upon
the owner, agent or the person having charge of the work. A revocation notice shall also be posted
alongside the permit. After the notice is received or posted, it shall be unlawful for any person to
proceed with any operation for which such permit was issued. No part of the fees for such permit shall
be returned.
(C) Notice, as required by this section, is to be served on the owner, agent, contractor or other
person responsible for the work or violation related to this chapter, by personal delivery or by certified
mail addressed to the last-known place of residence or place of business.
(1985 Code, § 52.12) (Ord. 87-29, passed 10-5-1987) Penalty, see § 52.99
Stormwater Regulations 15
§ 52.13 RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR SURVEY AND EXAMINATION.
(A) After presenting proper credentials and securing permission, the employees of the Public Works
Division or its agents, including contractors and their employees and consultants and their employees,
may enter upon lands within the city to make surveys and examinations to accomplish the necessary
preliminary findings to establish a master plan and for detailed analysis to prepare final plans and
specifications for the proposed improvements and easements.
(B) Where improvements are made that require periodic maintenance or inspection upon the lands
by the Madeira Stormwater Management Authority, the owner of such land shall grant the city a
perpetual easement and right of entry around and access to any stormwater channel or facility, including
storm sewers.
(1985 Code, § 52.13) (Ord. 87-29, passed 10-5-1987) Penalty, see § 52.99
§ 52.14 FUNDING.
Funding for the stormwater Madeira Stormwater Management Authority activities shall include but
not be limited to:
(A) Permit and inspection fees. Permit and inspection fees;
(B) Direct charges. This charge will be collected from the owner and developers for the cost of
designing and constructing stormwater facilities and administrative costs and related expenses where the
Madeira Stormwater Management Authority designs and/or constructs or contracts for the construction
of such facilities;
(C) Direct assessment. This charge will be collected from owners in localized areas that desire
stormwater drainage facilities not considered a part of the regional development or where an
improvement is desired ahead of the priority status;
(D) Other income. Other income obtained from federal, state, local and private grants or revolving
funds; and
(E) Fees. The fees shall be defined as the usual and customary cost.
(1985 Code, § 52.14) (Ord. 87-29, passed 10-5-1987)
§ 52.15 STORMWATER FUND.
All revenues generated by or on behalf of the Madeira Stormwater Management Authority, including
storm drainage service charges, permit and inspection fees and direct charges and interest earnings on
those revenues shall be deposited in a Stormwater Fund and used exclusively for Madeira Stormwater
Management Authority purposes.
(1985 Code, § 52.15) (Ord. 87-29, passed 10-5-1987)
16 Madeira - Public Works
§ 52.16 CLASSIFICATION OF PROPERTY.
There shall be three classifications of property for determination of the storm drainage charge.
(A) Class A, one- and two-family residential properties having land area 10,000 square feet or less.
Typically, these types of property comprise about 7,500 square feet total, area range number (ARN 4)
and an intensity of development factor (IDF) of .25, which constitutes an equivalent runoff unit (ERU)
of 1.00. A flat rate or value of 1.00 ERU shall be applied to all one- and two-family residential property
having a land area 10,000 square feet or less.
(B) Class B, one- and two-family residential properties having a land area 10,001 square feet or
larger. Typically, these types of property comprise about 13,000 square feet total, area range number
(ARN 7) and an intensity of development factor (IDF) of .20 which constitutes an equivalent runoff unit
(ERU) of 1.40. A flat rate or value of 1.40 ERU shall be applied to all one- and two-family residential
property having a land area 10,001 square feet or larger.
(C) Class C, multi-family (three families or more) residential property and non-residential property.
The gross area, total square footage, of each Class C property shall be grouped in 2,000 square foot
ranges and assigned an area range number (ARN).
(1985 Code, § 52.16) (Ord. 87-29, passed 10-5-1987)
§ 52.17 LAND USE INTENSITY OF DEVELOPMENT FACTORS.
(A) Nine land uses are identified and recognized for purposes of this chapter, each of which has an
assigned intensity of development factor (IDF).
(B) The land use of each Class C property shall be assigned based on the records of the County
Recorder or Auditor, the city or through field examination or photogrametric analysis.
Land-Use IDF
Agriculture .08
Commercial .85
Industrial .75
Institutional .40
Multi-family .60
Park and undeveloped .05
Residential Class A; up to 10,000 square feet .25
Stormwater Regulations 17
Land-Use IDF
Residential Class B; 10,001 square feet or larger .20
Transportation .50
(1985 Code, § 52.17) (Ord. 87-29, passed 10-5-1987)
§ 52.18 RATES.
The City Engineer is directed to prepare a list of all lots and parcels within the city and the area
thereof, and assign a classification. All properties included in Class C shall be assigned an area range
number (ARN) and intensity of development factor (IDF). The City Engineer shall report any
applications of the provisions which the utility engineer considers unjust or inequitable, and the matter
shall be resolved in accordance with the provisions of § 52.19. The fee schedule shall be on an annual
basis.
(1985 Code, § 52.18) (Ord. 87-29, passed 10-5-1987)
§ 52.19 DELINQUENT CHARGES.
(A) All charges not paid within 30 days after receipt of billing or under appeal shall be considered
delinquent.
(B) All charges in arrears and delinquent hereunder shall:
(1) Be subject to an interest charge at the statutory rate;
(2) Be subject to a rebilling charge covering administrative cost; and
(3) Constitute a lien upon the real property affected from the date charges are incurred.
(C) Charges which remain unpaid for a period of 60 days may be reported to City Council for
assessment against the real property. In the alternative, Council may direct the City Law Director to file
suit and collect unpaid charges.
(1985 Code, § 52.19) (Ord. 87-29, passed 10-5-1987) Penalty, see § 52.99
§ 52.20 NOTICE TO CORRECT DRAINAGE.
(A) Whenever the City Engineer shall find that a tract of land is inadequately drained, or that there
is an obstruction to a culvert, covered drain or other natural or human-made watercourse that interferes
with water naturally flowing therein or that such culvert, drain or watercourse is of insufficient capacity
to reasonably accommodate the flow of water as required by this chapter, the City Engineer or a person
designated by the City Engineer shall notify the owner or person having possession, charge or
18 Madeira - Public Works
management of such land to remove the obstruction or provide the necessary drainage. Such notice shall
be served on such persons by personal delivery, by mail at the last known place of residence, or by
posting on the premises.
(B) The owner must comply with the City Engineer’s orders within the time specified and not to
exceed 30 days. Failure to comply with such order shall constitute an unlawful act. Each additional
period of ten days thereafter during which the owner fails to carry out the order of the City Engineer,
or a designee, shall constitute a separate offense.
(1985 Code, § 52.20) (Ord. 87-29, passed 10-5-1987) Penalty, see § 52.99
§ 52.21 EMERGENCIES AND ABATEMENT.
(A) In case of an emergency, the City Engineer may direct that action be taken immediately to
correct the condition or abate the activity to protect the public health, safety and welfare. The Utility
Division may perform the required work and charge the owner the abatement costs.
(B) In any case where a condition described in this section exists for more than 30 days after service
of notice, City Council may by resolution direct the owner to fill or drain such land, remove any
obstruction and, if necessary, enlarge the culverts, drains or watercourse to meet the requirements of this
chapter.
(C) After service of a copy of such resolution or after publication in a paper of general circulation
in the city for two consecutive weeks, the owner, agent or attorney shall comply with the directions of
the resolution within the time therein specified. When the resolution is submitted to the appropriate
Council committee, the owner shall be afforded notice and an opportunity to be heard prior to passage
of the resolution. In the event an owner fails or refuses to comply with Council’s resolution, the Madeira
Stormwater Management Authority may perform the required work and charge the owner the abatement
costs. Such costs shall constitute a lien on the real property from the time of the adoption of the
resolution which may be enforced by suit in the Court of Common Pleas.
(1985 Code, § 52.21) (Ord. 87-29, passed 10-5-1987)
§ 52.22 ABATEMENT COSTS.
(A) The City Engineer shall account for all costs associated with an emergency or abatement,
including but not limited to administration, notification, inspection, serving of papers or documents, legal
counsel, force account labor, enforcement, operational services and outside contracted services. These
costs shall be charged to the owner.
(B) This section shall not be construed to relieve the owner of any penalties prescribed by other
sections of this chapter.
(1985 Code, § 52.22) (Ord. 87-29, passed 10-5-1987) Penalty, see § 52.99
Stormwater Regulations 19
§ 52.23 APPEALS AND VARIANCES.
(A) Except as provided in § 52.22, any person who has a bona fide controversy with the City
Engineer as to the interpretation or application of a provision of this chapter or related laws or
ordinances pertaining to stormwater management and subject to the administration of the City Engineer,
may apply in writing to the City Engineer for a written interpretation or ruling, setting forth in his or
her petition the requirements of § 52.24.
(B) When the City Engineer has rendered a written interpretation or ruling, or has issued a written
order to make repairs, maintenance or alterations, the complainant shall be allowed 30 days from the date
of the receipt of the same, within which to file with the City Engineer an appeal to the Board of Appeals.
(C) The appeal shall be based on one of the following grounds:
(1) The interpretation, ruling or order is erroneous or constitutes an erroneous application of
the particular provisions of the drainage code or other related laws or ordinances pertaining to
stormwater management and finance, or is otherwise contrary to law; or
(2) A variance is necessary and feasible whereby the Board of Appeals shall make the following
findings:
(a) Good and sufficient cause based on an unreasonable burden or hardship has been
proven;
(b) The granting of the variance would not result in any increase in quantity or velocity
of flow, degradation of water quality or negative impacts upon adjoining or downstream properties, nor
upon the stormwater system;
(c) The degree of variance is the minimum necessary to afford relief from the unreasonable
burden or hardship imposed by the drainage code or standards, specifications, requirements, regulations
and procedures adopted pursuant to this code; and/or
(d) The variance may be granted without defeating the public health, safety and welfare
purposes and intent of the drainage code or related laws or ordinances pertaining to stormwater
management and finance.
(1985 Code, § 52.23) (Ord. 87-29, passed 10-5-1987)
§ 52.24 CONTENTS OF PETITION.
(A) The complainant shall set forth in the petition for appeal, the interpretation, ruling or order
appealed from, and the provisions of the drainage code or related laws or ordinances, and shall state
wherein the interpretation, ruling or order is erroneous.
20 Madeira - Public Works
(B) If the appeal is based on a request for variance, the petition shall point out the provision or
provisions from which the variance is sought and how the request satisfies the requirements of
§ 52.23(C)(2).
(1985 Code, § 52.24) (Ord. 87-29, passed 10-5-1987)
§ 52.25 FILING FEE.
No appeal petition shall be accepted for filing unless the complainant, at the time of filing, pays a
fee of $50 to partially compensate the city for the direct and indirect expenditures, costs and extra work
occasioned by the filing and prosecution of the appeal. Such filing fee shall be in addition to the payment
of the permits and inspection fees and any or other fee which thereafter may occur, and no portion of
such filing fee shall be refunded, whatever the outcome of the appeal.
(1985 Code, § 52.25) (Ord. 87-29, passed 10-5-1987)
§ 52.26 BOARD OF APPEALS.
(A) A board consisting of a member designated by and from the Planning Commission, the City
Law Director and the Chairperson of the Public Works Committee of Council shall serve as the Board
of Appeals to hear and determine any appeal filed under § 52.23.
(B) The Board of Appeals shall have full authority to affirm, modify, reverse or set aside the
interpretation, ruling or order appealed or to grant a variance, and its decision shall be final.
(1985 Code, § 52.26) (Ord. 87-29, passed 10-5-1987)
§ 52.27 EMERGENCY SITUATIONS.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent immediate action by the City Manager in
emergency situations.
(1985 Code, § 52.27) (Ord. 87-29, passed 10-5-1987)
§ 52.28 FLOODING; LIABILITY.
Floods from stormwater runoff may occasionally occur which exceed the capacity of storm drainage
facilities constructed, operated or maintained by funds made available under this chapter. This chapter
does not imply that property subject to the fees and charges established herein will always be free from
stormwater flooding or flood damage, or that stormwater systems capable of handling all storm events
can be cost effectively constructed, operated or maintained. Nor shall this chapter create a liability on
the part of, or cause of action against, the city or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage
that may result from such storms or the runoff thereof. Nor does this chapter purport to reduce the need
or the necessity for obtaining flood insurance.
(1985 Code, § 52.28) (Ord. 87-29, passed 10-5-1987)
Stormwater Regulations 21
§ 52.29 SEVERABILITY.
If any section, division, sentence, clause or portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct
and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions.
(1985 Code, § 52.29) (Ord. 87-29, passed 10-5-1987)
§ 52.30 VIOLATION OF SECTIONS.
(A) Whoever violates §§ 52.04 and 52.05 by failing to file an application for minor repairs shall
first be given a warning by the City Engineer and thereafter shall be guilty in accordance with § 52.99.
(B) Whoever violates § 52.09 or fails to obey a warning under § 52.99 shall be guilty of a minor
misdemeanor on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on each subsequent offense. Each
day and every day on which such person continues to violate the provisions of this code after having once
been notified of such violation shall constitute a separate offense. Any fine hereunder shall be mandatory.
(1985 Code, § 52.31) (Ord. 87-29, passed 10-5-1987) Penalty, see § 52.99
§ 52.31 ACCESSORIES.
Any person being the owner, agent or having control of the premises, or any architect, engineer,
contractor, builder, sub-contractor, foreperson, mechanic, employee or other person who shall violate
or assist in the violation of this chapter, or of any certificate, order or permit issued hereunder, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on each offense.
(1985 Code, § 52.32) (Ord. 87-29, passed 10-5-1987) Penalty, see § 52.99
§ 52.32 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
ALTERED WATERCOURSE. The engineering description provided by the property owner of any
alteration to the natural watercourse easement.
CITY. The City of Madeira.
NATURAL ELEVATIONS. The elevation which exists prior to property improvements.
NATURAL WATERCOURSE EASEMENT. The high water mark which exists during a ten-year
rain prior to property improvements.
22 Madeira - Public Works
PRIVATE STORMWATER MAINTENANCE. The maintenance which the property owner does
on private property outside of the natural or altered watercourse.
(1985 Code, § 52.33) (Ord. 87-29, passed 10-5-1987)
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
Except as provided in § 52.30, any person being the owner, agent or having control of the premises,
who violates any of the provisions of this chapter, or fails to conform to any of the provisions thereof,
or fails to obey any order of the City Engineer or his or her duly authorized agent, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. Each and every day on which such person continues to violate the
provisions of this chapter after having once been notified of such violation, shall constitute a separate
offense.
(1985 Code, § 52.30) (Ord. 87-29, passed 10-5-1987)
CHAPTER 53: MINORITY BUSINESS ENTERPRISE ASSOCIATION
Section
53.01 Adoption by reference
§ 53.01 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
(A) The city hereby adopts the affirmative plan of action for accomplishing minority business
enterprise participation requirements of the Ohio Public Works Commission, and R.C. Chapter 164, by
reference, which plan is attached to Ordinance 90-89 as Exhibit A, and is incorporated as if fully set
forth herein.
(B) The city hereby adopts such plan specifically to further provide participation in the financing
of certain projects pursuant to R.C. Chapter 164 and for no other purposes whatsoever. Capital
improvement projects which are not financed pursuant to the procedure and participation as set forth in
R.C. Ch. 164 are not subject to said plan.
(1985 Code, § 53.01) (Ord. 90-89, passed 12-3-1990)
23
24 Madeira - Public Works

TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
Chapter
70. GENERAL PROVISIONS
71. LICENSING PROVISIONS
72. TRAFFIC RULES
73. MOTOR VEHICLE CRIMES
74. EQUIPMENT AND LOADS
75. BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES, SNOWMOBILES AND
ALL PURPOSE VEHICLES
76. PARKING REGULATIONS
1
2 Madeira - Traffic Code
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
70.01 Definitions
70.02 Compliance with order of police officer
70.03 Emergency vehicles to proceed cautiously past red or stop signal
70.04 Exceptions
70.05 Persons riding or driving animals upon roadways
70.06 Prohibitions against pedestrians and slow-moving vehicles on freeways
70.07 Use of private property for vehicular travel
70.08 Motor vehicles used by traffic officers
70.09 Unaccepted streets
70.10 Names of persons damaging real property by operation of vehicle to be provided to
owner
70.11 License tax
70.12 Limited access highways; barriers along; vehicles to enter and leave at designated
intersections
70.13 Removal of vehicles after accidents
Traffic-Control Devices
70.25 Obeying traffic-control devices
70.26 Signal lights
70.27 Signals over reversible lanes
70.28 Pedestrian-control signals
70.29 Prohibition against unauthorized signs and signals
70.30 Alteration, defacement or removal prohibited
70.31 Duties of City Manager
70.32 Signal preemption devices; prohibitions
70.33 Traffic law photo-monitoring devices
70.34 Unauthorized possession or sale of devices
70.35 Ambiguous or non-working traffic signals
3
4 Madeira - Traffic Code
70.99 Penalty
Statutory reference:
Local traffic regulations, scope and authority, see R.C. § 4511.07
Notice of arrest of certain commercial drivers, see R.C. § 5577.14
Uniform application and precedence of state traffic laws, see R.C. § 4511.06
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
Except as otherwise provided, the definitions set forth in R.C. § 4501.01 shall apply to this Title
and the penal laws of the municipality. For the purpose of this Title, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
AGRICULTURAL TRACTOR. Every self-propelled vehicle designed or used for drawing other
vehicles or wheeled machinery, but having no provision for carrying loads independently of such other
vehicles, and used principally for agricultural purposes.
ALLEY. A street or highway intended to provide access to the rear or side of lots or buildings in
urban districts, and not intended for the purpose of through vehicular traffic, and any street or highway
that has been declared an “alley” by the legislative authority of the municipality in which the street or
highway is located.
ARTERIAL STREET. Any United States or state numbered route, controlled-access highway or
other major radial or circumferential street or highway designated by local authorities within their
respective jurisdictions as part of a major arterial system of streets or highways.
BEACON. A highway traffic signal with one or more signal sections that operate in a flashing mode.
BICYCLE. Every device, other than a device that is designed solely for use as a play vehicle by a
child, that is propelled solely by human power upon which a person may ride, and that has two or more
wheels, any of which is more than 14 inches in diameter.
BUS. Every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than nine passengers, and used for the
transportation of persons other than in a ridesharing arrangement, and every motor vehicle, automobile
for hire or funeral car, other than a taxicab or motor vehicle used in a ridesharing arrangement, designed
and used for the transportation of persons for compensation.
BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory fronting upon a street or highway, including the street or
highway, between successive intersections within the municipality, where 50% or more of the frontage
between successive intersections is occupied by buildings in use for business, or within or outside the
General Provisions 5
municipality where 50% or more of the frontage for a distance of 300 feet or more is occupied by
buildings in use for business, and the character of the territory is indicated by official traffic-control
devices.
CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINE. A motor vehicle that is designed to carry nine or fewer passengers
and is operated for hire pursuant to a prearranged contract for the transportation of passengers on public
roads and highways along a route under the control of the person hiring the vehicle and not over a
defined and regular route. “Prearranged contract” means an agreement, made in advance of boarding,
to provide transportation from a specific location in an chauffeured limousine. The term does not include
any vehicle that is used exclusively in the business of funeral directing.
CHILD DAY-CARE CENTER. Has the same meaning as set forth in R.C. § 5104.01.
COMMERCIAL TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle having motive power designed or used for
drawing other vehicles, and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon, or designed or used for
drawing other vehicles while carrying a portion of the other vehicles, or the load thereon, or both.
CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY. Every street or highway in respect to which owners or
occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal right or access to or from the same except
at certain points only and in a manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction
over the street or highway.
CROSSWALK.
(1) That part of a roadway at intersections ordinarily included within the real or projected
prolongation of property lines and curb lines or, in the absence of curbs, the edges of the traversable
roadway;
(2) Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere, distinctly indicated for pedestrian
crossing by lines or other markings on the surface; and
(3) Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this definition, there shall not be a crosswalk
where the legislative authority has placed signs indicating no crossing.
DRIVER. Any person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Emergency vehicles of municipal, township or county departments or
public utility corporations, when identified as such as required by law, the Director of Public Safety or
local authorities, and motor vehicles when commandeered by a police officer.
EXPLOSIVES. Any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is intended for the purpose of
producing an explosion that contains any oxidizing and combustible units or other ingredients in such
proportions, quantities, or packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion, by percussion or
by a detonator of any part of the compound or mixture may cause a sudden generation of highly heated
6 Madeira - Traffic Code
gases, such that the resultant gaseous pressures are capable of producing destructive effects on contiguous
objects, or of destroying life or limb. Manufactured articles shall not be held to be explosives when the
individual units contain explosives in limited quantities of such nature or in such packing that it is
impossible to procure a simultaneous or a destructive explosion of the units, to the injury of life, limb,
or property by fire, friction, concussion, percussion or by a detonator, such as fixed ammunition for
small arms, firecrackers or safety fuse matches.
EXPRESSWAY. A divided arterial highway for through traffic with full or partial control of access
with an excess of 50% of all crossroads separated in grade.
FLAMMABLE LIQUID. Any liquid which has a flash point of 70°F or less, as determined by a
tagliabue or equivalent closed cup test device.
FREEWAY. A divided multi-lane highway for through traffic with crossroads separated in grade
and with full control of access.
FUNERAL ESCORT VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle, including a funeral hearse, while used to
facilitate the movement of a funeral procession.
GROSS WEIGHT. The weight of a vehicle plus the weight of any load thereon.
HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way open to the use of the public
as a thoroughfare for purposes of vehicular travel.
HIGHWAY MAINTENANCE VEHICLE. A vehicle used in snow and ice removal or road surface
maintenance, including a snow plow, traffic line striper, road sweeper, mowing machine, asphalt
distributing vehicle or other such vehicle designed for use in specific highway maintenance activities.
HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SIGNAL. A power-operated traffic control device by which traffic is warned
or directed to take some specific action. The term does not include a power-operated sign, steadily
illuminated pavement marker, warning light or steady burning electric lamp.
HYBRID BEACON. A type of beacon that is intentionally placed in a dark mode between periods
of operation where no indications are displayed and, when in operation, displays both steady and flashing
traffic control signal indications.
INTERSECTION.
(1) The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines, or, if
none, the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two highways that join one another at, or
approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways that
join at any other angle might come into conflict. The junction of an alley or driveway with a roadway
or highway does not constitute an intersection unless the roadway or highway at the junction is controlled
by a traffic control device.
General Provisions 7
(2) If a highway includes two roadways that are 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of
each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting highway constitutes a separate intersection.
If both intersecting highways include two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of any
two roadways of such highways constitutes a separate intersection.
(3) At a location controlled by a traffic control signal, regardless of the distance between the
separate intersections as described in division (2) of this definition:
(a) If a stop line, yield line or crosswalk has not been designated on the roadway within
the median between the separate intersections, the two intersections and the roadway and median
constitute one intersection.
(b) Where a stop line, yield line or crosswalk line is designated on the roadway on the
intersection approach, the area within the crosswalk and any area beyond the designated stop line or yield
line constitute part of the intersection.
(c) Where a crosswalk is designated on a roadway on the departure from the intersection,
the intersection includes the area that extends to the far side of the crosswalk.
LANED HIGHWAY. A highway the roadway of which is divided into two or more clearly marked
lanes for vehicular traffic.
LOCAL AUTHORITIES. Every county, municipal, and other local board or body having authority
to adopt police regulations under the Constitution and laws of this state.
MEDIAN. The area between two roadways of a divided highway, measured from edge of traveled
way to edge of traveled way, but excluding turn lanes. The width of a median may be different between
intersections, between interchanges, and at opposite approaches of the same intersection.
MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle propelled or drawn by power other than muscular power or
power collected from overhead electric trolley wires, except motorized bicycles, road rollers, traction
engines, power shovels, power cranes and other equipment used in construction work, and not designed
for or employed in general highway transportation, hole-digging machinery, well-drilling machinery,
ditch-digging machinery, farm machinery, and trailers designed and used exclusively to transport a boat
between a place of storage and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street
or highway for a distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of 25 mph or less.
MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle, other than a tractor, having a seat or saddle for the use of
the operator and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, including
but not limited to motor vehicles known as “motor-driven cycle,” “motor scooter,” “cab-enclosed
motorcycle” or “motorcycle” without regard to weight or brake horsepower.
MOTORIZED BICYCLE or MOPED. Any vehicle having either two tandem wheels or one wheel
in the front and two wheels in the rear, that may be pedaled, and that is equipped with a helper motor
8 Madeira - Traffic Code
of not more than 50 cubic centimeters piston displacement that produces no more than one brake
horsepower and is capable of propelling the vehicle at a speed of not greater than 20 mph on a level
surface.
MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIR. Any self-propelled vehicle designed for, and used by, a person with
a disability and that is incapable of a speed in excess of eight mph.
MULTI-WHEEL AGRICULTURAL TRACTOR. A type of agricultural tractor that has two or more
wheels or tires on each side of one axle at the rear of the tractor, is designed or used for drawing other
vehicles or wheeled machinery, has no provision for carrying loads independently of the drawn vehicles
or machinery, and is used principally for agricultural purposes.
OPERATE. To cause or have caused movement of a vehicle.
OPERATOR. Any person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
PARKED or PARKING. The standing of a vehicle upon a street, road, alley, highway or public
ground, whether accompanied or unaccompanied by a driver, but does not include the temporary
standing of a vehicle for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or loading merchandise
or passengers.
PEDESTRIAN. Any natural person afoot.
PERSON. Every natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation.
POLE TRAILER. Every trailer or semitrailer attached to the towing vehicle by means of a reach,
pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle, and ordinarily used for
transporting long or irregular shaped loads such as poles, pipes or structural members capable, generally,
of sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting connections.
POLICE OFFICER. Every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic, or to make arrests for
violations of traffic regulations.
PREDICATE MOTOR VEHICLE OR TRAFFIC OFFENSE. Any of the following:
(1) A violation of R.C. § 4511.03, 4511.051, 4511.12, 4511.132, 4511.16, 4511.20,
4511.201, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.213, 4511.214, 4511.22, 4511.23, 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27,
4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33, 4511.34, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37,
4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40, 4511.41, 4511.42, 4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.432, 4511.44, 4511.441,
4511.451, 4511.452, 4511.46, 4511.47, 4511.48, 4511.481, 4511.49, 4511.50, 4511.511, 4511.53,
4511.54, 4511.55, 4511.56, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59, 4511.60, 4511.61, 4511.64, 4511.66,
4511.661, 4511.68, 4511.70, 4511.701, 4511.71, 4511.711, 4511.712, 4511.713, 4511.72, 4511.73,
4511.763, 4511.771, 4511.78 or 4511.84;
General Provisions 9
(2) A violation of R.C. § 4511.17(A)(2), 4511.51(A) through (D), or 4511.74(A);
(3) A violation of any provision of R.C. §§ 4511.01 through 4511.76 for which no penalty
otherwise is provided in the section that contains the provision violated; and
(4) A violation of a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any section or
provision set forth or described in division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.
PRIVATE ROAD OPEN TO PUBLIC TRAVEL. A private toll road or road, including any adjacent
sidewalks that generally run parallel to the road, within a shopping center, airport, sports arena or other
similar business or recreation facility that is privately owned but where the public is allowed to travel
without access restrictions. The term includes a gated toll road but does not include a road within a
private gated property where access is restricted at all times, a parking area, a driving aisle within a
parking area, or a private grade crossing.
PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY. Every way or place in private ownership used for vehicular
travel by the owner, and those having express or implied permission from the owner, but not by other
persons.
PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE. Any of the following:
(1) Ambulances, including private ambulance companies under contract to a municipality,
township, or county, and private ambulances and nontransport vehicles bearing license plates issued
under R.C. § 4503.49;
(2) Motor vehicles used by public law enforcement officers or other persons sworn to enforce
the criminal and traffic laws of the state;
(3) Any motor vehicle when properly identified as required by the Director of Public Safety,
when used in response to fire emergency calls or to provide emergency medical service to ill or injured
persons, and when operated by a duly qualified person who is a member of a volunteer rescue service
or a volunteer fire department, and who is on duty pursuant to the rules or directives of that service. The
State Fire Marshal shall be designated by the Director of Public Safety as the certifying agency for all
public safety vehicles described herein;
(4) Vehicles used by fire departments, including motor vehicles when used by volunteer
firefighters responding to emergency calls in the fire department service when identified as required by
the Director of Public Safety;
(5) Any vehicle used to transport or provide emergency medical service to an ill or injured
person, when certified as a public safety vehicle, shall be considered such a vehicle when transporting
an ill or injured person to a hospital, regardless of whether such vehicle has already passed a hospital;
or
10 Madeira - Traffic Code
(6) Vehicles used by the Motor Carrier Enforcement Unit for the enforcement of orders and
rules of the Public Utilities Commission as specified in R.C. § 5503.34.
RAILROAD. A carrier of persons or property operating upon rails placed principally on a private
right-of-way.
RAILROAD SIGN OR SIGNAL. Any sign, signal, or device erected by authority of a public body
or official or by a railroad, and intended to give notice of the presence of railroad tracks or the approach
of a railroad train.
RAILROAD TRAIN. A steam engine or an electric or other motor, with or without cars coupled
thereto, operated by a railroad.
RESIDENCE DISTRICT. The territory, not comprising a business district, fronting on a street or
highway, including the street or highway, where, for a distance of 300 feet or more, the frontage is
improved with residences or residences and buildings in use for business.
RIDESHARING ARRANGEMENT. Includes the transportation of persons in a motor vehicle where
the transportation is incidental to another purpose of a volunteer driver, and includes arrangements
known as carpools, vanpools and buspools.
RIGHT-OF-WAY. Either of the following, as the context requires:
(1) The right of a vehicle or pedestrian to proceed uninterruptedly in a lawful manner in the
direction in which it, he or she is moving, in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching
from a different direction into its, his or her path; or
(2) A general term denoting land, property, or the interest therein, usually in the configuration
of a strip, acquired for or devoted to transportation purposes. When used in this context, “right-of-way”
includes the roadway, shoulders or berm, ditch and slopes extending to the right-of-way limits under the
control of the state or local authority.
ROAD SERVICE VEHICLE. Means wreckers, utility repair vehicles and state, county and
municipal service vehicles equipped with visual signals by means of flashing, rotating, or oscillating
lights.
ROADWAY. That portion of a highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel,
except the berm or shoulder. If a highway includes two or more separate roadways, the term means any
roadway separately, but not all the roadways collectively.
RURAL MAIL DELIVERY VEHICLE. Every vehicle used to deliver United States mail on a rural
mail delivery route.
General Provisions 11
SAFETY ZONE. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of
pedestrians, and protected or marked or indicated by adequate signs so as to be plainly visible at all
times.
SCHOOL BUS. Every bus designed for carrying more than nine passengers which is owned by a
public, private, or governmental agency or institution of learning, and operated for the transportation
of children to or from a school session or a school function, or owned by a private person and operated
for compensation for the transportation of children to or from a school session or a school function;
provided the term does not include a bus operated by a municipally owned transportation system, a mass
transit company operating exclusively within the territorial limits of a municipality, or within such limits
and the territorial limits of municipalities immediately contiguous to the municipality, nor a common
passenger carrier certified by the Public Utilities Commission unless the bus is devoted exclusively to
the transportation of children to and from a school session or a school function, and the term does not
include a van or bus used by a licensed child day-care center or type A family day-care home to transport
children from the child day-care center or type A family day-care home to a school if the van or bus does
not have more than 15 children in the van or bus at any time.
SEMITRAILER. Every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or property with another and
separate motor vehicle so that in operation a part of its own weight or that of its load, or both, rests upon
and is carried by another vehicle.
SHARED-USE PATH. A bikeway outside the traveled way and physically separated from motorized
vehicular traffic by an open space or barrier and either within the highway right-of-way or within an
independent alignment. A shared-use path also may be used by pedestrians, including skaters, joggers,
users of manual and motorized wheelchairs, and other authorized motorized and non-motorized users.
SIDEWALK. That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral line of a roadway, and
the adjacent property lines, intended for the use of pedestrians.
STANDING. When prohibited, means any halting of a vehicle, even momentarily, except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or
traffic control device.
STATE HIGHWAY. A highway under the jurisdiction of the Department of Transportation, outside
the limits of municipalities, provided that the authority conferred upon the Director of Transportation
in R.C. § 5511.01 to erect state highway route markers and signs directing traffic shall not be modified
by R.C. §§ 4511.01 through 4511.79 and 4511.99.
STATE ROUTE. Every highway which is designated with an official state route number and so
marked.
STOP. When required, means a complete cessation of movement.
12 Madeira - Traffic Code
STOP INTERSECTION. Any intersection at one or more entrances of which stop signs are erected.
STOPPING. When prohibited, means any halting of a vehicle, even momentarily, except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or
traffic control device.
STREET. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way open to the use of the public
as a thoroughfare for purposes of vehicular travel.
THROUGH HIGHWAY. Every street or highway as provided in R.C. § 4511.65, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
THRUWAY. A through highway whose entire roadway is reserved for through traffic and on which
roadway parking is prohibited.
TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars, and other devices, either
singly or together, while using for purposes of travel any highway or private road open to public travel.
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE. A flagger, sign, signal, marking or other device used to regulate,
warn, or guide traffic, placed on, over, or adjacent to a street, highway, private road open to public
travel, pedestrian facility or shared-use path by authority of a public agency or official having
jurisdiction, or, in the case of a private road open to public travel, by authority of the private owner or
private official having jurisdiction.
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL. Any highway traffic signal by which traffic is alternately directed
to stop and permitted to proceed.
TRAILER. Every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or property wholly on its own
structure, and for being drawn by a motor vehicle, including any vehicle when formed by or operated
as a combination of a semitrailer and a vehicle of the dolly type, such as that commonly known as a
trailer dolly, a vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural production materials between
a local place of storage or supply and the farm when drawn or towed on a street or highway at a speed
greater than 25 mph and a vehicle designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of
storage and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or highway for a
distance of more than ten miles or at a speed of more than 25 mph.
TRUCK. Every motor vehicle, except trailers and semitrailers, designed and used to carry property.
TYPE A FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME. Has the same meaning as set forth in R.C. § 5104.01.
URBAN DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including any street or highway which is built
up with structures devoted to business, industry, or dwelling houses situated at intervals of less than 100
feet for a distance of one-quarter of a mile or more, and the character of the territory is indicated by
official traffic-control devices.
General Provisions 13
VEHICLE. Every device, including a motorized bicycle, in, upon, or by which any person or
property may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except that the term does not include any
motorized wheelchair, any electric personal assistive mobility device, any device that is moved by power
collected from overhead electric trolley wires or that is used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks,
or any device, other than a bicycle, that is moved by human power.
(R.C. § 4511.01) (1985 Code, § 70.01)
§ 70.02 COMPLIANCE WITH ORDER OF POLICE OFFICER.
(A) No person shall fail to comply with any lawful order or direction of any police officer invested
with authority to direct, control or regulate traffic.
(B) No person shall operate a motor vehicle so as willfully to elude or flee a police officer after
receiving a visible or audible signal from a police officer to bring the person’s motor vehicle to a stop.
(C) (1) Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to comply with an order or signal of a
police officer.
(2) A violation of division (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(3) Except as provided in divisions (C)(4) and (C)(5) of this section, a violation of division (B)
of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(4) Except as provided in division (C)(5) of this section, a violation of division (B) of this
section is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law if the jury or judge as trier of fact
finds by proof beyond a reasonable doubt that in committing the offense, the offender was fleeing
immediately after the commission of a felony.
(5) (a) A violation of division (B) of this section is a felony and shall be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if the jury or judge as trier of fact finds any of the following by proof beyond a
reasonable doubt:
1. The operation of the motor vehicle by the offender was a proximate cause of
serious physical harm to persons or property; or
2. The operation of the motor vehicle by the offender caused a substantial risk of
serious physical harm to persons or property.
(b) If a police officer pursues an offender who is violating division (B) of this section and
division (C)(5)(a) of this section applies, the sentencing court, in determining the seriousness of an
offender’s conduct for purposes of sentencing the offender for a violation of division (B) of this section,
14 Madeira - Traffic Code
shall consider, along with the factors set forth in R.C. §§ 2929.12 and 2929.13 that are required to be
considered, all of the following:
1. The duration of the pursuit;
2. The distance of the pursuit;
3. The rate of speed at which the offender operated the motor vehicle during the
pursuit;
4. Whether the offender failed to stop for traffic lights or stop signs during the
pursuit;
5. The number of traffic lights or stop signs for which the offender failed to stop
during the pursuit;
6. Whether the offender operated the motor vehicle during the pursuit without lighted
lights during a time when lighted lights are required;
7. Whether the offender committed a moving violation during the pursuit;
8. The number of moving violations the offender committed during the pursuit; and
9. Any other relevant factors indicating that the offender’s conduct is more serious
than conduct normally constituting the offense.
(D) In addition to any other sanction imposed for a violation of division (A) of this section or a
misdemeanor violation of division (B) of this section, the court shall impose a class five suspension from
the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(5). If the offender previously has been found guilty of an
offense under this section or under R.C. § 2921.331 or any other substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, in addition to any other sanction imposed for the offense, the court shall impose a class one
suspension as described in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(1). The court may grant limited driving privileges to the
offender on a suspension imposed for a misdemeanor violation of this section as set forth in R.C.
§ 4510.021. No judge shall suspend any portion of the suspension under a class one suspension of an
offender’s license, permit or privilege required by this division (D).
(E) As used in this section:
MOVING VIOLATION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2743.70.
POLICE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
(R.C. § 2921.331(A) - (C), (E), (F)) (1985 Code, § 70.02) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977)
General Provisions 15
§ 70.03 EMERGENCY VEHICLES TO PROCEED CAUTIOUSLY PAST RED OR STOP
SIGNAL.
(A) The driver of any emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle, when responding to an emergency
call, upon approaching a red or stop signal or any stop sign, shall slow down as necessary for safety to
traffic, but may proceed cautiously past the red or stop sign or signal with due regard for the safety of
all persons using the street or highway.
(B) Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.03) (1985 Code, § 70.03) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977)
§ 70.04 EXCEPTIONS.
(A) The provisions of this Traffic Code, except for §§ 73.01 and 73.02, do not apply to persons,
teams, motor vehicles and other equipment while actually engaged in work upon the surface of a highway
within an area designated by traffic-control devices, but apply to those persons and vehicles when
traveling to or from such work.
(B) The driver of a highway maintenance vehicle owned by this state or any political subdivision
of this state, while the driver is engaged in the performance of official duties upon a street or highway,
provided the highway maintenance vehicle is equipped with flashing lights and such other markings as
are required by law and such lights are in operation when the driver and vehicle are so engaged, shall
be exempt from criminal prosecution for violations of R.C. §§ 4511.22, 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27,
4511.28, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.33, 4511.35, 4511.66, and 4513.02 and R.C. §§ 5577.01 through
5577.09, and any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(C) (1) This section does not exempt a driver of a highway maintenance vehicle from civil liability
arising from a violation of R.C. § 4511.22, 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.30, 4511.31,
4511.33, 4511.35, 4511.66 or 4513.02 or R.C. §§ 5577.01 through 5577.09, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
(2) This section does not exempt the driver of a vehicle that is engaged in the transport of
highway maintenance equipment from criminal liability for a violation of R.C. §§ 5577.01 through
5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(D) The provisions of R.C. §§ 4511.12, 4511.13, 4511.131, 4511.132, 4511.14, 4511.202,
4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.22, 4511.23, 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30,
4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33, 4511.34, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40,
4511.41, 4511.42, 4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.432, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59,
16 Madeira - Traffic Code
4511.60, 4511.61, 4511.62, 4511.66, 4511.68, 4511.681 and 4511.69 and any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinances do not apply to the driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle if the
emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle is responding to an emergency call, is equipped with and
displaying at least one flashing, rotating or oscillating light visible under normal atmospheric conditions
from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle and if the driver of the vehicles is giving an audible
signal by siren, exhaust whistle or bell. This section does not relieve the driver of an emergency vehicle
or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons and property
upon the highway.
(R.C. § 4511.041)
(E) The provisions of R.C. §§ 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31,
4511.32, 4511.33, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38 and 4511.66 or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinances do not apply to a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator operating a
motor vehicle in accordance with R.C. § 4513.171 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
This division (F) does not relieve a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator operating a motor
vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the
highway.
(R.C. § 4511.042)
(1985 Code, § 70.04)
§ 70.05 PERSONS RIDING OR DRIVING ANIMALS UPON ROADWAYS.
Every person riding, driving or leading an animal upon a roadway is subject to the provisions of this
Traffic Code, applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except those provisions of this Traffic Code which
by their nature are inapplicable.
(R.C. § 4511.05) (1985 Code, § 70.05) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977)
§ 70.06 PROHIBITIONS AGAINST PEDESTRIANS AND SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES ON
FREEWAYS.
(A) No person, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, shall:
(1) As a pedestrian, occupy any space within the limits of the right-of-way of a freeway,
except: in a rest area; on a facility that is separated from the roadway and shoulders of the freeway and
is designed and appropriately marked for pedestrian use; in the performance of public works or official
duties; as a result of an emergency caused by an accident or breakdown of a motor vehicle; or to obtain
assistance; or
(2) Occupy any space within the limits of the right-of-way of a freeway, with an animal-drawn
vehicle, a ridden or led animal, herded animals, a pushcart, a bicycle, except on a facility that is
separated from the roadway and shoulders of the freeway and is designed and appropriately marked for
General Provisions 17
bicycle use, a bicycle with motor attached, a motor-driven cycle with a motor which produces not to
exceed five brake horsepower, an agricultural tractor or farm machinery, except in the performance of
public works or official duties.
(B) Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.051) (1985 Code, § 70.06)
Statutory reference:
Designation of a freeway, see R.C. § 4511.011
§ 70.07 USE OF PRIVATE PROPERTY FOR VEHICULAR TRAVEL.
The provisions of this Traffic Code do not prevent the owner of real property, used by the public
for purposes of vehicular travel by permission of the owner and not as a matter of right, from prohibiting
such use or from requiring additional conditions to those specified in this Traffic Code, or otherwise
regulating such use as may seem best to the owner.
(R.C. § 4511.08) (1985 Code, § 70.07)
§ 70.08 MOTOR VEHICLES USED BY TRAFFIC OFFICERS.
Any motor vehicle used by any member of the City Police Department while the officer is on duty
for the exclusive or main purpose of enforcing the motor vehicle or traffic laws of this municipality,
provided the offense is punishable as a misdemeanor, shall be marked in some distinctive manner or
color. The City Manager shall determine the marking and color of Police Department vehicles.
(1985 Code, § 70.08) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977)
§ 70.09 UNACCEPTED STREETS.
The provisions of this Traffic Code shall apply to the operation of vehicles and the traffic of
pedestrians upon, and in all respects to, any dedicated but unaccepted street by whatever name known.
(1985 Code, § 70.09) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977)
Cross-reference:
Duties of City Manager, see § 70.31
18 Madeira - Traffic Code
§ 70.10 NAMES OF PERSONS DAMAGING REAL PROPERTY BY OPERATION OF
VEHICLE TO BE PROVIDED TO OWNER.
(A) As used in this section, MOTOR VEHICLE has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
(B) If damage is caused to real property by the operation of a motor vehicle in, or during the,
violation of any section of the Ohio Revised Code or of any municipal ordinance, the law enforcement
agency that investigates the case, upon request of the real property owner, shall provide the owner with
the names of the persons who are charged with the commission of the offense. If a request for the names
is made, the agency shall provide the names as soon as possible after the persons are charged with the
offense.
(C) The personnel of law enforcement agencies who act pursuant to division (B) of this section in
good faith are not liable in damages in a civil action allegedly arising from their actions taken pursuant
to that division. Political subdivisions and the state are not liable in damages in a civil action allegedly
arising from the actions of personnel of their law enforcement agencies if the personnel have immunity
under this division (C).
(R.C. § 2935.28) (1985 Code, § 70.091)
§ 70.11 LICENSE TAX.
There is hereby levied an annual $5 license tax under the provisions of R.C. § 4504.171 to take
effect beginning in 1992. The revenue derived from said tax will be used for the purposes authorized
pursuant to R.C. § 4504.171, including supplementation of costs and expenses associated with the
maintenance of public roads within the city.
(1985 Code, § 70.092) (Ord. 91-64, passed 8-19-1991)
§ 70.12 LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAYS; BARRIERS ALONG; VEHICLES TO ENTER
AND LEAVE AT DESIGNATED INTERSECTIONS.
(A) No person, firm or corporation shall cut, injure, remove or destroy any fence or other barrier
designed and erected to prevent traffic from entering or leaving a limited access highway without the
permission of the Director of Transportation, except in a case of emergency where life or property is in
danger. No person, firm or corporation shall cause a vehicle of any character to enter or leave a limited
access highway at any point other than intersections designated by the Director for such purposes, except
in a case of emergency where life or property is in danger.
(R.C. § 3767.201)
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 3767.99(D))
General Provisions 19
§ 70.13 REMOVAL OF VEHICLES AFTER ACCIDENTS.
(A) If a motor vehicle accident occurs on any highway, public street or other property open to the
public for purposes of vehicular travel and if any motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property that has
been damaged or spilled as a result of the motor vehicle accident is blocking the highway, street or other
property or is otherwise endangering public safety, the Chief of Police or the Chief of the Fire
Department, or a duly authorized subordinate acting on behalf of such an official, without consent of the
owner but with the approval of the law enforcement agency conducting any investigation of the accident,
may remove the motor vehicle if the motor vehicle is unoccupied, cargo, or personal property from the
portion of the highway, public street or property ordinarily used for vehicular travel on the highway,
public street or other property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
(B) (1) Except as provided in division (B)(2) or (B)(3) of this section, the Chief of Police, any
police officer, the Chief of the Fire Department, any firefighter or a duly authorized subordinate acting
on behalf of such an official, who authorizes or participates in the removal of any unoccupied motor
vehicle, cargo, or personal property as authorized by division (A) of this section is not liable in civil
damages for any injury, death or loss to person or property that results from the removal of that
unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo or personal property. Except as provided in division (B)(2) or (B)(3)
of this section, if the Chief of Police or Chief of the Fire Department, or a duly authorized subordinate
acting on behalf of such an official, authorizes, employs, or arranges to have a private tow truck operator
or towing company remove any unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo or personal property as authorized by
division (A) of this section, that private tow truck operator or towing company is not liable in civil
damages for any injury, death or loss to person or property that results from the removal of that
unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo or personal property. Further, the Chief of Police or Chief of the Fire
Department, or a duly authorized subordinate acting on behalf of such an official, is not liable in civil
damages for any injury, death or loss to person or property that results from the private tow truck
operator or towing company’s removal of that unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo or personal property.
(2) Division (B)(1) of this section does not apply to any person or entity involved in the
removal of an unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property pursuant to division (A) of this
section if that removal causes or contributes to the release of a hazardous material or to structural damage
to the roadway.
(3) Division (B)(1) of this section does not apply to a private tow truck operator or towing
company that was not authorized, employed, or arranged by the Chief of Police or Chief of the Fire
Department, or a duly authorized subordinate acting on behalf of such an official, or to a private tow
truck operator or towing company that was authorized, employed or arranged by the Chief of Police or
Chief of the Fire Department, or a duly authorized subordinate acting on behalf of such an official, to
perform the removal of the unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property and the private tow
truck operator or towing company performed the removal in a reckless or willful manner.
(C) As used in this section, HAZARDOUS MATERIAL has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 2305.232.
(R.C. § 4513.66)
20 Madeira - Traffic Code
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
§ 70.25 OBEYING TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
(A) (1) No pedestrian or driver of a vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any traffic-control
device placed in accordance with the provisions of this Traffic Code, unless at the time otherwise
directed by a police officer.
(2) No provision of this Traffic Code for which signs are required shall be enforced against
an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged violation, an official sign is not in proper
position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular
section of this Traffic Code does not state that signs are required, that section shall be effective even
though no signs are erected or in place.
(R.C. § 4511.12(A))
(B) (1) Except as provided in division (C) of this section, any operator of a commercial motor
vehicle, upon approaching a scale location established for the purpose of determining the weight of the
vehicle and its load, shall comply with any traffic-control device or the order of a peace officer directing
the vehicle to proceed to be weighed or otherwise inspected.
(2) Any operator of a commercial motor vehicle, upon bypassing a scale location in accordance
with division (C) of this section, shall comply with an order of a peace officer to stop the vehicle to
verify the use and operation of an electronic clearance device.
(C) Any operator of a commercial motor vehicle that is equipped with an electronic clearance device
authorized by the Superintendent of the State Highway Patrol under R.C. § 4549.081 may bypass a scale
location, regardless of the instruction of a traffic-control device to enter the scale facility, if either of the
following apply:
(1) The in-cab transponder displays a green light or other affirmative visual signal and also
sounds an affirmative audible signal; or
(2) Any other criterion established by the Superintendent of the State Highway Patrol is met.
(D) Any peace officer may order the operator of a commercial motor vehicle that bypasses a scale
location to stop the vehicle to verify the use and operation of an electronic clearance device.
(E) As used in this section, COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE means any combination of
vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating or an actual gross vehicle weight of more than 10,000 pounds
if the vehicle is used in interstate or intrastate commerce to transport property and also means any vehicle
that is transporting hazardous materials for which placarding is required pursuant to 49 C.F.R. Parts 100
through 180.
(R.C. § 4511.121(A) - (C), (E))
General Provisions 21
(F) No person shall use an electronic clearance device if the device or its use is not in compliance
with rules of the Superintendent of the State Highway Patrol.
(R.C. § 4549.081(B))
(G) (1) Except as otherwise provided in this division (G)(1), whoever violates division (A) of this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offenses, whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.12(B))
(2) Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within
one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation
of division (B) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, whoever
violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations
of division (B) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, whoever
violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.121(D))
(3) Whoever violates division (F) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree
on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the third degree on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 4549.081(C))
(1985 Code, § 70.10)
Statutory reference:
Placing traffic-control devices on state highways, permission required, see R.C. § 4511.10
Traffic-control devices to conform to the state manual and specifications, see R.C. § 4511.11
Uniform system of traffic-control devices, see R.C. § 4511.09
§ 70.26 SIGNAL LIGHTS.
Highway traffic signal indications for vehicles and pedestrians shall have the following meanings:
(A) Steady green signal indication.
(1) (a) Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal indication is permitted to proceed
straight through or turn right or left or make a U-turn movement except as such movement is modified
by a lane-use sign, turn prohibition sign, lane marking, roadway design, separate turn signal indication,
or other traffic control device. Such vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left or making
a U-turn movement, shall yield the right-of-way to both of the following:
22 Madeira - Traffic Code
1. Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk; and
2. Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
(b) In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a U-turn movement to the left shall
yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching from the opposite direction so closely as to constitute
an immediate hazard during the time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the
intersection.
(2) Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal indication, displayed alone or in combination
with another signal indication, is permitted to cautiously enter the intersection only to make the
movement indicated by such arrow, or such other movement as is permitted by other indications
displayed at the same time. Such vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left or making a
U-turn movement, shall yield the right-of-way to both of the following:
(a) Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk; and
(b) Other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
(3) (a) Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication, as provided in R.C.
§ 4511.14, pedestrians facing a circular green signal indication are permitted to proceed across the
roadway within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. The pedestrian shall yield the
right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection or so close as to create an immediate hazard at
the time that the green signal indication is first displayed.
(b) Pedestrians facing a green arrow signal indication, unless otherwise directed by a
pedestrian signal indication or other traffic control device, shall not cross the roadway.
(B) Steady yellow signal indication.
(1) Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular yellow signal indication is thereby warned that the
related green movement or the related flashing arrow movement is being terminated or that a steady red
signal indication will be exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic shall not enter the
intersection. The provisions governing vehicular operation under the movement being terminated shall
continue to apply while the steady circular yellow signal indication is displayed.
(2) Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow arrow signal indication is thereby warned that the
related green arrow movement or the related flashing arrow movement is being terminated. The
provisions governing vehicular operation under the movement being terminated shall continue to apply
while the steady yellow arrow signal indication is displayed.
(3) Pedestrians facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow signal indication, unless
otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication as provided in R.C. § 4511.14 or other traffic control
device, shall not start to cross the roadway.
General Provisions 23
(C) Steady red signal indication.
(1) (a) Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red signal indication, unless entering the
intersection to make another movement permitted by another signal indication, shall stop at a clearly
marked stop line; but if there is no stop line, traffic shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near
side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, then before entering the intersection; and shall remain
stopped until a signal indication to proceed is displayed except as provided in divisions (C)(1), (C)(2)
and (C)(3) of this section.
(b) Except when a traffic control device is in place prohibiting a turn on red or a steady
red arrow signal indication is displayed, vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red signal indication
is permitted, after stopping, to enter the intersection to turn right, or to turn left from a one-way street
into a one-way street. The right to proceed with the turn shall be subject to the provisions that are
applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
(2) (a) Vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow signal indication shall not enter the
intersection to make the movement indicated by the arrow and, unless entering the intersection to make
another movement permitted by another signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but
if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection; or if there is
no crosswalk, then before entering the intersection; and shall remain stopped until a signal indication or
other traffic control device permitting the movement indicated by such red arrow is displayed.
(b) When a traffic control device is in place permitting a turn on a steady red arrow signal
indication, vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow indication is permitted, after stopping, to enter the
intersection to turn right, or to turn left from a one-way street into a one-way street. The right to proceed
with the turn shall be limited to the direction indicated by the arrow and shall be subject to the provisions
that are applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
(3) Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication as provided in R.C. § 4511.14
or other traffic control device, pedestrians facing a steady circular red or steady red arrow signal
indication shall not enter the roadway.
(4) Local authorities by ordinance, or the Director of Transportation on state highways, may
prohibit a right or a left turn against a steady red signal at any intersection, which shall be effective when
signs giving notice thereof are posted at the intersection.
(D) Flashing green signal indication. A flashing green signal indication has no meaning and shall
not be used.
(E) Flashing yellow signal indication.
(1) (a) Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a flashing circular yellow
signal indication, is permitted to cautiously enter the intersection to proceed straight through or turn right
or left or make a U-turn movement except as such movement is modified by lane-use signs, turn
24 Madeira - Traffic Code
prohibition signs, lane markings, roadway design, separate turn signal indications, or other traffic control
devices. Such vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left or making a U-turn movement,
shall yield the right-of-way to both of the following:
1. Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk; and
2. Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
(b) In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a U-turn to the left shall yield the
right-of-way to other vehicles approaching from the opposite direction so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard during the time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the intersection.
(2) (a) Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a flashing yellow arrow
signal indication, displayed alone or in combination with another signal indication, is permitted to
cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, or other such
movement as is permitted by other signal indications displayed at the same time. Such vehicular traffic,
including vehicles turning right or left or making a U-turn, shall yield the right-of-way to both of the
following:
1. Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk; and
2. Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
(b) In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a U-turn to the left shall yield the
right-of-way to other vehicles approaching from the opposite direction so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard during the time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the intersection.
(3) Pedestrians facing any flashing yellow signal indication at an intersection, unless otherwise
directed by a pedestrian signal indication or other traffic control device, are permitted to proceed across
the roadway within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. Pedestrians shall yield the
right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the flashing yellow signal
indication is first displayed.
(4) When a flashing circular yellow signal indication is displayed as a beacon to supplement
another traffic control device, road users are notified that there is a need to pay additional attention to
the message contained thereon or that the regulatory or warning requirements of the other traffic control
device, which might not be applicable at all times, are currently applicable.
(F) Flashing red signal indication.
(1) Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a flashing circular red signal
indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if there is no stop line, before entering the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, at the point nearest the
General Provisions 25
intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway
before entering the intersection. The right to proceed shall be subject to the provisions that are applicable
after making a stop at a stop sign.
(2) Pedestrians facing any flashing red signal indication at an intersection, unless otherwise
directed by a pedestrian signal indication or other traffic control device, are permitted to proceed across
the roadway within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. Pedestrians shall yield the
right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the flashing red signal indication
is first displayed.
(3) When a flashing circular red signal indication is displayed as a beacon to supplement
another traffic control device, road users are notified that there is a need to pay additional attention to
the message contained thereon or that the regulatory requirements of the other traffic control device,
which might not be applicable at all times, are currently applicable. Use of this signal indication shall
be limited to supplementing stop, do not enter, or wrong way signs, and to applications where
compliance with the supplemented traffic control device requires a stop at a designated point.
(G) Official traffic-control signal erected and maintained at place other than an intersection. In the
event an official traffic-control signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the
provisions of this section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature can have
no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where
the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the
signal.
(H) Railroad grade crossings. This section does not apply at railroad grade- crossings. Conduct of
drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall be governed by R.C. §§ 4511.61 and
4511.62.
(R.C. § 4511.13) (1985 Code, § 70.11)
§ 70.27 SIGNALS OVER REVERSIBLE LANES.
The meanings of lane-use control signal indications are as follows.
(A) A steady downward green arrow. A road user is permitted to drive in the lane over which the
arrow signal indication is located.
(B) A steady yellow “X.” A road user is to prepare to vacate the lane over which the signal
indication is located because a lane control change is being made to a steady red “X” signal indication.
(C) A steady white two-way left-turn arrow. A road user is permitted to use a lane over which the
signal indication is located for a left turn, but not for through travel, with the understanding that common
use of the lane by oncoming road users for left turns also is permitted.
26 Madeira - Traffic Code
(D) A steady white one-way left-turn arrow. A road user is permitted to use a lane over which the
signal indication is located for a left turn, without opposing turns in the same lane, but not for through
travel.
(E) A steady red “X.” A road user is not permitted to use the lane over which the signal indication
is located and that this signal indication shall modify accordingly the meaning of other traffic controls
present.
(R.C. § 4511.131) (1985 Code, § 70.12)
§ 70.28 PEDESTRIAN-CONTROL SIGNALS.
Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words “walk” or “don’t walk,” or the
symbol of a walking person or an upraised palm are in place, these signals shall indicate the following
instructions.
(A) A steady walking person signal indication, which symbolizes “walk,” means that a pedestrian
facing the signal indication is permitted to start to cross the roadway in the direction of the signal
indication, possibly in conflict with turning vehicles. The pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to
vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the walking person signal indication is first
shown.
(B) A flashing upraised hand signal indication, which symbolizes “don’t walk,” means that a
pedestrian shall not start to cross the roadway in the direction of the signal indication, but that any
pedestrian who has already started to cross on a steady walking person signal indication shall proceed
to the far side of the traveled way of the street or highway, unless otherwise directed by a traffic-control
device to proceed only to the median of a divided highway or only to some other island or pedestrian
refuge area.
(C) A steady upraised hand signal indication means that a pedestrian shall not enter the roadway in
the direction of the signal indication.
(D) Nothing in this section shall be construed to invalidate the continued use of pedestrian control
signals utilizing the word “wait” if those signals were installed prior to March 28, 1985.
(E) A flashing walking person signal indication has no meaning and shall not be used.
(R.C. § 4511.14) (1985 Code, § 70.13)
§ 70.29 PROHIBITION AGAINST UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS AND SIGNALS.
(A) (1) No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway any
unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be, is an imitation of, or resembles a
General Provisions 27
traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or
hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any traffic-control device or any railroad sign or
signal, and no person shall place or maintain, nor shall any public authority permit, upon any highway
any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising. This section does not prohibit
either the erection upon private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional
information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for traffic-control devices, or the erection upon private
property of traffic-control devices by the owner of real property in accordance with R.C. §§ 4511.211
and 4511.432.
(2) Every prohibited sign, signal, marking or device is a public nuisance, and the authority
having jurisdiction over the highway may remove the same or cause it to be removed.
(B) Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.16) (1985 Code, § 70.15) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977)
§ 70.30 ALTERATION, DEFACEMENT OR REMOVAL PROHIBITED.
(A) No person, without lawful authority, shall do any of the following:
(1) Knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy or otherwise improperly tamper with any
traffic-control device, any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or insignia on the device, sign
or signal, or any part of the device, sign or signal;
(2) Knowingly drive upon or over any freshly applied pavement marking material on the
surface of a roadway while the marking material is in an undried condition, and is marked by flags,
markers, signs or other devices intended to protect it; or
(3) Knowingly move, damage, destroy or otherwise improperly tamper with a manhole cover.
(B) (1) Except as otherwise provided in this division (B)(1), whoever violates division (A)(1) or
(A)(3) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. If a violation of division (A)(1) or
(A)(3) of this section creates a risk of physical harm to any person, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If a violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(3) of this section causes serious
physical harm to property that is owned, leased or controlled by a state or local authority, the offender
is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(2) Except as otherwise provided in this division (B)(2), whoever violates division (A)(2) of
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously
28 Madeira - Traffic Code
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates division (A)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle
or traffic offenses, whoever violates division (A)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(R.C. § 4511.17) (1985 Code, § 70.16) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977)
§ 70.31 DUTIES OF CITY MANAGER.
The City Manager is invested with the authority to erect, install, place and maintain such trafficcontrol devices; make and maintain such traffic-control markings; and erect, install, place, and maintain
such signs, meters and devices for the regulations and prohibition of parking on highways and municipal
property as he or she may deem proper.
(1985 Code, § 70.17) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977)
§ 70.32 SIGNAL PREEMPTION DEVICES; PROHIBITIONS.
(A) (1) No person shall possess a portable signal preemption device.
(2) No person shall use a portable signal preemption device to affect the operation of a
traffic-control device.
(B) Division (A)(1) of this section does not apply to any of the following persons and division (A)(2)
of this section does not apply to any of the following persons when responding to an emergency call:
(1) A peace officer, as defined in R.C. § 109.17(A)(1), (A)(12), (A)(14) or (A)(19);
(2) A state highway patrol officer; or
(3) A person while occupying a public safety vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4511.01(E)(1), (E)(3)
or (E)(4).
(C) Whoever violates division (A)(1) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
Whoever violates division (A)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(D) As used in this section, PORTABLE SIGNAL PREEMPTION DEVICE means a device that,
if activated by a person, is capable of changing a traffic-control signal to green out of sequence.
(R.C. § 4511.031) (1985 Code, § 70.18)
General Provisions 29
§ 70.33 TRAFFIC LAW PHOTO-MONITORING DEVICES.
(A) As used in this section, TRAFFIC LAW PHOTO-MONITORING DEVICE means an electronic
system consisting of a photographic, video or electronic camera and a means of sensing the presence of
a motor vehicle that automatically produces photographs, videotape or digital images of the vehicle or
its license plate.
(B) (1) The municipality shall not use traffic law photo-monitoring devices to enforce any traffic
law until after it has erected signs on every highway that is not a freeway that is part of the state highway
system and that enters the municipality. The signs shall inform inbound traffic that the municipality
utilizes traffic law photo-monitoring devices to enforce traffic laws. The signs shall be erected within the
first 300 feet of the boundary of the municipality or, if the signs cannot be located within the first 300
feet of the boundary of the municipality, as close to that distance as possible, provided that if a particular
highway enters and exits the territory of the municipality multiple times, the municipality shall erect the
signs as required by this division (B)(1) at the locations in each direction of travel where inbound traffic
on the highway first enters the territory of the municipality and is not required to erect additional signs
along such highway each time the highway reenters the territory of the municipality. The municipality
is responsible for all costs associated with the erection, maintenance and replacement, if necessary, of
the signs. All signs erected under this division (B)(1) shall conform in size, color, location and content
to standards contained in the manual adopted by the Department of Transportation pursuant to R.C.
§ 4511.09 and shall remain in place for as long as the municipality utilizes traffic law photo-monitoring
devices to enforce any traffic law. Any ticket, citation or summons issued by or on behalf of the
municipality for any traffic law violation based upon evidence gathered by a traffic law photo-monitoring
device after March 12, 2009, but before the signs have been erected, is invalid; provided that no ticket,
citation or summons is invalid if the municipality is in substantial compliance with the requirement of
this division (B)(1) to erect the signs.
(2) The municipality is deemed to be in substantial compliance with the requirement of division
(B)(1) of this section to erect the advisory signs if the municipality does both of the following:
(a) First erects all signs as required by division (B)(1) of this section and subsequently
maintains and replaces the signs as needed so that at all times at least 90% of the required signs are in
place and functional; and
(b) Annually documents and upon request certifies its compliance with division (B)(2)(a)
of this section.
(C) If the municipality uses traffic law photo-monitoring devices to enforce any traffic law at an
intersection where traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals that exhibit different colored lights or
colored lighted arrows, the municipality shall time the operation of the yellow lights and yellow arrows
of those traffic-control signals so that the steady yellow indication exceeds by one second the minimum
duration for yellow indicators at similar intersections as established by the provisions of the manual
adopted by the Department of Transportation under R.C. § 4511.09.
(R.C. § 4511.094) (1985 Code, § 70.19)
30 Madeira - Traffic Code
§ 70.34 UNAUTHORIZED POSSESSION OR SALE OF DEVICES.
(A) As used in this section, TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICE means any sign, traffic-control signal
or other device conforming to and placed or erected in accordance with the manual adopted under R.C.
§ 4511.09 by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating,
warning or guiding traffic, including signs denoting the names of streets and highways, but does not
mean any pavement marking.
(B) No individual shall buy or otherwise possess, or sell, a traffic-control device, except when one
of the following applies:
(1) In the course of the individual’s employment by the state or a local authority for the express
or implied purpose of manufacturing, providing, erecting, moving or removing such a traffic-control
device;
(2) In the course of the individual’s employment by any manufacturer of traffic-control devices
other than a state or local authority;
(3) For the purpose of demonstrating the design and function of a traffic-control device to state
or local officials;
(4) When the traffic-control device has been purchased from the state or a local authority at
a sale of property that is no longer needed or is unfit for use; or
(5) When the traffic-control device has been properly purchased from a manufacturer for use
on private property and the person possessing the device has a sales receipt for the device or other
acknowledgment of sale issued by the manufacturer.
(C) This section does not preclude, and shall not be construed as precluding, prosecution for theft
in violation of R.C. § 2913.02, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or for receiving stolen
property in violation of R.C. § 2913.51, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(D) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.18)
§ 70.35 AMBIGUOUS OR NON-WORKING TRAFFIC SIGNALS.
(A) The driver of a vehicle who approaches an intersection where traffic is controlled by
traffic-control signals shall do all of the following, if the signal facing the driver either exhibits no
colored lights or colored lighted arrows or exhibits a combination of such lights or arrows that fails to
clearly indicate the assignment of right-of-way:
General Provisions 31
(1) Stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, stop before entering the crosswalk on the
near side of the intersection, or, if none, stop before entering the intersection;
(2) Yield the right-of-way to all vehicles in the intersection or approaching on an intersecting
road, if the vehicles will constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or
within the intersection or junction of roadways; and
(3) Exercise ordinary care while proceeding through the intersection.
(B) Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.132)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
(A) Whoever is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor other than a minor misdemeanor
shall be imprisoned for a definite term or fined, or both, which term of imprisonment and fine shall be
fixed by the court as provided in this section.
(1) Terms of imprisonment for misdemeanors shall be imposed as follows:
(a) For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than 6 months;
(b) For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than 90 days;
(c) For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than 60 days;
(d) For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than 30 days.
(2) Fines for a misdemeanor shall be imposed as follows:
(a) For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than $1,000;
(b) For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than $750;
(c) For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than $500;
32 Madeira - Traffic Code
(d) For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than $250.
(3) Whoever is convicted of or pleads guilty to a minor misdemeanor shall be fined not more
than $150.
(1985 Code, § 70.99) (Ord. 1401, passed 5-21-1979; Ord. 04-21, passed 8-23-2004)
(B) Whoever violates any provision of this Traffic Code for which no penalty otherwise is provided
in the section violated is guilty of one of the following:
(1) Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2) or (B)(3) of this section, a minor
misdemeanor;
(2) If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree;
(3) If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.99)
CHAPTER 71: LICENSING PROVISIONS
Section
Motor Vehicle Licensing
71.01 Display of license plates or validation stickers
71.02 License required as driver or commercial driver on public or private property;
nonresident exemption
71.03 Improper use of noncommercial motor vehicle
71.04 Operating motor vehicle ordered immobilized; forfeiture
71.05 Operation or sale without certificate of title
71.06 Display of certificate of registration
Prohibitions
71.20 Prohibited acts
71.21 Prohibition against permitting minor to operate vehicle
71.22 Employment of a minor to operate a taxicab prohibited
71.23 Restriction against owner lending vehicle for use of another
71.24 Suspension of driver’s licenses; license suspended by court of record
71.25 Display of license
71.26 Prohibition against false statements
71.27 Driving under suspension or in violation of license restriction
71.28 Operating motor vehicle without valid license
71.29 Driving under OVI suspension
71.30 Driving under financial responsibility law suspension or cancellation
71.31 Failure to reinstate license
Motor Vehicle License Tax
71.45 Levy of annual tax
71.46 Duration of tax
71.47 Payment of tax
71.48 Disposition of proceeds
Commercial Driver’s Licenses
71.60 Definitions
71.61 Use of actual gross weight in lieu of rating
33
34 Madeira - Traffic Code
71.62 Prohibited acts
71.63 Prerequisites to operation of commercial motor vehicle
71.64 Physical qualification to operate commercial motor vehicles
71.65 Criminal offenses
71.66 Application of federal regulations
71.67 Employment of drivers of commercial vehicles
71.99 Penalty
Statutory reference:
Commercial driver’s licenses, see R.C. Chapter 4506
Driver’s licenses, see R.C. Chapter 4507
Motor vehicle licensing, see R.C. Chapter 4504
Municipal motor vehicle license tax, see R.C. § 4504.06
Notice of arrest of certain commercial drivers, see R.C. § 5577.14
Proof of financial responsibility required; civil penalties; peace officers as agents of Registrar
 of Motor Vehicles; procedures and rules, see R.C. §§ 4509.101 et seq.
Suspension and revocation of driver’s licenses, see R.C. Chapter 4510
Suspension of driver’s licenses; municipal power to suspend for a period not to exceed time
 permitted or required by state law, see R.C. § 4510.05
MOTOR VEHICLE LICENSING
§ 71.01 DISPLAY OF LICENSE PLATES OR VALIDATION STICKERS.
(A) (1) No person who is the owner or operator of a motor vehicle shall fail to display in plain view
on the front and rear of the motor vehicle the distinctive number and registration mark, including any
county identification sticker and any validation sticker issued under R.C. §§ 4503.19 and 4503.191,
furnished by the Director of Public Safety, except that a manufacturer of motor vehicles or dealer
therein, the holder of an in-transit permit and the owner or operator of a motorcycle, motorized bicycle
or moped, motor-driven cycle or motor scooter, cab-enclosed motorcycle, manufactured home, mobile
home, trailer or semitrailer shall display on the rear only. A motor vehicle that is issued two license
plates shall display the validation sticker only on the rear license plate, except that a commercial tractor
that does not receive an apportioned license plate under the international registration plan shall display
the validation sticker on the front of the commercial tractor. An apportioned vehicle receiving an
apportioned license plate under the international registration plan shall display the license plate only on
the front of a commercial tractor and on the rear of all other vehicles. All license plates shall be securely
fastened so as not to swing, and shall not be covered by any material that obstructs its visibility.
(2) No person to whom a temporary license placard or windshield sticker has been issued for
the use of a motor vehicle under R.C. § 4503.182, and no operator of that motor vehicle, shall fail to
Licensing Provisions 35
display the temporary license placard in plain view from the rear of the vehicle either in the rear window
or on an external rear surface of the motor vehicle, or fail to display the windshield sticker in plain view
on the rear window of the motor vehicle. No temporary license placard or windshield sticker shall be
covered by any material that obstructs its visibility.
(R.C. § 4503.21(A)) (1985 Code, § 71.01) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977; Ord. 88-39, passed
10-3-1988)
(B) Except as otherwise provided by R.C. §§ 4503.103, 4503.173, 4503.41, 4503.43, and 4503.46,
no person who is the owner or chauffeur of a motor vehicle operated or driven upon the public roads
or highways shall fail to file annually the application for registration or to pay the tax therefor.
(R.C. § 4503.11(A))
(C) (1) Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4503.21(B))
(2) Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 4503.11(D))
§ 71.02 LICENSE REQUIRED AS DRIVER OR COMMERCIAL DRIVER ON PUBLIC OR
PRIVATE PROPERTY; NONRESIDENT EXEMPTION.
(A) (1) (a) No person shall permit the operation of a motor vehicle upon any public or private
property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking, knowing the operator does not
have a valid driver’s license issued to the operator by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles under R.C.
Chapter 4507 or a valid commercial driver’s license issued under R.C. Chapter 4506. Except as
otherwise provided in this division (A)(1)(a), whoever violates this division (A)(1)(a) is guilty of an
unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be
sentenced pursuant to § 130.18, § 130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall
not be sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community residential sanction
pursuant to § 130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding § 130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C.
§ 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to $1,000; and, notwithstanding § 130.99(F)(1)(c) and
R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant to § 130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C)
to serve a term of community service of up to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term
of community service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C.
§ 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
(b) If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
the offense is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
36 Madeira - Traffic Code
(2) No person shall receive a driver’s license, or a motorcycle operator’s endorsement of a
driver’s or commercial driver’s license, unless and until the person surrenders to the Registrar all valid
licenses issued to the person by another jurisdiction recognized by this state. The Registrar shall report
the surrender of a license to the issuing authority, together with information that a license is now issued
in this state. The Registrar shall destroy any such license that is not returned to the issuing authority. No
person shall be permitted to have more than one valid license at any time.
(R.C. § 4507.02(A))
(B) (1) No person shall be required to obtain a driver’s or commercial driver’s license for the
purpose of temporarily driving, operating, drawing, moving or propelling a road roller or road
machinery upon a street or highway.
(2) No person shall be required to obtain a driver’s or commercial driver’s license for the
purpose of temporarily driving, operating, drawing, moving or propelling any agricultural tractor or
implement of husbandry upon a street or highway at a speed of 25 mph or less.
(3) No person shall drive, operate, draw, move or propel any agricultural tractor or implement
of husbandry upon a street or highway at a speed greater than 25 mph unless the person has a current,
valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license.
(4) No person having a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license shall be required to have
a motorcycle operator’s endorsement to operate a motorcycle having three wheels with a motor of not
more than 50 cubic centimeters piston displacement.
(5) Every person on active duty in the military or naval forces of the United States, when
furnished with a driver’s permit and when operating an official motor vehicle in connection with such
duty, is exempt from the license requirements of R.C. Chapters 4506 and 4507. Every person on active
duty in the military or naval forces of the United States or in service with the peace corps, volunteers
in service to America or the foreign service of the United States, is exempt from the license requirements
of such sections for the period of the person’s active duty or service and for six months thereafter,
provided such person was a licensee under such sections at the time the person commenced the person’s
active duty or service. This section does not prevent such a person or the person’s spouse or dependent
from making an application, as provided in R.C. § 4507.10(C), for the renewal of a driver’s license or
motorcycle operator’s endorsement or as provided in R.C. § 4506.14 for the renewal of a commercial
driver’s license during the period of the person’s active duty or service.
(6) Whoever violates division (B)(3) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4507.03)
(C) Nonresidents, permitted to drive upon the highways of their own state, may operate any motor
vehicle upon any highway in this state without examination or license under R.C. §§ 4507.01 through
Licensing Provisions 37
4507.39, inclusive, upon condition that such nonresident may be required at any time or place to prove
lawful possession or their right to operate such motor vehicle, and to establish proper identity.
(R.C. § 4507.04)
(1985 Code, § 71.02) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977; Ord. 88-39, passed 10-3-1988)
§ 71.03 IMPROPER USE OF NONCOMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE.
(A) No person shall use a motor vehicle registered as a noncommercial motor vehicle for other than
the purposes set forth in R.C. § 4501.01.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4503.05)
§ 71.04 OPERATING MOTOR VEHICLE ORDERED IMMOBILIZED; FORFEITURE.
(A) No person shall operate a motor vehicle or permit the operation of a motor vehicle upon any
public or private property used by the public for vehicular travel or parking knowing or having
reasonable cause to believe that the motor vehicle has been ordered immobilized pursuant to an
immobilization order issued under R.C. § 4503.233.
(B) A motor vehicle that is operated by a person during a violation of division (A) of this section
shall be criminally forfeited to the state in accordance with the procedures contained in R.C. § 4503.234.
(C) Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(R.C. § 4503.236)
§ 71.05 OPERATION OR SALE WITHOUT CERTIFICATE OF TITLE.
(A) No person shall do any of the following:
(1) Operate in this municipality a motor vehicle for which a certificate of title is required
without having that certificate in accordance with R.C. Chapter 4505 or, if a physical certificate of title
has not been issued for a motor vehicle, operate the motor vehicle in this state knowing that the
ownership information relating to the vehicle has not been entered into the automated title processing
system by a Clerk of a court of common pleas;
(2) Display or display for sale or sell as a dealer or acting on behalf of a dealer, a motor
vehicle without having obtained a manufacturer’s or importer’s certificate, a certificate of title or an
assignment of a certificate of title for it as provided in R.C. Chapter 4505;
38 Madeira - Traffic Code
(3) Fail to surrender any certificate of title or any certificate of registration or license plates
upon cancellation of the same by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles and notice of the cancellation as
prescribed in R.C. Chapter 4505;
(4) Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a Clerk of a court of common pleas as provided
in R.C. Chapter 4505 in case of the destruction or dismantling or change of a motor vehicle in such
respect that it is not the motor vehicle described in the certificate of title;
(5) Violate any rules adopted pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4505;
(6) Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapters 4505 and 4517, sell at wholesale a motor
vehicle ownership of which is not evidenced by an Ohio certificate of title, or the current certificate of
title issued for the motor vehicle, or the manufacturer’s certificate of origin, and all title assignments that
evidence the seller’s ownership of the motor vehicle, and an odometer disclosure statement that complies
with R.C. § 4505.06 and subchapter IV of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act, 86 Stat.
961 (1972), 15 U.S.C. § 1981; or
(7) Operate in this state a motor vehicle knowing that the certificate of title to the vehicle or
ownership of the vehicle as otherwise reflected in the automated title processing system has been
canceled.
(B) This section does not apply to persons engaged in the business of warehousing or transporting
motor vehicles for the purpose of salvage disposition.
(C) Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than $200, imprisoned not more than 90
days, or both.
(R.C. § 4505.18)
§ 71.06 DISPLAY OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.
(A) (1) The operator of a “commercial car,” as defined in R.C. § 4501.01, when the commercial
car is required to be registered under state law, shall, when operating the commercial car, trailer or
semitrailer on the streets, roads or highways of this municipality display inside or on the vehicle the
certificate of registration for the commercial car, trailer or semitrailer provided for in R.C. § 4503.19,
or shall carry the certificate on the operator’s person and display it upon the demand of any peace
officer.
(2) Every person operating a commercial car, trailer or semitrailer required to be registered
under state law shall permit the inspection of the certificate of registration upon demand of any peace
officer.
(B) Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a commercial car certificate of
registration violation, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4549.18)
Licensing Provisions 39
PROHIBITIONS
§ 71.20 PROHIBITED ACTS.
(A) No person shall do any of the following:
(1) Display or cause or permit to be displayed, or possess any identification card, driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit knowing the same to be fictitious, or to have been canceled, suspended or altered;
(2) Lend to a person not entitled thereto, or knowingly permit a person not entitled thereto to
use any identification card, driver’s or commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit or
commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit issued to the person so lending or permitting
the use thereof;
(3) Display, or represent as one’s own, any identification card, driver’s or commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit or commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit not
issued to the person so displaying the same;
(4) Fail to surrender to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, upon the Registrar’s demand, any
identification card, driver’s or commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit or commercial
driver’s license temporary instruction permit that has been suspended or canceled; or
(5) In any application for an identification card, driver’s or commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, or commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit or any renewal
or duplicate thereof, knowingly conceal a material fact or present any physician’s statement required
under R.C. § 4507.08 or 4507.081 when knowing the same to be false or fictitious.
(B) Whoever violates any division of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4507.30) (1985 Code, § 71.05)
Statutory reference:
Use of license to violate liquor laws; suspension; procedures, see R.C. § 4510.33
§ 71.21 PROHIBITION AGAINST PERMITTING MINOR TO OPERATE VEHICLE.
(A) No person shall cause or knowingly permit any minor to drive a motor vehicle upon a highway
as an operator, unless the minor has first obtained a license or permit to drive a motor vehicle under
R.C. Chapter 4507.
(R.C. § 4507.31(A))
40 Madeira - Traffic Code
(B) (1) No holder of a temporary instruction permit issued under R.C. § 4507.05(A) shall operate
a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking in violation of the conditions established under R.C. § 4507.05(A).
(2) (a) Except as provided in division (B)(2)(b) of this section, no holder of a temporary
instruction permit that is issued under R.C. § 4507.05(A) and that is issued on or after July 1, 1998, and
who has not attained the age of 18 years, shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or
private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking between the hours of
midnight and 6:00 a.m.
(b) The holder of a temporary instruction permit issued under R.C. § 4507.05(A) on or
after July 1, 1998, who has not attained the age of 18 years, may operate a motor vehicle upon a
highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposed of vehicular travel or parking
between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. if, at the time of such operation, the holder is accompanied
by the holder’s parent, guardian or custodian, and the parent, guardian or custodian holds a current valid
driver’s or commercial driver’s license issued by this state, is actually occupying a seat beside the permit
holder, and does not have a prohibited concentration of alcohol in the whole blood, blood serum or
plasma, breath or urine as provided in R.C. § 4511.19(A).
(R.C. § 4507.05(F))
(C) (1) (a) No holder of a probationary driver’s license who has not attained the age of 17 years
shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public for
vehicular travel or parking between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. unless the holder is
accompanied by the holder’s parent or guardian.
(b) No holder of a probationary driver’s license who has attained the age of 17 years but
has not attained the age of 18 years shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private
property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking between the hours of 1:00 a.m.
and 5:00 a.m. unless the holder is accompanied by the holder’s parent or guardian.
(2) (a) Subject to division (E)(1)(a) of this section, division (C)(1)(a) of this section does not
apply to the holder of a probationary driver’s license who is traveling to or from work between the hours
of midnight and 6:00 a.m. and has in the holder’s immediate possession written documentation from the
holder’s employer.
(b) Division (C)(1)(b) of this section does not apply to the holder of a probationary driver’s
license who is traveling to or from work between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. and has in the
holder’s immediate possession written documentation from the holder’s employer.
(3) An employer is not liable in damages in a civil action for any injury, death or loss to person
or property that allegedly arises from, or is related to, the fact that the employer provided an employee
who is the holder of a probationary driver’s license with the written documentation described in division
(C)(2) of this section. The Registrar of Motor Vehicles has available at no cost a form to serve as the
Licensing Provisions 41
written documentation described in division (C)(2) of this section, and employers and holders of
probationary driver’s licenses may utilize that form or may choose to utilize any other written
documentation to meet the requirements of that division.
(4) No holder of a probationary driver’s license who is less than 17 years of age shall operate
a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking with more than one person who is not a family member occupying the vehicle
unless the probationary license holder is accompanied by the probationary license holder’s parent,
guardian or custodian.
(D) It is an affirmative defense to a violation of division (C)(1)(a) or (C)(1)(b) of this section if, at
the time of the violation, the holder of the probationary driver’s license was traveling to or from an
official function sponsored by the school the holder attends, or an emergency existed that required the
holder to operate a motor vehicle in violation of division (C)(1)(a) or (C)(1)(b) of this section, or the
holder was an emancipated minor.
(E) (1) (a) Except as otherwise provided in division (E)(2) of this section, if a person is issued a
probationary driver’s license prior to attaining the age of 17 years and the person pleads guilty to, is
convicted of, or is adjudicated in juvenile court of having committed a moving violation during the
six-month period commencing on the date on which the person is issued the probationary driver’s
license, the holder must be accompanied by the holder’s parent or guardian whenever the holder is
operating a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking during whichever of the following time periods applies:
1. If, on the date the holder of the probationary driver’s license pleads guilty to, is
convicted of, or is adjudicated in juvenile court of having committed the moving violation, the holder
has not attained the age of 16.5 years, during the six-month period commencing on that date; or
2. If, on the date the holder pleads guilty to, is convicted of or is adjudicated in
juvenile court of having committed the moving violation, the holder has attained the age of 16.5 years
but not 17 years, until the person attains the age of 17 years.
(b) If the holder of a probationary driver’s license commits a moving violation during the
six-month period after the person is issued the probationary driver’s license and before the person attains
the age of 17 years and on the date the person pleads guilty to, is convicted of or is adjudicated in
juvenile court of having committed the moving violation the person has attained the age of 17 years, or
if the person commits the moving violation during the six-month period after the person is issued the
probationary driver’s license and after the person attains the age of 17 years, the holder is not subject
to the restriction described in divisions (E)(1)(a)1. and (E)(1)(a)2. of this section unless the court or
juvenile court imposes such a restriction upon the holder.
(2) Any person who is subject to the operating restrictions established under division (E)(1) of
this section as a result of a first moving violation may petition the court for occupational or educational
driving privileges without being accompanied by the holder’s parent or guardian during the period of
time specified in that division. The court may grant the person such driving privileges if the court finds
42 Madeira - Traffic Code
reasonable cause to believe that the restrictions established in division (E)(1) of this section will seriously
affect the person’s ability to continue in employment or educational training or will cause undue hardship
on the license holder or a family member of the license holder. In granting the driving privileges, the
court shall specify the purposes, times and places of the privileges and shall issue the person appropriate
forms setting forth the privileges granted. Occupational or educational driving privileges under this
division (E)(2) shall not be granted to the same person more than once. If a person is convicted of, pleads
guilty to or is adjudicated in juvenile court of having committed a second or subsequent moving
violation, any driving privileges previously granted under this division (E)(2) are terminated upon the
subsequent conviction, plea or adjudication.
(3) No person shall violate division (E)(1)(a) of this section.
(F) No holder of a probationary license shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public
or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking unless the total number
of occupants of the vehicle does not exceed the total number of occupant restraining devices originally
installed in the motor vehicle by its manufacturer, and each occupant of the vehicle is wearing all of the
available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device.
(G) A restricted license may be issued to a person who is 14 or 15 years of age under proof of
hardship satisfactory to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles.
(H) Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, no law enforcement officer shall
cause the operator of a motor vehicle being operated on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle
for the sole purpose of determining whether each occupant of the motor vehicle is wearing all of the
available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device as required by division (F) of this
section, or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation or summons if that requirement has been or
is being violated, or for causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation
of that requirement.
(I) Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no law enforcement officer shall
cause the operator of a motor vehicle being operated on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle
for the sole purpose of determining whether a violation of division (C)(1)(a) or (C)(1)(b) of this section
has been or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation or summons for such
a violation or for causing the arrest or commencing a prosecution of a person for such a violation.
(J) As used in this section:
FAMILY MEMBER. A family member of a probationary license holder includes any of the
following:
(a) A spouse;
(b) A child or stepchild;
Licensing Provisions 43
(c) A parent, stepparent, grandparent or parent-in-law;
(d) An aunt or uncle;
(e) A sibling, whether of the whole or half blood or by adoption, a brother-in-law or a
sister-in-law;
(f) A son or daughter of the probationary license holder’s stepparent if the stepparent has
not adopted the probationary license holder; or
(g) An eligible adult, as defined in R.C. § 4507.05.
MOVING VIOLATION. Means any violation of any statute or ordinance that regulates the
operation of vehicles on the highways or streets. The term does not include a violation of R.C.
§ 4513.263 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or a violation of any statute or ordinance
regulating pedestrians or the parking of vehicles, vehicle size or load limitations, vehicle fitness
requirements or vehicle registration.
OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4513.263.
(R.C. § 4507.071(B) - (I))
(K) (1) Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4507.31(B))
(2) Whoever violates divisions (B), (C)(1), (C)(4), (E)(3) or (F) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. §§ 4507.05(I), 4507.071(J))
(1985 Code, § 71.06)
§ 71.22 EMPLOYMENT OF A MINOR TO OPERATE A TAXICAB PROHIBITED.
(A) Notwithstanding the definition of “chauffeur” in R.C. § 4501.01, no person shall employ any
minor for the purpose of operating a taxicab.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4507.321) (1985 Code, § 71.08)
§ 71.23 RESTRICTION AGAINST OWNER LENDING VEHICLE FOR USE OF ANOTHER.
(A) No person shall permit a motor vehicle owned by the person or under the person’s control to
be driven by another if any of the following apply:
44 Madeira - Traffic Code
(1) The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the other person does not have
a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or valid nonresident driving privileges;
(2) The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the other person’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privileges have been suspended or
canceled under R.C. Chapter 4510 or any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code;
(3) The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the other person’s act of driving
the motor vehicle would violate any prohibition contained in R.C. Chapter 4509;
(4) The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the other person’s act of driving
would violate R.C. § 4511.19 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance; or
(5) The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the vehicle is the subject of an
immobilization waiver order issued under R.C. § 4503.235 and the other person is prohibited from
operating the vehicle under that order.
(B) Without limiting or precluding the consideration of any other evidence in determining whether
a violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4) or (A)(5) of this section has occurred, it shall be
prima facie evidence that the offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the operator of the
motor vehicle owned by the offender or under the offender’s control is in a category described in
division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4) or (A)(5) of this section if any of the following applies:
(1) Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in division (A)(1), (A)(3) or
(A)(5) of this section, the offender and the operator of the motor vehicle reside in the same household
and are related by consanguinity or affinity;
(2) Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in division (A)(2) of this section,
the offender and the operator of the motor vehicle reside in the same household, and the offender knows
or has reasonable cause to believe that the operator has been charged with or convicted of any violation
of law or ordinance, or has committed any other act or omission, that would or could result in the
suspension or cancellation of the operator’s license, permit or privilege; or
(3) Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in division (A)(4) of this section,
the offender and the operator of the motor vehicle occupied the motor vehicle together at the time of the
offense.
(C) Whoever violates this section is guilty of wrongful entrustment of a motor vehicle, and shall be
punished as provided in divisions (C) to (H) of this section.
(1) Except as provided in division (C)(2) of this section, whoever violates division (A)(1),
(A)(2) or (A)(3) of this section is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an
unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to § 130.18, § 130.99 or R.C.
§§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall
not be sentenced to a community residential sanction pursuant to § 130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26;
Licensing Provisions 45
notwithstanding § 130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding § 130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered
pursuant to § 130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to 500
hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service imposed by the court may
be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. § 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying
case.
(2) (a) If, within three years of a violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this section,
the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of two or more violations of division
(A)(1), (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this section, R.C. § 4511.203(A)(1), (A)(2) or (A)(3), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(b) Whoever violates division (A)(4) or (A)(5) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
(3) For any violation of this section, in addition to the penalties imposed under this Code or
R.C. Chapter 2929, the court may impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating
privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7), and, if the vehicle involved in the offense
is registered in the name of the offender, the court may order one of the following:
(a) Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(3)(b) or (C)(3)(c) of this section, the court
may order, for 30 days, the immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment
of that vehicle’s license plates. If issued, the order shall be issued and enforced under R.C. § 4503.233;
(b) If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of
this section, R.C. § 4511.203, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court may order,
for 60 days, the immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment of that
vehicle’s license plates. If issued, the order shall be issued and enforced under R.C. § 4503.233; or
(c) If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more
violations of this section, R.C. § 4511.203, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court
may order the criminal forfeiture to the state of the vehicle involved in the offense. If issued, the order
shall be issued and enforced under R.C. § 4503.234.
(4) If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to an order for criminal forfeiture under division
(C)(3)(c) of this section is assigned or transferred and R.C. § 4503.234(B)(2) or (B)(3) applies, in
addition to or independent of any other penalty established by law, the court may fine the offender the
value of the vehicle as determined by publications of the National Automobile Dealers Association. The
proceeds from any fine imposed under this division (C)(4) shall be distributed in accordance with R.C.
§ 4503.234(C)(2).
46 Madeira - Traffic Code
(D) If a court orders the criminal forfeiture of a vehicle under division (C)(3)(a) or (C)(3)(b) of this
section, the court shall not release the vehicle from the immobilization before the termination of the
period of immobilization ordered unless the court is presented with current proof of financial
responsibility with respect to that vehicle.
(E) If a court orders the criminal forfeiture of a vehicle under division (C)(3)(c) of this section, upon
receipt of the order from the court, neither the Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor any Deputy Registrar
shall accept any application for the registration or transfer of registration of any motor vehicle owned
or leased by the person named in the order. The period of denial shall be five years after the date the
order is issued, unless, during that five-year period, the court with jurisdiction of the offense that
resulted in the order terminates the forfeiture and notifies the Registrar of the termination. If the court
terminates the forfeiture and notifies the Registrar, the Registrar shall take all necessary measures to
permit the person to register a vehicle owned or leased by the person or to transfer the registration of
the vehicle.
(F) This section does not apply to motor vehicle rental dealers or motor vehicle leasing dealers, as
defined in R.C. § 4549.65.
(G) Evidence of a conviction of, plea of guilty to or adjudication as a delinquent child for a violation
of this section shall not be admissible as evidence in any civil action that involves the offender or
delinquent child who is the subject of the conviction, plea or adjudication and that arises from the
wrongful entrustment of a motor vehicle.
(H) For purposes of this section, a vehicle is owned by a person if, at the time of a violation of this
section, the vehicle is registered in the person’s name.
(R.C. § 4511.203) (1985 Code, § 71.09)
§ 71.24 SUSPENSION OF DRIVER’S LICENSES; LICENSE SUSPENDED BY COURT OF
RECORD.
(A) Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 4510.07 or in any other provision of the Ohio Revised
Code, whenever an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of any provision of this code
that is substantially equivalent to a provision of the Ohio Revised Code, and a court is permitted or
required to suspend a person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit for a violation of that
provision, a court, in addition to any other penalties authorized by law, may suspend the offender’s
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privileges for the period of
time the court determines appropriate, but the period of suspension imposed for the violation of the
provision of this code shall not exceed the period of suspension that is permitted or required to be
imposed for the violation of the provision of the Ohio Revised Code to which the provision of this code
is substantially equivalent.
(R.C. § 4510.05)
Licensing Provisions 47
(B) Whenever a person is found guilty under the laws of this state or any ordinance of any political
subdivision of this state, of operating a motor vehicle in violation of any such law or ordinance relating
to reckless operation, the trial court of any court of record, in addition to or independent of all other
penalties provided by law, may impose a class five suspension of the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C.
§ 4510.02(A)(5).
(C) Suspension of a commercial driver’s license under this section shall be concurrent with any
period of suspension disqualification under R.C. § 3123.58 or 4506.16. No person who is disqualified
for life from holding a commercial driver’s license under R.C. § 4506.16 shall be issued a driver’s
license under R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period for which the commercial driver’s license was
suspended under this section, and no person whose commercial driver’s license is suspended under this
section shall be issued a driver’s license under R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period of the suspension.
(R.C. § 4510.15)
(1985 Code, § 71.10)
§ 71.25 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
(A) The operator of a motor vehicle shall display the operator’s driver’s license, or furnish
satisfactory proof that the operator has a driver’s license, upon demand of any peace officer or of any
person damaged or injured in any collision in which the licensee may be involved. When a demand is
properly made, and the operator has the operator’s driver’s license on or about the operator’s person,
the operator shall not refuse to display the license. A person’s failure to furnish satisfactory evidence that
the person is licensed under R.C. Chapter 4507 when the person does not have the person’s license on
or about the person’s person shall be prima facie evidence of the person’s not having obtained a driver’s
license.
(B) (1) Except as provided in division (B)(2) of this section, whoever violates this section is guilty
of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be
sentenced pursuant to § 130.18, § 130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall
not be sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community residential sanction
pursuant to § 130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding § 130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C.
§ 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to $1,000; and notwithstanding § 130.99(F)(1)(c) and
R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant to § 130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C)
to serve a term of community service of up to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term
of community service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C.
§ 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
(2) If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section, R.C. § 4507.35, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4507.35) (1985 Code, § 71.11)
48 Madeira - Traffic Code
§ 71.26 PROHIBITION AGAINST FALSE STATEMENTS.
(A) No person shall knowingly make a false statement to any matter or thing required by the
provisions of this Traffic Code.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4507.36) (1985 Code, § 71.12)
§ 71.27 DRIVING UNDER SUSPENSION OR IN VIOLATION OF LICENSE
RESTRICTION.
(A) Driving under suspension or in violation of license restriction.
(1) Except as provided in division (A)(2) of this section, division (B) of this section, § 71.31
and in R.C. §§ 4510.111 and 4510.16, no person whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit or nonresident operating privilege has been suspended under any provision of the Ohio Revised
Code, other than R.C. Chapter 4509, or under any applicable law in any other jurisdiction in which the
person’s license or permit was issued shall operate any motor vehicle upon the public roads and
highways or upon any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or
parking within this municipality during the period of suspension unless the person is granted limited
driving privileges and is operating the vehicle in accordance with the terms of the limited driving
privileges.
(2) No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property
used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking in this municipality in violation of any
restriction of the person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit imposed under R.C.
§ 4506.10(D) or 4507.14.
(3) Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a non-certified copy of the law
enforcement automated data system report or a non-certified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles that shows the name, date of birth and Social Security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section may be admitted into evidence as prima facie
evidence that the license of the person was under suspension at the time of the alleged violation of
division (A)(1) of this section or the person operated a motor vehicle in violation of a restriction at the
time of the alleged violation of division (A)(2) of this section. The person charged with a violation of
division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section may offer evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.
(4) (a) Whoever violates division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the first degree. The court may impose upon the offender a class seven suspension of the offender’s
driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or
nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
Licensing Provisions 49
(b)1. Except as provided in division (A)(4)(b)2. or (A)(4)(b)3. of this section, the court,
in addition to any other penalty that it imposes on the offender and if the vehicle is registered in the
offender’s name and if, within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court, in addition to or independent of any other
sentence that it imposes upon the offender, may order the immobilization of the vehicle involved in the
offense for 30 days and the impoundment of that vehicle’s license plates for 30 days in accordance with
R.C. § 4503.233.
2. If the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if, within three years of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of this section,
or any combination of two violations of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16, or of a
substantially similar municipal ordinance, the court, in addition to any other sentence that it imposes on
the offender, may order the immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense for 60 days and the
impoundment of that vehicle’s license plates for 60 days in accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
3. If the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if, within three years of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of
this section, or any combination of three or more violations of this section or R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111
or 4510.16, or of a substantially similar municipal ordinance, the court, in addition to any other sentence
that it imposes on the offender, may order the criminal forfeiture of the vehicle involved in the offense
to the state.
(5) Any order for immobilization and impoundment under this section shall be issued and
enforced under R.C. §§ 4503.233 and 4507.02, as applicable. The court shall not release a vehicle from
immobilization ordered under this section unless the court is presented with current proof of financial
responsibility with respect to that vehicle.
(6) Any order of criminal forfeiture under this section shall be issued and enforced under R.C.
§ 4503.234. Upon receipt of the copy of the order from the court, neither the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles nor a Deputy Registrar shall accept any application for the registration or transfer of registration
of any motor vehicle owned or leased by the person named in the declaration of forfeiture. The period
of registration denial shall be five years after the date of the order, unless, during that period, the court
having jurisdiction of the offense that led to the order terminates the forfeiture and notifies the Registrar
of the termination. The Registrar then shall take necessary measures to permit the person to register a
vehicle owned or leased by the person or to transfer registration of the vehicle.
(7) The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial responsibility as defined in R.C.
§ 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any
other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to § 130.99(G) or R.C.
§ 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision
that was the direct and proximate result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during or after
committing the offense for which the offender is sentenced under this section.
(R.C. § 4510.11)
50 Madeira - Traffic Code
(B) Driving under suspension in violation of other provisions.
(1) No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property
used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking in this municipality whose driver’s or
commercial driver’s license has been suspended pursuant to R.C. § 2151.354, 2151.87, 2935.27,
3123.58, 4301.99, 4510.032, 4510.22 or 4510.33, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(2) Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a non-certified copy of the law
enforcement automated data system report or a non-certified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles that shows the name, date of birth and Social Security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (B)(1) of this section may be admitted into evidence as prima facie evidence that the
license of the person was under suspension at the time of the alleged violation of division (B)(1) of this
section. The person charged with a violation of division (B)(1) of this section may offer evidence to rebut
this prima facie evidence.
(3) Whoever violates division (B)(1) of this section is guilty of driving under suspension and
shall be punished as provided in division (B)(3) of this section.
(a) Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(3)(b) of this section, the offense is an
unclassified misdemeanor. The offender shall be sentenced pursuant to § 130.18, § 130.99 or R.C.
§§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall
not be sentenced to a community residential sanction pursuant to § 130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26;
notwithstanding § 130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding § 130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered
pursuant to § 130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to 500
hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service imposed by the court may
be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. § 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying
case.
(b) If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously was convicted of or
pleaded guilty to two or more violations of division (B)(1) of this section, or any combination of two or
more violations of division (B)(1) of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4510.111)
(C) Repeat traffic offender; point system suspension. Any person whose driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privileges are suspended as a repeat traffic offender
under R.C. § 4510.037 and who, during the suspension, operates any motor vehicle upon any public
roads and highways is guilty of driving under a 12-point suspension, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
The court shall sentence the offender to a minimum term of three days in jail. No court shall suspend
the first three days of jail time imposed pursuant to this division (C).
(R.C. § 4510.037(J))
Licensing Provisions 51
(D) Affirmative defense. It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under division (A)
of this section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid permit or driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a restriction because of a substantial emergency, and
because no other person was reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(R.C. § 4510.04)
(1985 Code, § 71.15)
§ 71.28 OPERATING MOTOR VEHICLE WITHOUT VALID LICENSE.
(A) (1) No person, except those expressly exempted under R.C. §§ 4507.03, 4507.04 and 4507.05,
shall operate any motor vehicle upon a public road or highway or any public or private property used
by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking in this municipality unless the person has a valid
driver’s license issued under R.C. Chapter 4507 or a commercial driver’s license issued under R.C.
Chapter 4506.
(2) No person, except a person expressly exempted under R.C. §§ 4507.03, 4507.04 and
4507.05, shall operate any motorcycle upon a public road or highway or any public or private property
used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking in this municipality unless the person has
a valid license as a motorcycle operator that was issued upon application by the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles under R.C. Chapter 4507. The license shall be in the form of an endorsement, as determined
by the Registrar, upon a driver’s or commercial driver’s license, if the person has a valid license to
operate a motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle, or in the form of a restricted license as provided
in R.C. § 4507.14, if the person does not have a valid license to operate a motor vehicle or commercial
motor vehicle.
(B) Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a non-certified copy of the law
enforcement automated data system report or a non-certified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles that shows the name, date of birth and Social Security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section may be admitted into evidence as prima facie
evidence that the person did not have either a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license at the time
of the alleged violation of division (A)(1) of this section or a valid license as a motorcycle operator either
in the form of an endorsement upon a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or a restricted license at
the time of the alleged violation of division (A)(2) of this section. The person charged with a violation
of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section may offer evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.
(C) Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a motor vehicle or motorcycle without a
valid license and shall be punished as follows.
(1) If the trier of fact finds that the offender never has held a valid driver’s or commercial
driver’s license issued by this state or any other jurisdiction, or, in a case involving the operation of a
motorcycle by the offender, if the offender has never held a valid license as a motorcycle operator, either
in the form of an endorsement upon a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or in the form of a
restricted license, except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(1), the offense is an unclassified
misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant
52 Madeira - Traffic Code
to § 130.18, § 130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be sentenced
to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community residential sanction pursuant to
§ 130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding § 130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the
offender may be fined up to $1,000; and, notwithstanding § 130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3),
the offender may be ordered pursuant to § 130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of
community service of up to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community
service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. § 2705.02(A)
that may be filed in the underlying case. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to any violation of this section or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(2) If the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or, in a case involving
the operation of a motorcycle by the offender, the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license
bearing the motorcycle endorsement or the offender’s restricted license was expired at the time of the
offense, except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(2), the offense is a minor misdemeanor. If
within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two
or more violations of this section or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(D) The court shall not impose a license suspension for a first violation of this section or if more
than three years have passed since the offender’s last violation of R.C. § 4510.12, this section, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(E) If the offender is sentenced under division (C)(2) of this section, if within three years of the
offense the offender previously was convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of R.C.
§ 4510.12, this section, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and if the offender’s license
was expired for more than six months at the time of the offense, the court may impose a class seven
suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit,
probationary license or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C.
§ 4510.02(A)(7).
(R.C. § 4510.12) (1985 Code, § 71.16)
§ 71.29 DRIVING UNDER OVI SUSPENSION.
(A) No person whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating
privilege has been suspended under R.C. § 4511.19, 4511.191 or 4511.196 or under R.C. § 4510.07
for a conviction of a violation of a municipal OVI ordinance shall operate any motor vehicle upon the
public roads or highways within this municipality during the period of the suspension.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of driving under OVI suspension. The court shall
sentence the offender under R.C. Chapter 2929, subject to the differences authorized or required by this
section.
Licensing Provisions 53
(1) Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2) or (B)(3) of this section, driving under OVI
suspension is a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the
following:
(a) A mandatory jail term of three consecutive days. The three-day term shall be imposed,
unless, subject to division (C) of this section, the court instead imposes a sentence of not less than 30
consecutive days of house arrest with electronic monitoring. A period of house arrest with electronic
monitoring imposed under this division (B)(1)(a) shall not exceed six months. If the court imposes a
mandatory three-day jail term under this division (B)(1)(a), the court may impose a jail term in addition
to that term, provided that in no case shall the cumulative jail term imposed for the offense exceed six
months;
(b) A fine of not less than $250 and not more than $1,000;
(c) A license suspension under division (E) of this section; and
(d) If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the offense is registered in the
offender’s name, immobilization for 30 days of the offender’s vehicle and impoundment for 30 days of
the identification license plates of that vehicle. The order for immobilization and impoundment shall be
issued and enforced in accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
(2) If, within six years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one violation of this section or one equivalent offense, driving under OVI suspension is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
(a) A mandatory jail term of ten consecutive days. Notwithstanding the jail terms provided
in R.C. §§ 2929.21 through 2929.28, the court may sentence the offender to a longer jail term of not
more than one year. The ten-day mandatory jail term shall be imposed unless, subject to division (C) of
this section, the court instead imposes a sentence of not less than 90 consecutive days of house arrest
with electronic monitoring. The period of house arrest with electronic monitoring shall not exceed one
year;
(b) Notwithstanding the fines provided for in R.C. Chapter 2929, a fine of not less than
$500 and not more than $2,500;
(c) A license suspension under division (E) of this section; and
(d) If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the offense is registered in the
offender’s name, immobilization of the offender’s vehicle for 60 days and the impoundment for 60 days
of the identification license plates of that vehicle. The order for immobilization and impoundment shall
be issued and enforced in accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
54 Madeira - Traffic Code
(3) If, within six years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of this section or two or more equivalent offenses, driving under OVI
suspension is a misdemeanor. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
(a) A mandatory jail term of 30 consecutive days. Notwithstanding the jail terms provided
in R.C. §§ 2929.21 through 2929.28, the court may sentence the offender to a longer jail term of not
more than one year. The court shall not sentence the offender to a term of house arrest with electronic
monitoring in lieu of the mandatory portion of the jail term;
(b) Notwithstanding the fines set forth in R.C. Chapter 2929, a fine of not less than $500
and not more than $2,500;
(c) A license suspension under division (E) of this section; and
(d) If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the offense is registered in the
offender’s name, criminal forfeiture to the state of the offender’s vehicle. The order of criminal
forfeiture shall be issued and enforced in accordance with R.C. § 4503.234. If title to a motor vehicle
that is subject to an order for criminal forfeiture under this division (B)(3)(d) is assigned or transferred
and R.C. § 4503.234(B)(2) or (B)(3) applies, the court may fine the offender the value of the vehicle as
determined by publications of the National Automobile Dealers Association. The proceeds from any fine
so imposed shall be distributed in accordance with R.C. § 4503.234(C)(2).
(C) (1) No court shall impose an alternative sentence of house arrest with electronic monitoring
under division (B)(1) or (B)(2) of this section unless, within 60 days of the date of sentencing, the court
issues a written finding on the record that, due to the unavailability of space at the jail where the offender
is required to serve the jail term imposed, the offender will not be able to begin serving that term within
the 60-day period following the date of sentencing.
(2) An offender sentenced under this section to a period of house arrest with electronic
monitoring shall be permitted work release during that period.
(D) Fifty percent of any fine imposed by a court under division (B)(1), (B)(2) or (B)(3) of this
section shall be deposited into the municipal Indigent Drivers Alcohol Treatment Fund under the control
of that court, as created by the municipality pursuant to R.C. § 4511.191(H).
(E) In addition to or independent of all other penalties provided by law or ordinance, the trial judge
of any court of record or the Mayor of a Mayor’s court shall impose on an offender who is convicted
of or pleads guilty to a violation of this section a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C.
§ 4510.02(A)(7).
(1) When permitted as specified in R.C. § 4510.021, if the court grants limited driving
privileges during a suspension imposed under this section, the privileges shall be granted on the
Licensing Provisions 55
additional condition that the offender must display restricted license plates, issued under R.C.
§ 4503.231, on the vehicle driven subject to the privileges, except as provided in R.C. § 4503.231(B).
(2) A suspension of a commercial driver’s license under this section shall be concurrent with
any period of suspension or disqualification under R.C. § 3123.58 or R.C. § 4506.16. No person who
is disqualified for life from holding a commercial driver’s license under R.C. § 4506.16 shall be issued
a driver’s license under R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period for which the commercial driver’s license
was suspended under this section, and no person whose commercial driver’s license is suspended under
this section shall be issued a driver’s license under R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period of the
suspension.
(F) The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial responsibility as defined in R.C.
§ 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any
other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to § 130.99(G) or R.C.
§ 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision
that was the direct and proximate result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during or after
committing the offense that is a misdemeanor of the first degree under this section for which the offender
is sentenced.
(G) As used in this section:
ELECTRONIC MONITORING. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
EQUIVALENT OFFENSE. Means any of the following:
(a) A violation of a municipal ordinance, law of another state or law of the United States
that is substantially equivalent to division (A) of this section; or
(b) A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially equivalent to division
(A) of this section.
JAIL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
MANDATORY JAIL TERM. Means the mandatory term in jail of three, ten or 30 consecutive
days that must be imposed under division (B)(1), (B)(2) or (B)(3) of this section upon an offender
convicted of a violation of division (A) of this section and in relation to which all of the following apply:
(a) Except as specifically authorized under this section, the term must be served in a jail;
and
(b) Except as specifically authorized under this section, the term cannot be suspended,
reduced or otherwise modified pursuant to any provision of the Ohio Revised Code.
(R.C. § 4510.14)
56 Madeira - Traffic Code
(H) It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this section that the alleged
offender drove under suspension, without a valid permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or
in violation of a restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(R.C. § 4510.04) (1985 Code, § 71.17)
Statutory reference:
Immobilization of vehicle; impoundment of license plates; criminal forfeiture of vehicle, see
 R.C. § 4510.161
§ 71.30 DRIVING UNDER FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY LAW SUSPENSION OR
CANCELLATION.
(A) No person, whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license or temporary instruction permit or
nonresident’s operating privilege has been suspended or canceled pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4509, shall
operate any motor vehicle within this municipality, or knowingly permit any motor vehicle owned by
the person to be operated by another person in the municipality, during the period of the suspension or
cancellation, except as specifically authorized by R.C. Chapter 4509. No person shall operate a motor
vehicle within this municipality, or knowingly permit any motor vehicle owned by the person to be
operated by another person in the municipality, during the period in which the person is required by
R.C. § 4509.45 to file and maintain proof of financial responsibility for a violation of R.C. § 4509.101,
unless proof of financial responsibility is maintained with respect to that vehicle.
(B) No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property
used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking in this municipality if the person’s driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or temporary instruction permit or nonresident operating privilege has
been suspended pursuant to R.C. § 4509.37 or 4509.40 for nonpayment of a judgment.
(C) Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a non-certified copy of the law
enforcement automated data system report or a non-certified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles that shows the name, date of birth and Social Security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (A) or (B) of this section may be admitted into evidence as prima facie evidence that
the license of the person was under either a financial responsibility law suspension at the time of the
alleged violation of division (A) of this section or a nonpayment of judgment suspension at the time of
the alleged violation of division (B) of this section. The person charged with a violation of division (A)
or (B) of this section may offer evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.
(D) Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of driving under financial responsibility
law suspension or cancellation and shall be punished as provided in this divisions (D). Whoever violates
division (B) of this section is guilty of driving under a nonpayment of judgment suspension and shall be
punished as provided in this division (D).
(1) Except as otherwise provided in this division (D)(2) of this section, the offense is an
unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be
Licensing Provisions 57
sentenced pursuant to § 130.18, § 130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall
not be sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community residential sanction
pursuant to § 130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding § 130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C.
§ 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to $1,000; and, notwithstanding § 130.99(F)(1)(c) and
R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant to § 130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C)
to serve a term of community service of up to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term
of community service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C.
§ 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
(2) If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously was convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of this section, or any combination of two violations of this section,
R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense
is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4510.16)
(E) (1) It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this section that the alleged
offender drove under suspension, without a valid permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or
in violation of a restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(2) It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this section that the order of
suspension resulted from the failure of the alleged offender to respond to a financial responsibility
random verification request under R.C. § 4509.101(A)(3)(c) and that, at the time of the initial financial
responsibility random verification request, the alleged offender was in compliance with R.C.
§ 4509.101(A)(1) as shown by proof of financial responsibility that was in effect at the time of that
request.
(R.C. § 4510.04) (1985 Code, § 71.18)
Statutory reference:
Immobilization of vehicle; impoundment of license plates; criminal forfeiture of vehicle, see
 R.C. § 4510.161
§ 71.31 FAILURE TO REINSTATE LICENSE.
(A) No person whose driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit
or nonresident’s operating privilege has been suspended shall operate any motor vehicle upon a public
road or highway or any public or private property after the suspension has expired unless the person has
complied with all license reinstatement requirements imposed by the court, the Bureau of Motor Vehicles
or another provision of the Ohio Revised Code.
(B) Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a non-certified copy of the law
enforcement automated data system report or a non-certified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles that shows the name, date of birth and Social Security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (A) of this section may be admitted into evidence as prima facie evidence that the
58 Madeira - Traffic Code
license of the person had not been reinstated by the person at the time of the alleged violation of division
(A) of this section. The person charged with a violation of division (A) of this section may offer evidence
to rebut this prima facie evidence.
(C) Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to reinstate a license, and shall be punished as
follows.
(1) Except as provided in division (C)(2) of this section, whoever violates this section is guilty
of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be
sentenced pursuant to § 130.18, § 130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall
not be sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community residential sanction
pursuant to § 130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding § 130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C.
§ 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to $1,000; and, notwithstanding § 130.99(F)(1)(c) and
R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant to § 130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C)
to serve a term of community service of up to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term
of community service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C.
§ 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
(2) If, within three years of a violation of division (A) of this section, the offender previously
has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of two or more violations of this section, R.C. § 4510.21 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(3) In all cases, the court may impose upon the offender a class seven suspension of the
offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
driver’s license or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
(R.C. § 4510.21)
(D) It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this section that the alleged
offender drove under suspension, without a valid permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or
in violation of a restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(R.C. § 4510.04) (1985 Code, § 71.19)
MOTOR VEHICLE LICENSE TAX
§ 71.45 LEVY OF ANNUAL TAX.
(A) There is hereby levied an annual license tax upon the operation of motor vehicles on the public
roads or highways pursuant to R.C. § 4504.172, for the purposes of paying the costs and expenses of
enforcing and administering the tax provided for in this section; and to provide additional revenue for
the purposes set forth in R.C. § 4504.06; and to supplement revenue already available for such purposes.
Licensing Provisions 59
(B) Such tax shall be at the rate of $5 per motor vehicle on each and every motor vehicle in the
District of Registration which, as defined in R.C. § 4503.10, is in the city.
(C) As used in this subchapter, the term MOTOR VEHICLE means any and all vehicles included
within the definition of motor vehicle in R.C. §§ 4501.01 and 4505.01.
(1985 Code, § 71.25) (Ord. 87-36, passed 9-8-1987)
§ 71.46 DURATION OF TAX.
The tax imposed by this subchapter shall apply to and be in effect for the registration year
commencing January l, 1988 and shall continue in effect and application during each registration year
thereafter.
(1985 Code, § 71.26) (Ord. 87-36, passed 9-8-1987)
§ 71.47 PAYMENT OF TAX.
The tax imposed by this subchapter shall be paid to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles of the State of
Ohio or to a Deputy Registrar at the time application for registration of a motor vehicle is made as
provided in R.C. § 4503.10.
(1985 Code, § 71.27) (Ord. 87-36, passed 9-8-1987)
§ 71.48 DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS.
All moneys derived from the tax hereinbefore levied shall be used by the city for the purposes
specified in this subchapter.
(1985 Code, § 71.28) (Ord. 87-36, passed 9-8-1987)
COMMERCIAL DRIVER’S LICENSES
§ 71.60 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
ALCOHOL CONCENTRATION. The concentration of alcohol in a person’s blood, breath or urine.
When expressed as a percentage, it means grams of alcohol per the following: 100 milliliters of whole
blood, blood serum or blood plasma; 210 liters of breath; or 100 milliliters of urine.
60 Madeira - Traffic Code
COMMERCIAL DRIVER’S LICENSE. A license issued in accordance with R.C. Chapter 4506
that authorizes an individual to drive a commercial motor vehicle.
COMMERCIAL DRIVER’S LICENSE INFORMATION SYSTEM. The information system
established pursuant to the requirements of the Commercial Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1986, 100 Stat.
3207-171, 49 U.S.C. App. 2701.
COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE. Except when used in R.C. § 4506.25, any motor vehicle
designed or used to transport persons or property that meets any of the following qualifications:
(1) Any combination of vehicles with a combined gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 pounds
or more, provided that the gross vehicle weight rating of the vehicle or vehicles being towed is in excess
of 10,000 pounds;
(2) Any single vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 pounds or more, or any
such vehicle towing a vehicle having a gross vehicle weight rating that is not in excess of 10,000 pounds;
(3) Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles that is not a Class A or Class B vehicle, but
is designed to transport 16 or more passengers including the driver;
(4) Any school bus with a gross vehicle weight rating of less than 26,001 pounds that is
designed to transport fewer than 16 passengers including the driver;
(5) Is transporting hazardous materials for which placarding is required under 49 C.F.R. Part
172, Subpart F, as amended; or
(6) Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles that is designed to be operated and to travel
on a public street or highway and is considered by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration to
be a commercial motor vehicle, including but not limited to a motorized crane, a vehicle whose function
is to pump cement, a rig for drilling wells and a portable crane.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Includes all of the following:
(1) Any substance classified as a controlled substance under the Controlled Substances Act, 80
Stat. 1242 (1970), 21 U.S.C. § 802(6), as amended;
(2) Any substance included in Schedules I through V of 21 C.F.R. Part 1308, as amended; and
(3) Any drug of abuse.
CONVICTION. An unvacated adjudication of guilt or a determination that a person has violated
or failed to comply with the law in a court of original jurisdiction or an authorized administrative
tribunal, an unvacated forfeiture of bail or collateral deposited to secure the person’s appearance in court,
Licensing Provisions 61
a plea of guilty or nolo contendere accepted by the court, the payment of a fine or court cost, or violation
of a condition of release without bail, regardless of whether or not the penalty is rebated, suspended or
probated.
DISQUALIFICATION. Means any of the following:
(1) The suspension, revocation or cancellation of a person’s privileges to operate a commercial
motor vehicle;
(2) Any withdrawal of a person’s privileges to operate a commercial motor vehicle as the result
of a violation of state or local law relating to motor vehicle traffic control other than parking, vehicle
weight or vehicle defect violations; or
(3) A determination by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration that a person is not
qualified to operate a commercial motor vehicle under 49 C.F.R. Part 391.
DOWNGRADE. Any of the following, as applicable:
(1) A change in the commercial driver’s license holder’s self-certified status as described in
R.C. § 4506.10(A)(2);
(2) A change to a lesser class of vehicle; or
(3) Removal of commercial driver’s license privileges from the individual’s driver’s license.
DRIVE. To drive, operate or be in physical control of a motor vehicle.
DRIVER. Any person who drives, operates or is in physical control of a commercial motor vehicle
or is required to have a commercial driver’s license.
DRIVER’S LICENSE. A license issued by the Bureau of Motor Vehicles that authorizes an
individual to drive.
DRUG OF ABUSE. Any controlled substance, dangerous drug as defined in R.C. § 4729.01, or
over-the-counter medication that, when taken in quantities exceeding the recommended dosage, can result
in impairment of judgment or reflexes.
ELECTRONIC DEVICE. Includes a cellular telephone, a personal digital assistant, a pager, a
computer and any other device used to input, write, send, receive or read text.
ELIGIBLE UNIT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT. A village, township or county that has a
population of not more than 3,000 persons according to the most recent federal census.
62 Madeira - Traffic Code
EMPLOYER. Any person, including the federal government, any state and a political subdivision
of any state, that owns or leases a commercial motor vehicle or assigns a person to drive such a motor
vehicle.
ENDORSEMENT. An authorization on a person’s commercial driver’s license that is required to
permit the person to operate a specified type of commercial motor vehicle.
FARM TRUCK. A truck controlled and operated by a farmer for use in the transportation to or
from a farm, for a distance of not more than 150 miles, of products of the farm, including livestock and
its products, poultry and its products, floricultural and horticultural products, and in the transportation
to the farm, from a distance of not more than 150 miles, of supplies for the farm, including tile, fence
and every other thing or commodity used in agricultural, floricultural, horticultural, livestock and poultry
production, and livestock, poultry and other animals and things used for breeding, feeding or other
purposes connected with the operation of the farm, when the truck is operated in accordance with this
definition and is not used in the operations of a motor carrier, as defined in R.C. § 4923.01.
FATALITY. The death of a person as the result of a motor vehicle accident occurring not more than
365 days prior to the date of death.
FELONY. Any offense under federal or state law that is punishable by death or imprisonment for
a term exceeding one year and includes any offense specifically classified as a felony under the law of
this state, regardless of the penalty that may be imposed.
FOREIGN JURISDICTION. Any jurisdiction other than a state.
GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING. The value specified by the manufacturer as the maximum
loaded weight of a single or a combination vehicle. The gross vehicle weight rating of a combination
vehicle is the gross vehicle weight rating of the power unit plus the gross vehicle weight rating of each
towed unit.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any material that has been designated as hazardous under 49 U.S.C.
§ 5103 and is required to be placarded under 49 C.F.R. Part 172, Subpart F or any quantity of a material
listed as a select agent or toxin in 42 C.F.R. Part 73, as amended.
IMMINENT HAZARD. The existence of a condition that presents a substantial likelihood that
death, serious illness, severe personal injury or a substantial endangerment to health, property or the
environment may occur before the reasonably foreseeable completion date of a formal proceeding begun
to lessen the risk of death, illness, injury or endangerment.
MEDICAL VARIANCE. One of the following received by a driver from the Federal Motor Carrier
Safety Administration that allows the driver to be issued a medical certificate:
(1) An exemption letter permitting operation of a commercial motor vehicle under 49 C.F.R.
Part 381, Subpart C or 49 C.F.R. § 391.64; or
Licensing Provisions 63
(2) A skill performance evaluation certificate permitting operation of a commercial motor
vehicle pursuant to 49 C.F.R. § 391.49.
MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer or semitrailer propelled or drawn by
mechanical power used on highways, except that such term does not include a vehicle, machine, tractor,
trailer or semitrailer operated exclusively on a rail.
OUT-OF-SERVICE ORDER. A declaration by an authorized enforcement officer of a federal,
state, local, Canadian or Mexican jurisdiction declaring that the driver, commercial motor vehicle or
commercial motor carrier operation is out of service as defined in 49 C.F.R. § 390.5.
PEACE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01
PORTABLE TANK. A liquid or gaseous packaging designed primarily to be loaded onto or
temporarily attached to a vehicle and equipped with skids, mountings or accessories to facilitate handling
of the tank by mechanical means.
PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01(E)(1) and (E)(3).
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Includes every vehicle that is defined as a recreational vehicle in
R.C. § 4501.01 and is used exclusively for purposes other than engaging in business for profit.
RESIDENCE. Any person’s residence determined in accordance with standards prescribed in the
rules adopted by the Registrar.
SCHOOL BUS. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
SERIOUS TRAFFIC VIOLATION. Any of the following:
(1) A conviction arising from a single charge of operating a commercial motor vehicle in
violation of any provision of R.C. § 4506.03;
(2) A violation while operating a commercial motor vehicle of a law of this state, or any
municipal ordinance or county or township resolution prohibiting texting while driving, or any other
substantially similar law of another state or political subdivision of another state; or
(3) A conviction arising from the operation of any motor vehicle that involves any of the
following:
(a) A single charge of any speed in excess of the posted speed limit by 15 mph or more;
(b) Violations of R.C. § 4511.20 or R.C. § 4511.201 or any substantially equivalent
ordinance or resolution, or of any substantially equivalent law of another state or political subdivision
of another state;
64 Madeira - Traffic Code
(c) Violation of a law of this state or an ordinance or resolution relating to traffic control,
other than a parking violation, or of any substantially equivalent law of another state or political
subdivision of another state, that results in a fatal accident;
(d) Violation of R.C. § 4506.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or
county or township resolution, or of any substantially equivalent law of another state or political
subdivision of another state, that involves the operation of a commercial motor vehicle without a valid
commercial driver’s license with the proper class or endorsement for the specific vehicle group being
operated or for the passengers or type of cargo being transported;
(e) Violation of R.C. § 4506.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or
county or township resolution, or of any substantially equivalent law of another state or political
subdivision of another state, that involves the operation of a commercial motor vehicle without a valid
commercial driver’s license being in the person’s possession;
(f) Violation of R.C. § 4511.33 or R.C. § 4511.34, or any municipal ordinance or county
or township resolution substantially equivalent to either of those sections, or any substantially equivalent
law of another state or political subdivision of another state; or
(g) Violation of any other law of this state or an ordinance or resolution relating to traffic
control, other than a parking violation, that is determined to be a serious traffic violation by the United
States Secretary of Transportation and the Ohio Director of Public Safety designates as such by rule.
STATE. A state of the United States and includes the District of Columbia.
TANK VEHICLE. Any commercial motor vehicle that is designed to transport any liquid and has
a maximum capacity greater than 119 gallons or is designed to transport gaseous materials and has a
water capacity greater than 1,000 pounds within a tank that is either permanently or temporarily attached
to the vehicle or its chassis. The term does not include any of the following:
(1) Any portable tank having a rated capacity of less than 1,000 gallons;
(2) Tanks used exclusively as a fuel tank for the motor vehicle to which it is attached;
(3) An empty storage container tank that is not designed for transportation and that is readily
distinguishable from a transportation tank; or
(4) Ready-mix concrete mixers.
TESTER. Means a person or entity acting pursuant to a valid agreement entered into pursuant to
R.C. § 4506.09(B).
TEXTING. Manually entering alphanumeric text into, or reading text from, an electronic device.
TEXTING includes short message service (SMS), email, instant messaging, a command or request to
Licensing Provisions 65
access a world wide web page, or engaging in any other form of electronic text retrieval or entry, for
present or future communication. TEXTING does not include the following:
(1) Reading, selecting or entering a telephone number, an extension number or voicemail
retrieval codes and commands into an electronic device for the purpose of initiating or receiving a
telephone call or using voice commands to initiate or receive a telephone call; or
(2) Inputting, selecting or reading information on a global positioning system or navigation
system.
TEXTING WHILE DRIVING. Texting while operating a commercial motor vehicle, with the
motor running, including while temporarily stationary because of traffic, a traffic-control device or other
momentary delays, but does not include operating a commercial motor vehicle with or without the motor
running when the driver has moved the vehicle to the side of, or off, a highway and is stopped in a
location where the vehicle can safely remain stationary.
UNITED STATES. The 50 states and the District of Columbia.
UPGRADE. A change in the class of vehicles, endorsements or self-certified status as described
in R.C. § 4506.10(A)(2) that expands the ability of a current commercial driver’s license holder to
operate commercial motor vehicles under this chapter or R.C. Chapter 4506.
VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
(R.C. § 4506.01)
§ 71.61 USE OF ACTUAL GROSS WEIGHT IN LIEU OF RATING.
For purposes of this subchapter, the actual gross weight of a vehicle or combination of vehicles may
be used in lieu of a gross vehicle weight rating to determine whether a vehicle or combination of vehicles
qualifies as a commercial motor vehicle if the gross vehicle weight rating specified by the manufacturer
for the vehicle of combination of vehicles is not determinable, or if the manufacturer of the vehicle has
not specified a gross vehicle weight rating.
(R.C. § 4506.011)
§ 71.62 PROHIBITED ACTS.
(A) No person shall do any of the following:
(1) Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having in the person’s possession or otherwise
under the person’s control more than one valid driver’s license issued by this state, any other state or
by a foreign jurisdiction;
66 Madeira - Traffic Code
(2) Drive a commercial motor vehicle on a highway in this municipality in violation of an
out-of-service order while the person’s driving privilege is suspended, revoked or cancelled, or while
the person is subject to disqualification;
(3) Drive a motor vehicle on a highway in the municipality under the authority of a commercial
driver’s license issued by another state or a foreign jurisdiction, after having been a resident of this state
for 30 days or longer; or
(4) Knowingly give false information in any application or certification required by R.C.
§ 4506.07.
(B) The municipality shall give every conviction occurring out of this state and notice of which was
received by the State Department of Public Safety after December 31, 1989, full faith and credit and treat
it for sanctioning purposes under this chapter as though the conviction had occurred in this state.
(R.C. § 4506.04(A), (B))
(C) No person shall drive any commercial motor vehicle for which an endorsement is required
under R.C. § 4506.12 unless the proper endorsement appears on the person’s commercial driver’s
license.
(R.C. § 4506.12(E))
(D) (1) Whoever violates division (A)(1), (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
(2) Whoever violates division (A)(4) of this section is guilty of falsification, a misdemeanor
of the first degree. In addition, the provisions of R.C. § 4507.19 apply.
(R.C. § 4506.04(C))
(3) Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4506.12(F))
§ 71.63 PREREQUISITES TO OPERATION OF COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE.
(A) Except as provided in divisions (B) or (C) of this section, the following shall apply.
(1) No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle on a highway in this municipality unless
the person holds, and has in the person’s possession, a valid commercial driver’s license with proper
endorsements for the motor vehicle being driven, issued by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, a valid
examiner’s commercial driver’s permit issued under R.C. § 4506.13, a valid restricted commercial
driver’s license and waiver for farm-related service industries issued under R.C. § 4506.24, or a valid
commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit issued by the Registrar and is accompanied by
an authorized state driver’s license examiner or tester or a person who has been issued and has in the
person’s immediate possession a current, valid commercial driver’s license with proper endorsements
for the motor vehicle being driven.
Licensing Provisions 67
(2) No person shall be issued a commercial driver’s license until the person surrenders to the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles all valid licenses issued to the person by another jurisdiction recognized by
this state. The Registrar shall report the surrender of a license to the issuing authority, together with
information that a license is now issued in this state. The Registrar shall destroy any such license that
is not returned to the issuing authority.
(3) No person who has been a resident of this state for 30 days or longer shall drive a
commercial motor vehicle under the authority of a commercial driver’s license issued in another
jurisdiction.
(B) Nothing in division (A) of this section applies to any qualified person when engaged in the
operation of any of the following:
(1) A farm truck;
(2) Fire equipment for a Fire Department, volunteer or nonvolunteer fire company, fire district
or joint fire district;
(3) A public safety vehicle used to provide transportation or emergency medical service for ill
or injured persons;
(4) A recreational vehicle;
(5) A commercial motor vehicle within the boundaries of an eligible unit of local government,
if the person is employed by the eligible unit of local government and is operating the commercial motor
vehicle for the purpose of removing snow or ice from a roadway by plowing, sanding or salting, but only
if either the employee who holds a commercial driver’s license issued under R.C. Chapter 4506 and
ordinarily operates a commercial motor vehicle for these purposes is unable to operate the vehicle, or
the employing eligible unit of local government determines that a snow or ice emergency exists that
requires additional assistance;
(6) A vehicle operated for military purposes by any member or uniformed employee of the
armed forces of the United States or their reserve components, including the Ohio National Guard. This
exception does not apply to United States reserve technicians;
(7) A commercial motor vehicle that is operated for nonbusiness purposes. OPERATED FOR
NONBUSINESS PURPOSES means that the commercial motor vehicle is not used in commerce as
commerce is defined in 49 C.F.R. § 383.5, as amended, and is not regulated by the Public Utilities
Commission pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4905, 4921 or 4923;
(8) A motor vehicle that is designed primarily for the transportation of goods and not persons,
while that motor vehicle is being used for the occasional transportation of personal property by
individuals not for compensation and not in the furtherance of a commercial enterprise;
68 Madeira - Traffic Code
(9) A police SWAT team vehicle; or
(10) A police vehicle used to transport prisoners.
(C) Nothing contained in division (B)(5) of this section shall be construed as preempting or
superseding any law, rule or regulation of this state concerning the safe operation of commercial motor
vehicles.
(R.C. § 4506.03(A) - (C))
(D) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a person may drive a commercial motor vehicle
on a highway in this municipality if all of the following conditions are met:
(1) The person has a valid commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license
temporary instruction permit issued by any state or jurisdiction in accordance with the minimum
standards adopted by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration under the Commercial Motor
Vehicle Safety Act of 1986, 100 Stat. 3207-171, 49 U.S.C. App., for issuance of commercial driver’s
licenses;
(2) The person’s commercial driver’s license or permit is not suspended, revoked or cancelled;
(3) The person is not disqualified from driving a commercial motor vehicle;
(4) The person is not subject to an out-of-service order; and
(5) The person is medically certified as physically qualified to operate a commercial motor
vehicle in accordance with this chapter or R.C. Chapter 4506 and is able to verify the medical
certification when on duty as follows.
(a) Prior to January 30, 2012, the person shall have in the person’s possession the original
or copy of the person’s current medical examiner’s certificate when on duty.
(b) On or after January 30, 2012:
1. A person who submitted a medical examiner’s certificate to the Registrar in
accordance with R.C. § 4506.10(A)(2) and whose medical certification information is maintained in the
commercial driver’s license information system is not required to have the medical examiner’s certificate
in the person’s possession when on duty;
2. A person whose medical certification information is not maintained in the
commercial driver’s license information system is required to have in the person’s possession when on
duty the original or copy of a current medical examiner’s certificate that was issued prior to January 30,
2012, except that after January 30, 2014, such person is required to have in the person’s possession when
on duty, the original or a copy of the current medical examiner’s certificate that was submitted to the
Licensing Provisions 69
Registrar, but the person may operate a commercial motor vehicle with such proof of medical
certification for not more than 15 days after the date the current medical examiner’s certificate was issued
to the person; and
3. A person who has a medical variance shall have in the person’s possession the
original or copy of the medical variance documentation at all times while on duty.
(R.C. § 4506.05(A))
(E) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. §§ 4506.03(D), 4506.05(B))
§ 71.64 PHYSICAL QUALIFICATION TO OPERATE COMMERCIAL MOTOR
VEHICLES.
(A) No person who holds a valid commercial driver’s license shall drive a commercial motor vehicle
unless the person is physically qualified to do so.
(1) Prior to January 30, 2012, each person who drives or expects to drive a commercial motor
vehicle in interstate or foreign commerce or is otherwise subject to 49 C.F.R. §§ 391 et seq., as
amended, shall certify to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles at the time of application for a commercial
driver’s license that the person is in compliance with these standards. Any person who is not subject to
49 C.F.R. §§ 391 et seq., as amended, shall also certify at the time of application that the person is not
subject to these standards.
(2) Beginning on January 30, 2012, any person applying for a commercial driver’s license,
renewing of a commercial driver’s license or transferring a commercial driver’s license from out of state
shall self-certify to the Registrar for purposes of 49 C.F.R. § 383.71 one of the following in regard to
the applicant’s operation of a commercial motor vehicle, as applicable:
(a) 1. If the applicant operates or expects to operate a commercial motor vehicle in
interstate or foreign commerce and is subject to and meets the requirements under 49 C.F.R. Part 391,
the applicant shall self-certify that the applicant is non-excepted interstate and shall provide the Registrar
with the original or a copy of a medical examiner’s certificate and each subsequently issued medical
examiner’s certificate prepared by a qualified medical examiner to maintain a medically certified status
on the applicant’s commercial driver licensing system driver record; or
2. If the applicant operates or expects to operate a commercial motor vehicle in
interstate commerce, but engages in transportation or operations excepted under 49 C.F.R. §§ 390.3(f),
391.2, 391.68 or 398.3 from all or parts of the qualification requirements of 49 C.F.R. Part 391, the
applicant shall self-certify that the applicant is excepted interstate and is not required to obtain a medical
examiner’s certificate.
70 Madeira - Traffic Code
(b)1. If the applicant operates only in intrastate commerce and is subject to state driver
qualification requirements, the applicant shall self-certify that the applicant is non-excepted intrastate;
or
2. If the applicant operates only in intrastate commerce and is excepted from all or
parts of the state driver qualification requirements, the applicant shall self-certify that the applicant is
excepted intrastate.
(3) Notwithstanding the expiration date on a person’s commercial driver’s license, every
commercial driver’s license holder shall provide the Registrar with the certification required by this
section, on or after January 30, 2012, but prior to January 30, 2014.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4506.10(A), (E))
§ 71.65 CRIMINAL OFFENSES.
(A) No person who holds a commercial driver’s license or operates a motor vehicle for which a
commercial driver’s license is required shall do any of the following:
(1) Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having a measurable or detectable amount of
alcohol or of a controlled substance in the person’s blood, breath or urine;
(2) Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol concentration of 0.04% or more
by whole blood or breath;
(3) Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol concentration of .048% or more
by blood serum or blood plasma;
(4) Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol concentration of .056% or more
by urine;
(5) Drive a motor vehicle while under the influence of a controlled substance;
(6) Drive a motor vehicle in violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a municipal OVI ordinance as
defined in R.C. § 4511.181;
(7) Use a vehicle in the commission of a felony;
(8) Refuse to submit to a test under R.C. § 4506.17 or R.C. § 4511.191, or any substantially
similar municipal ordinance;
(9) Operate a commercial motor vehicle while the person’s commercial driving privileges are
revoked, suspended, cancelled or disqualified;
Licensing Provisions 71
(10) Cause a fatality through the negligent operation of a commercial motor vehicle, including
but not limited to the offenses of aggravated vehicular homicide, vehicular homicide and vehicular
manslaughter;
(11) Fail to stop after an accident in violation of R.C. §§ 4549.02 to 4549.03, or any
substantially similar municipal ordinance;
(12) Drive a commercial motor vehicle in violation of any provision of R.C. §§ 4511.61
through 4511.63 or any federal or local law or ordinance pertaining to railroad-highway grade crossings;
(13) Use a motor vehicle in the commission of a felony involving the manufacture, distribution
or dispensing of a controlled substance as defined in R.C. § 3719.01 or the possession with intent to
manufacture, distribute or dispense a controlled substance.
(R.C. § 4506.15(A))
(B) No person shall refuse to immediately surrender the person’s commercial driver’s license to a
peace officer when required to do so by R.C. § 4506.17.
(R.C. § 4506.17(H))
(C) (1) Within the jurisdictional limits of the appointing authority, any peace officer shall stop and
detain any person found violating division (A) of this section without obtaining a warrant. When there
is reasonable ground to believe that a violation of division (A) of this section has been committed and
a test or tests of the person’s whole blood, blood plasma or blood serum, breath or urine is necessary,
the peace officer shall take the person to an appropriate place for testing. If a person refuses to submit
to a test after being warned as provided in R.C. § 4506.17(C), or submits to a test that discloses the
presence of a controlled substance or an alcohol concentration of 0.04% or more by whole blood or
breath, an alcohol concentration of .048% or more by blood serum or blood plasma, or an alcohol
concentration of .056% or more by urine, the peace officer shall require that the person immediately
surrender the person’s commercial driver’s license to the peace officer.
(2) As used in this division (C), JURISDICTIONAL LIMITS means the limits within which
a peace officer may arrest and detain a person without a warrant under R.C. § 2935.03, except that the
Superintendent and the troopers of the State Highway Patrol may stop and detain, without warrant, any
person who, in the presence of the Superintendent or any trooper, is engaged in a violation of any of the
provisions of this subchapter or R.C. Chapter 4506.
(R.C. § 4506.23)
(D) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. §§ 4506.15(B), 4506.17(N))
Statutory reference:
Alcohol or controlled substance testing, disqualification of drivers, see R.C. § 4506.17
Disqualification of drivers for violations, see R.C. § 4506.16
72 Madeira - Traffic Code
§ 71.66 APPLICATION OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS.
(A) The provisions of 49 C.F.R. Part 383, Subpart C (Notification Requirements and Employer
Responsibilities), as amended, shall apply to all commercial drivers or persons who apply for
employment as commercial drivers. No person shall fail to make a report to the person’s employer as
required by this section.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4506.19)
§ 71.67 EMPLOYMENT OF DRIVERS OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.
(A) Each employer shall require every applicant for employment as a driver of a commercial vehicle
to provide the applicant’s employment history for the ten years preceding the date the employment
application is submitted to the prospective employer. The following information shall be submitted:
(1) A list of the names and addresses of the applicant’s previous employers for which the
applicant was the operator of a commercial motor vehicle;
(2) The dates the applicant was employed by these employers; and
(3) The reason for leaving each of these employers.
(B) No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize any driver employed by the employer to drive
a commercial motor vehicle during any period in which any of the following apply:
(1) The driver’s commercial driver’s license is suspended, revoked or cancelled by any state
or a foreign jurisdiction;
(2) The driver has lost the privilege to drive, or currently is disqualified from driving, a
commercial motor vehicle in any state or foreign jurisdiction;
(3) The driver, the commercial motor vehicle the driver is driving, or the motor carrier
operation is subject to an out-of-service order in any state or a foreign jurisdiction; or
(4) The driver has more than one driver’s license.
(C) No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a commercial motor
vehicle in violation of R.C. § 4506.15.
(D) Whoever violates division (A) or (B) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
Licensing Provisions 73
(E) Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 4506.20)
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no penalty otherwise is provided in the
section that contains the provision violated is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. §§ 4506.99, 4507.99) (1985 Code, § 71.99)
74 Madeira - Traffic Code
CHAPTER 72: TRAFFIC RULES
Section
General Provisions
72.01 Lanes of travel upon roadways
72.02 Driving through safety zone
72.03 Vehicles traveling in opposite directions
72.04 Rules governing overtaking and passing of vehicles
72.05 Permission to overtake and pass on the right
72.06 Driving to left of centerline
72.07 Prohibition against driving upon left side of roadway
72.08 Hazardous zones
72.09 One-way highways and rotary traffic islands
72.10 Rules for driving in marked lanes
72.11 Space between moving vehicles
72.12 Divided roadways
72.13 Rules for turns at intersections
72.14 U-turns and turning in roadway prohibited
72.15 Starting and backing vehicles
72.16 Turn and stop signals
72.17 Hand and arm signals
72.18 Unnecessary noise
Right-of-Way
72.20 Right-of-way at intersections
72.21 Right-of-way when turning left
72.22 Right-of-way at through highways; stop signs; yield signs
72.23 Stop at sidewalk area; stop signs on private roads and driveways
72.24 Right-of-way on public highway
72.25 Pedestrian on sidewalk has right-of-way
72.26 Right-of-way of public safety vehicles
72.27 Funeral procession has right-of-way
72.28 Pedestrians yield right-of-way to public safety vehicle
72.29 Pedestrian on crosswalk has right-of-way
72.30 Right-of-way yielded to blind person
75
76 Madeira - Traffic Code
72.31 Right-of-way yielded by pedestrian
72.32 Intoxicated or drugged pedestrian hazard on highway
72.33 Driver’s duties upon approaching intersection with ambiguous or non-working traffic
signal
Pedestrians
72.35 Pedestrians
72.36 Pedestrian walking along highway
72.37 Prohibition against soliciting rides; riding on outside of vehicle
72.38 Pedestrian on bridge or railroad crossing
72.39 Persons operating motorized wheelchairs
72.40 Operation of electric personal assistive mobility devices
Grade Crossings
72.45 Stop signs at grade crossings
72.46 Driving vehicle across railroad grade crossing
72.47 Vehicles required to stop at grade crossings
72.48 Slow-moving vehicles or equipment crossing railroad tracks
Through Highways
72.50 Through highways
Prohibitions
72.55 Obstruction and interference affecting view and control of driver
72.56 Occupying travel trailer while in motion
72.57 Driving upon closed highway prohibited
72.58 Driving upon sidewalk area or paths exclusively for bicycles
72.59 Obstructing passage of other vehicles
72.60 Following an emergency or public vehicle prohibited; approaching stationary public
safety vehicle with caution
72.61 Driving over unprotected fire hose
72.62 Prohibition against placing injurious material on highway
72.63 Assemblages
72.64 Transporting child not in child restraint system prohibited
72.64.1 Prohibition against depositing litter from motor vehicle
72.64.2 Operating motor vehicle while wearing earphones or earplugs
72.64.3 Use of engine brakes prohibited
72.64.4 Chauffeured limousines and livery services
72.64.5 Operating traction engine upon improved highway
72.64.6 Cracking exhaust noises; peeling out
72.64.7 Shortcutting across private property
Traffic Rules 77
72.64.8 Texting while driving prohibited
72.64.9 Use of electronic wireless communication devices by minors or probationary drivers
while driving prohibited
School Buses
72.65 Regulations concerning school buses
72.65.1 Violation of regulations; report; investigation; citation; warning
72.66 Restrictions on the operation of school buses
72.67 School bus inspection
72.68 School bus not used for school purposes
72.69 Licensing by Department of Public Safety
72.70 Registration and identification of school buses
72.71 School bus marking
72.72 Flashing red light signal lamps
72.73 Occupant restraining device for operator
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 72.01 LANES OF TRAVEL UPON ROADWAYS.
(A) Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon the right half of the
roadway, except as follows:
(1) When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction, or when
making a left turn under the rules governing such movements;
(2) When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left of the center of the
highway; provided, any person so doing shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper
direction upon the unobstructed portion of the highway within such distance as to constitute an immediate
hazard;
(3) When driving upon a roadway divided into three or more marked lanes for traffic under
the rules applicable thereon;
(4) When driving upon a roadway designated and posted with signs for one-way traffic; and
(5) When otherwise directed by a police officer or traffic-control device.
78 Madeira - Traffic Code
(B) (1) Upon all roadways any vehicle proceeding at less than the prevailing and lawful speed of
traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall be driven in the right-hand lane
then available for traffic, and far enough to the right to allow passing by faster vehicles if such passing
is safe and reasonable, except under any of the following circumstances:
(a) When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction;
(b) When preparing for a left turn; or
(c) When the driver must necessarily drive in a lane other than the right-hand lane to
continue on the driver’s intended route.
(2) Nothing in division (B)(1) of this section requires a driver of a slower vehicle to
compromise the driver’s safety to allow overtaking by a faster vehicle.
(C) Upon any roadway having four or more lanes for moving traffic and providing for two-way
movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to the left of the centerline of the roadway, except when
authorized by official traffic-control devices designating certain lanes to the left of the center of the
roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use the lanes, or except as permitted under division
(A)(2) of this section. This division (C) shall not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of the
centerline in making a left turn into or from an alley, private road or driveway.
(D) Except as otherwise provided in this division (D), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.25) (1985 Code, § 72.01)
§ 72.02 DRIVING THROUGH SAFETY ZONE.
(A) No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety zone.
(B) Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.60)
Traffic Rules 79
§ 72.03 VEHICLES TRAVELING IN OPPOSITE DIRECTIONS.
(A) Operators of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to the right, and
upon roadways having width for not more than one line of traffic in each direction, each operator shall
give to the other one-half of the main traveled portion of the roadway or as nearly one-half as is
reasonably possible.
(B) Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.26) (1985 Code, § 72.03) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977)
§ 72.04 RULES GOVERNING OVERTAKING AND PASSING OF VEHICLES.
(A) The following rules govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles proceeding in the same
direction.
(1) The operator of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall,
except as provided in division (A)(3) of this section, signal to the vehicle to be overtaken, shall pass to
the left thereof at a safe distance, and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely
clear of the overtaken vehicle.
(2) Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the operator of an overtaken
vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle at the latter’s audible signal, and
the operator shall not increase the speed of the operator’s vehicle until completely passed by the
overtaking vehicle.
(3) The operator of a vehicle overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction on a divided highway as defined in R.C. § 4511.35, a limited access highway as defined in
R.C. § 5511.02, or a highway with four or more traffic lanes is not required to signal audibly to the
vehicle being overtaken and passed.
(B) Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.27) (1985 Code, § 72.04) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977)
80 Madeira - Traffic Code
§ 72.05 PERMISSION TO OVERTAKE AND PASS ON THE RIGHT.
(A) The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass on the right of another vehicle only under the
following conditions:
(1) When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn; or
(2) Upon a roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for two or more lines of
vehicles moving lawfully in the direction being traveled by the overtaking vehicle.
(B) The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle only under conditions permitting
the movement in safety. The movement shall not be made by driving off the roadway.
(C) Except as otherwise provided in this division (C), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.28) (1985 Code, § 72.05) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977)
§ 72.06 DRIVING TO LEFT OF CENTERLINE.
(A) No vehicle shall be driven to the left of the center of the roadway in overtaking and passing
traffic proceeding in the same direction, unless the left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming
traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit the overtaking and passing to be completely made without
interfering with the safe operation of any traffic approaching from the opposite direction or any traffic
overtaken. In every event, the overtaking vehicle must return to an authorized lane of travel as soon as
practicable, and in the event the passing movement involves the use of a lane authorized for the traffic
approaching from the opposite direction, before coming within 200 feet of any approaching vehicle.
(B) Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.29) (1985 Code, § 72.06) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977)
§ 72.07 PROHIBITION AGAINST DRIVING UPON LEFT SIDE OF ROADWAY.
(A) No vehicle shall be driven upon the left side of the roadway under the following conditions:
Traffic Rules 81
(1) When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the highway, where the
operator’s view is obstructed within such a distance as to create a hazard in the event traffic might
approach from the opposite direction;
(2) When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet of any bridge, viaduct or
tunnel; or
(3) When approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any intersection or railroad grade
crossing.
(B) This section does not apply to vehicles upon a one-way roadway, upon a roadway where traffic
is lawfully directed to be driven to the left side, or under the conditions described in R.C.
§ 4511.25(A)(2) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(C) Except as otherwise provided in this division (C), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.30) (1985 Code, § 72.07)
§ 72.08 HAZARDOUS ZONES.
(A) The Department of Transportation may determine those portions of any state highway where
overtaking and passing other traffic or driving to the left of the center or centerline of the roadway would
be especially hazardous, and may, by appropriate signs or markings on the highway, indicate the
beginning and end of such zones. When signs or markings are in place and clearly visible, every operator
of a vehicle shall obey the directions of the signs or markings, notwithstanding the distances set out in
R.C. § 4511.30.
(B) Division (A) of this section does not apply when all of the following apply:
(1) The slower vehicle is proceeding at less than half the speed of the speed limit applicable
to that location;
(2) The faster vehicle is capable of overtaking and passing the slower vehicle without exceeding
the speed limit; and
(3) There is sufficient clear sight distance to the left of the center or centerline of the roadway
to meet the overtaking and passing provisions of R.C. § 4511.29, considering the speed of the slower
vehicle.
82 Madeira - Traffic Code
(C) Except as otherwise provided in this division (C), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.31) (1985 Code, § 72.08)
§ 72.09 ONE-WAY HIGHWAYS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS.
(A) (1) Upon a roadway designated and posted with signs for one-way traffic, a vehicle shall be
driven only in the direction designated.
(2) A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only to the right of the rotary
traffic island.
(B) Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.32) (1985 Code, § 72.09)
§ 72.10 RULES FOR DRIVING IN MARKED LANES.
(A) Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for traffic, or
wherever within the municipality traffic is lawfully moving in two or more substantially continuous lines
in the same direction, the following rules apply.
(1) A vehicle shall be driven, as nearly as is practicable, entirely within a single lane or line
of traffic and shall not be moved from the lane or line until the driver has first ascertained that the
movement can be made with safety.
(2) Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes and provides for the two-way movement
of traffic, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane, except when overtaking and passing another
vehicle where the roadway is clearly visible and the center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance,
or when preparing for a left turn, or where the center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic
moving in the direction the vehicle is proceeding, and is posted with signs to give notice of such
allocation.
Traffic Rules 83
(3) Official signs may be erected directing specified traffic to use a designated lane or
designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the center of
the roadway, or restricting the use of a particular lane to only buses during certain hours or during all
hours, and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of such signs.
(4) Official traffic-control devices may be installed prohibiting the changing of lanes on sections
of roadway, and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such device.
(B) Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.33) (1985 Code, § 72.10) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977)
§ 72.11 SPACE BETWEEN MOVING VEHICLES.
(A) (1) The operator of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is
reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of the vehicle and the traffic upon and the
condition of the highway.
(2) The driver of any truck, or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle, when traveling upon
a roadway outside a business or residence district, shall maintain a sufficient space, whenever conditions
permit, between the vehicle and another vehicle ahead so an overtaking motor vehicle may enter and
occupy the space without danger. This division (A)(2) does not prevent overtaking and passing nor does
it apply to any lane specially designated for use by trucks.
(3) Motor vehicles being driven upon any roadway outside of a business or residence district
in a caravan or motorcade shall maintain a sufficient space between the vehicles so an overtaking vehicle
may enter and occupy the space without danger. This division (A)(3) shall not apply to funeral
processions.
(B) Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.34) (1985 Code, § 72.11)
84 Madeira - Traffic Code
§ 72.12 DIVIDED ROADWAYS.
(A) Whenever any highway has been divided into two roadways by an intervening space, or by a
physical barrier, or a clearly indicated dividing section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic,
every vehicle shall be driven only upon the right-hand roadway, and no vehicle shall be driven over,
across, or within any dividing space, barrier or section, except through an opening, crossover or
intersection established by public authority. This section does not prohibit the occupancy of the dividing
space, barrier or section for the purpose of an emergency stop, or in compliance with an order of a
police officer.
(B) Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.35) (1985 Code, § 72.12)
§ 72.13 RULES FOR TURNS AT INTERSECTIONS.
(A) The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall be governed by the following
rules.
(1) Approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the
right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
(2) At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both directions on each roadway
entering the intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the
roadway nearest the centerline thereof and by passing to the right of the centerline where it enters the
intersection, and, after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection
to the right of the centerline of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall be
made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection.
(3) At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the
roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection shall approach the
intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel
of the vehicle, and, after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the
intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the left-hand lane of the roadway being entered lawfully
available to traffic moving in that lane.
(B) The Department of Transportation and local authorities may cause markers, buttons or signs
to be placed within or adjacent to intersections, and thereby require and direct that a different course
Traffic Rules 85
from that specified in this section be traveled by vehicles turning at an intersection, and when markers,
buttons or signs are so placed, no operator of a vehicle shall turn the vehicle at an intersection other than
as directed and required by the markers, buttons or signs.
(C) Except as otherwise provided in this division (C), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.36) (1985 Code, § 72.13) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977)
§ 72.14 U-TURNS AND TURNING IN ROADWAY PROHIBITED.
(A) Except as provided in R.C. § 4511.13 and division (B) of this section, no vehicle shall be turned
so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any curve, or upon the approach to or near the crest of
a grade, if such vehicle cannot be seen within 500 feet by the driver of any other vehicle approaching
from either direction.
(B) The driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle, when responding to an emergency
call, may turn the vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction. This division (B) applies only when
the emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle is responding to an emergency call, is equipped with and
displaying at least one flashing, rotating or oscillating light visible under normal atmospheric conditions
from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle, and when the driver of the vehicle is giving an
audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle or bell. This division (B) does not relieve the driver of an
emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons and property upon the highway.
(C) Except as otherwise provided in this division (C), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.37) (1985 Code, § 72.14)
§ 72.15 STARTING AND BACKING VEHICLES.
(A) (1) No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked until the movement can
be made with reasonable safety.
86 Madeira - Traffic Code
(2) Before backing, operators of vehicles shall give ample warning, and while backing they
shall exercise vigilance not to injure person or property on the street or highway.
(3) No person shall back a motor vehicle on a freeway, except:
(a) In a rest area;
(b) In the performance of public works or official duties; and
(c) As a result of an emergency caused by an accident or breakdown of a motor vehicle.
(B) Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.38) (1985 Code, § 72.15)
§ 72.16 TURN AND STOP SIGNALS.
(A) (1) No person shall turn a vehicle or move right or left upon a highway unless and until the
person has exercised due care to ascertain that the movement can be made with reasonable safety, nor
without giving an appropriate signal in the manner hereinafter provided.
(2) When required, a signal of intention to turn or move right or left shall be given
continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the vehicle before turning, except that in
the case of a person operating a bicycle, the signal shall be made not less than one time but is not
required to be continuous. A bicycle operator is not required to make a signal if the bicycle is in a
designated turn lane, and a signal shall not be given when the operator’s hands are needed for the safe
operation of the bicycle.
(3) No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without first giving an
appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear,
when there is opportunity to give a signal.
(4) Any stop or turn signal required by this section shall be given either by means of the hand
and arm, or by signal lights that clearly indicate to both approaching and following traffic the intention
to turn or move right or left, except that any motor vehicle in use on a highway shall be equipped with,
and the required signal shall be given by, signal lights when the distance from the center of the top of
the steering post to the left outside limit of the body, cab or load of such motor vehicle exceeds 24
inches, or when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit of the body
or load thereof exceeds 14 feet, whether a single vehicle or a combination of vehicles.
Traffic Rules 87
(5) The signal lights required by this section shall not be flashed on one side only on a disabled
vehicle, flashed as a courtesy or “do pass” signal to operators of other vehicles approaching from the
rear, nor be flashed on one side only of a parked vehicle except as may be necessary for compliance with
this section.
(B) Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.39) (1985 Code, § 72.16) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977)
§ 72.17 HAND AND ARM SIGNALS.
(A) Except as provided in division (B) of this section, all signals required by the provisions of this
Traffic Code, when given by hand and arm, shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the
following manner, and the signals shall indicate as follows:
(1) Left turn, hand and arm extended horizontally;
(2) Right turn, hand and arm extended upward; and
(3) Stop or decrease speed, hand and arm extended downward.
(B) As an alternative to division (A)(2) of this section, a person operating a bicycle may give a right
turn signal by extending the right hand and arm horizontally and to the right side of the bicycle.
(C) Except as otherwise provided in this division (C), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.40) (1985 Code, § 72.17)
§ 72.18 UNNECESSARY NOISE.
(A) No person shall sound any signaling device in the operation of a vehicle on any highway except
when and to the extent reasonably necessary for the prevention of an accident and except other
reasonable use for purposes of lawful operation in traffic or of reasonable warning or notice of presence
or approach.
88 Madeira - Traffic Code
(B) No person shall create unnecessary noise or sound in the operation or enjoyment of a vehicle
on any highway or public land so as to disturb the peace and quiet of a neighborhood or of any ordinary
pursuit. Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing:
(1) Any noise produced by a cutout, bypass, gutted muffler, straight pipe, pinched tail pipe
whistle, or the retarding or advancing of the timing of the spark shall be deemed unnecessary;
(2) Any noise emanating from the sound system of a motor vehicle, be it removable or
permanent, which is plainly audible from more than 30 feet from that vehicle shall be deemed
unnecessary;
(3) Broadcasting from a public address system, attached in any way to a motor vehicle, without
specific written permission from the City Manager; and
(4) It shall be presumed to be a violation of this section if notice to cease and desist producing
a noise has been given to any person and that person continues to make, cause or permit a noise of
similar intensity and duration. However, such notice shall not be required as an element of an offense
of this section.
(C) No person shall place a vehicle in motion from rest or accelerate a moving vehicle in such a
manner as to create excessive and unnecessary noise or so as to deposit portions of the tires thereof on
the surface of the highway whether from the spinning of the tires against the surface of materials thereon
or from the high number of revolutions of the moving parts of its engine while the vehicle is in low or
intermediate gear or gear range or from any other cause whatever.
(1985 Code, § 72.18) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977; Ord. 99-10, passed 5-10-1999)
RIGHT-OF-WAY
§ 72.20 RIGHT-OF-WAY AT INTERSECTIONS.
(A) When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection from different streets or highways at
approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the
vehicle on the right.
(B) The right-of-way rule declared in division (A) of this section is modified at through highways
and otherwise as stated in this Traffic Code or R.C. Chapter 4511.
(C) Except as otherwise provided in this division (C), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
Traffic Rules 89
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.41) (1985 Code, § 72.20) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977)
§ 72.21 RIGHT-OF-WAY WHEN TURNING LEFT.
(A) The operator of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an intersection or into an alley,
private road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite
direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard.
(B) Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.42) (1985 Code, § 72.21)
§ 72.22 RIGHT-OF-WAY AT THROUGH HIGHWAYS; STOP SIGNS; YIELD SIGNS.
(A) Except when directed to proceed by a law enforcement officer, every driver of a vehicle
approaching a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting
roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering
it. After having stopped, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or
approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time the
driver is moving across or within the intersection or junction of roadways.
(B) The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall slow down to a speed reasonable for the
existing conditions, and if required for safety to stop, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none,
before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then at the point nearest
the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway
before entering it. After slowing, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection
or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time the
driver is moving across or within the intersection or junction of roadways. Whenever a driver is involved
in a collision with a vehicle in the intersection or junction of roadways, after driving past a yield sign
without stopping, the collision shall be prima facie evidence of the driver’s failure to yield the
right-of-way.
(C) Except as otherwise provided in this division (C), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
90 Madeira - Traffic Code
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.43) (1985 Code, § 72.22)
§ 72.23 STOP AT SIDEWALK AREA; STOP SIGNS ON PRIVATE ROADS AND
DRIVEWAYS.
(A) The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, building, private road or driveway within a
business or residence district shall stop the vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto
the sidewalk area extending across the alley, building entrance, road or driveway, or in the event there
is no sidewalk area, shall stop at the point nearest the street to be entered where the driver has a view
of approaching traffic thereon.
(R.C. § 4511.431(A)) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977)
(B) The owner of a private road or driveway located in a private residential area containing 20 or
more dwelling units may erect stop signs at places where the road or driveway intersects with another
private road or driveway in the residential area, in compliance with all of the following requirements:
(1) The stop sign is sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person and meets
the specifications of and is placed in accordance with the manual adopted by the Department of
Transportation pursuant to R.C. § 4511.09; and
(2) The owner has posted a sign at the entrance of the private road or driveway that is in plain
view and clearly informs persons entering the road or driveway that they are entering private property,
stop signs have been posted and must be obeyed, and the signs are enforceable by law enforcement
officers under state law. The sign required by this division (B)(2), where appropriate, may be
incorporated with the sign required by R.C. § 4511.211(A)(2), or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
(C) The provisions of R.C. § 4511.43(A) and R.C. § 4511.46, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, shall be deemed to apply to the driver of a vehicle on a private road or driveway
where a stop sign is placed in accordance with division (B) of this section and to a pedestrian crossing
such a road or driveway at an intersection where a stop sign is in place.
(D) When a stop sign is placed in accordance with division (B) of this section, any law enforcement
officer may apprehend a person found violating the stop sign and may stop and charge the person with
violating the stop sign.
(E) As used in this section, and for the purpose of applying R.C. § 4511.43(A) and R.C. § 4511.46,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, to conduct under this section:
Traffic Rules 91
INTERSECTION.
(a) The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines, or,
if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two private roads or driveways which join one
another at, or approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different
private roads or driveways joining at any other angle may come in conflict.
(b) Where a private road or driveway includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then
every crossing of two roadways of such private roads or driveways shall be regarded as a separate
intersection.
OWNER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.211.
PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL AREA CONTAINING 20 OR MORE DWELLING UNITS. Has
the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.211.
ROADWAY. Means that portion of a private road or driveway improved, designed or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel, except the berm or shoulder. If a private road or driveway includes
two or more separate roadways, the term means any such roadway separately but not all such roadways
collectively.
(R.C.§§ 4511.432(A) - (C), (E))
(F) Except as otherwise provided in this division (F), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. §§ 4511.431(B), 4511.432(D))
(1985 Code, § 72.23)
§ 72.24 RIGHT-OF-WAY ON PUBLIC HIGHWAY.
(A) The operator of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from any place other than another
roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all traffic approaching on the roadway to be entered or crossed.
(B) Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.44) (1985 Code, § 72.24)
92 Madeira - Traffic Code
§ 72.25 PEDESTRIAN ON SIDEWALK HAS RIGHT-OF-WAY.
(A) The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian on a sidewalk.
(B) Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.441) (1985 Code, § 72.25) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977)
§ 72.26 RIGHT-OF-WAY OF PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLES.
(A) Upon the approach of a public safety vehicle or coroner’s vehicle, equipped with at least one
flashing, rotating or oscillating light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500
feet to the front of the vehicle, and the driver is giving an audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle or bell,
no driver of any other vehicle shall fail to yield the right-of-way, immediately drive if practical to a
position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the right edge or curb of the highway clear of any
intersection, and stop and remain in that position until the public safety vehicle or coroner’s vehicle has
passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer.
(B) This section does not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle or coroner’s vehicle from the
duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
(C) This section applies to a coroner’s vehicle only when the vehicle is operated in accordance with
R.C. § 4511.171, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance. As used in this section,
CORONER’S VEHICLE means a vehicle used by a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator
that is equipped with a flashing, oscillating or rotating red or blue light and a siren, exhaust whistle or
bell capable of giving an audible signal.
(D) Except as otherwise provided in this division (D), whoever violates division (A) of this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense. On a second offense within one year
after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree, and, on each subsequent
offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second
degree.
(R.C. § 4511.45) (1985 Code, § 72.26) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977)
§ 72.27 FUNERAL PROCESSION HAS RIGHT-OF-WAY.
(A) As used in this section, FUNERAL PROCESSION means two or more vehicles accompanying
the cremated remains or the body of a deceased person in the daytime when each of the vehicles has its
Traffic Rules 93
headlights lighted and is displaying a purple and white or an orange and white pennant attached to each
vehicle in such a manner as to be clearly visible to traffic approaching from any direction.
(B) Excepting public safety vehicles proceeding in accordance with R.C. § 4511.45 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or when directed otherwise by a police officer, pedestrians
and the operators of all vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to each vehicle that is a part of a funeral
procession. Whenever the lead vehicle in a funeral procession lawfully enters an intersection, the
remainder of the vehicles in the procession may continue to follow the lead vehicle through the
intersection, notwithstanding any traffic-control devices or right-of-way provisions of the Ohio Revised
Code, provided that the operator of each vehicle exercises due care to avoid colliding with any other
vehicle or pedestrian.
(C) No person shall operate any vehicle as a part of a funeral procession without having the
headlights of the vehicle lighted and without displaying a purple and white or an orange and white
pennant in such a manner as to be clearly visible to traffic approaching from any direction.
(D) Except as otherwise provided in this division (D), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.451) (1985 Code, § 72.27)
§ 72.28 PEDESTRIANS YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY TO PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE.
(A) Upon the immediate approach of a public safety vehicle, as stated in R.C. § 4511.45 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, every pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to the public
safety vehicle.
(B) This section shall not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle from the duty to exercise due
care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian.
(C) Except as otherwise provided in this division (C), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.452) (1985 Code, § 72.28)
94 Madeira - Traffic Code
§ 72.29 PEDESTRIAN ON CROSSWALK HAS RIGHT-OF-WAY.
(A) When traffic-control signals are not in place, not in operation, or are not clearly assigning the
right-of-way, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be
to so yield, or if required by R.C. § 4511.132 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, to a
pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway
upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite
half of the roadway as to be in danger.
(B) No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path
of a vehicle which is so close as to constitute an immediate hazard.
(C) Division (A) of this section does not apply under the conditions stated in R.C. § 4511.48(B),
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(D) Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at an
intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from
the rear shall not overtake and pass the stopped vehicle.
(E) Except as otherwise provided in this division (E), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.46) (1985 Code, § 72.29) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977)
§ 72.30 RIGHT-OF-WAY YIELDED TO BLIND PERSON.
(A) (1) As used in this section BLIND PERSON or BLIND PEDESTRIAN means a person having
not more than 20/200 visual acuity in the better eye with correcting lenses, or visual acuity greater than
20/200, but with a limitation in the fields of vision such that the widest diameter of the visual field
subtends an angle no greater than 20 degrees.
(2) The driver of every vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to every blind pedestrian guided
by a guide dog, or carrying a cane which is predominantly white or metallic in color, with or without
a red tip.
(B) No person, other than a blind person, while on any public highway, street, alley or other public
thoroughfare, shall carry a white or metallic cane, with or without a red tip.
(C) Except as otherwise provided in this division (C), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
Traffic Rules 95
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.47) (1985 Code, § 72.30) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977)
§ 72.31 RIGHT-OF-WAY YIELDED BY PEDESTRIAN.
(A) Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or
within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the
roadway.
(B) Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian
crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way to all traffic upon the roadway.
(C) Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in operation, pedestrians shall
not cross at any place except in a marked crosswalk.
(D) No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless authorized by official
traffic-control devices; and when authorized to cross diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in
accordance with the official traffic-control devices pertaining to such crossing movements.
(E) This section does not relieve the operator of a vehicle from exercising due care to avoid
colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway.
(F) Except as otherwise provided in this division (F), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.48) (1985 Code, § 72.31)
§ 72.32 INTOXICATED OR DRUGGED PEDESTRIAN HAZARD ON HIGHWAY.
(A) A pedestrian who is under the influence of alcohol, any drug of abuse, or any combination of
them to a degree that renders the pedestrian a hazard shall not walk or be upon a highway.
(B) Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
96 Madeira - Traffic Code
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.481) (1985 Code, § 72.32)
§ 72.33 DRIVER’S DUTIES UPON APPROACHING INTERSECTION WITH AMBIGUOUS
OR NON-WORKING TRAFFIC SIGNAL.
The driver of a vehicle, streetcar or trackless trolley who approaches an intersection where traffic
is controlled by traffic-control signals shall do all of the following, if the signal facing him or her either
exhibits no colored lights or colored lighted arrows or exhibits a combination of such lights or arrows
that fails to clearly indicate the assignment of right-of-way.
(A) Stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, stop before entering the crosswalk on the near
side of the intersection, or, if none, stop before entering the intersection;
(B) Yield the right-of-way to all vehicles, streetcars or trackless trolleys in the intersection or
approaching on an intersecting road, if the vehicles, streetcars or trackless trolleys will constitute an
immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the intersection or junction of
roadways; and
(C) Exercise ordinary care while proceeding through the intersection.
(1985 Code, § 72.33) (Ord. 93-57, passed 11-1-1993)
PEDESTRIANS
§ 72.35 PEDESTRIANS.
(A) Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of crosswalks.
(B) Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.49) (1985 Code, § 72.35) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977)
Traffic Rules 97
§ 72.36 PEDESTRIAN WALKING ALONG HIGHWAY.
(A) Where a sidewalk is provided and its use is practicable, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian
to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
(B) Where a sidewalk is not available, any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall walk
only on a shoulder, as far as practicable from the edge of the roadway.
(C) Where neither a sidewalk nor a shoulder is available, any pedestrian walking along and upon
a highway shall walk as near as practicable to an outside edge of the roadway, and, if on a two-way
roadway, shall walk only on the left side of the roadway.
(D) Except as otherwise provided in R.C. §§ 4511.13 and 4511.46, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinances, any pedestrian upon a roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon
the roadway.
(E) Except as otherwise provided in this division (E), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.50) (1985 Code, § 72.36)
§ 72.37 PROHIBITION AGAINST SOLICITING RIDES; RIDING ON OUTSIDE OF
VEHICLE.
(A) No person while on a roadway outside a safety zone shall solicit a ride from the driver of any
vehicle.
(B) (1) Except as provided in division (B)(2) of this section, no person shall stand on a highway
for the purpose of soliciting employment, business or contributions from the occupant of any vehicle.
(2) The legislative authority, by ordinance, may authorize the issuance of a permit to a
charitable organization to allow a person acting on behalf of the organization to solicit charitable
contributions from the occupant of a vehicle by standing on a highway, other than a freeway as provided
in R.C. § 4511.051(A)(1), that is under the jurisdiction of the municipality. The permit shall be valid
for only one period of time, which shall be specified in the permit, in any calendar year. The legislative
authority also may specify the locations where contributions may be solicited and may impose any other
restrictions on or requirements regarding the manner in which the solicitations are to be conducted that
the legislative authority considers advisable.
98 Madeira - Traffic Code
(3) As used in division (B)(2) of this section, CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION means an
organization that has received from the Internal Revenue Service a currently valid ruling or determination
letter recognizing the tax-exempt status of the organization pursuant to IRC § 501(c)(3).
(C) No person shall hang onto or ride on the outside of any motor vehicle while it is moving upon
a roadway, except mechanics or test engineers making repairs or adjustments, or workers performing
specialized highway or street maintenance or construction under authority of a public agency.
(D) No operator shall knowingly permit any person to hang onto or ride on the outside of any motor
vehicle while it is moving upon a roadway, except mechanics or test engineers making repairs or
adjustments, or workers performing specialized highway or street maintenance or construction under
authority of a public agency.
(E) No driver of a truck, trailer or semitrailer shall knowingly permit any person who has not
attained the age of 16 years to ride in the unenclosed or unroofed cargo storage area of the driver’s
vehicle if the vehicle is traveling faster than 25 mph, unless either of the following applies:
(1) The cargo storage area of the vehicle is equipped with a properly secured seat to which is
attached a seat safety belt that is in compliance with federal standards for an occupant restraining device
as defined in R.C. § 4513.263(A)(2), the seat and seat safety belt were installed at the time the vehicle
was originally assembled, and the person riding in the cargo storage area is in the seat and is wearing
the seat safety belt; or
(2) An emergency exists that threatens the life of the driver or the person being transported in
the cargo storage area of the truck, trailer or semitrailer.
(F) No driver of a truck, trailer or semitrailer shall permit any person, except for those workers
performing specialized highway or street maintenance or construction under authority of a public agency,
to ride in the cargo storage area or on a tailgate of the driver’s vehicle while the tailgate is unlatched.
(G) (1) Except as otherwise provided in this division (G)(1), whoever violates any provision of
divisions (A) through (D) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle
or traffic offense, whoever violates any provision of divisions (A) through (D) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates any
provision of divisions (A) through (D) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(2) Whoever violates division (E) or (F) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.51) (1985 Code, § 72.37)
Traffic Rules 99
§ 72.38 PEDESTRIAN ON BRIDGE OR RAILROAD CROSSING.
(A) No pedestrian shall enter or remain upon any bridge or approach thereto beyond the bridge
signal, gate or barrier after a bridge operation signal indication has been given.
(B) No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over or under any crossing gate or barrier at a
railroad grade crossing or bridge while the gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.
(C) Except as otherwise provided in this division (C), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.511) (1985 Code, § 72.38) (Ord. 90-85, passed 12-17-1990)
§ 72.39 PERSONS OPERATING MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIRS.
Every person operating a motorized wheelchair shall have all of the rights and duties applicable to
a pedestrian that are contained in this chapter, except those provisions which by their nature can have
no application.
(R.C. § 4511.491) (1985 Code, § 72.39)
§ 72.40 OPERATION OF ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICES.
(A) (1) Electric personal assistive mobility devices may be operated on the public streets, highways,
sidewalks and paths and portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles in accordance
with this section.
(2) Except as otherwise provided in this section, those sections of this Traffic Code that by their
nature are applicable to an electric personal assistive mobility device apply to the device and the person
operating it whenever it is operated upon any public street, highway, sidewalk or path or upon any
portion of a roadway set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
(3) The municipality may regulate or prohibit the operation of electric personal assistive
mobility devices on public streets, highways, sidewalks and paths, or portions of roadways set aside for
the exclusive use of bicycles, under its jurisdiction.
(B) No operator of an electric personal assistive mobility device shall do any of the following:
(1) Fail to yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians and human-powered vehicles at all times;
100 Madeira - Traffic Code
(2) Fail to give an audible signal before overtaking and passing a pedestrian;
(3) Operate the device at night unless the device or its operator is equipped with or wearing
both of the following:
(a) A lamp pointing to the front that emits a white light visible from a distance of not less
than 500 feet; and
(b) A red reflector facing the rear that is visible from all distances from 100 feet to 600
feet when directly in front of lawful lower beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle.
(4) Operate the device on any portion of a street or highway that has an established speed limit
of 55 mph or more;
(5) Operate the device upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of pedestrians or other
specialized use when an appropriate sign giving notice of the specialized use is posted on the path;
(6) If under 18 years of age, operate the device unless wearing a protective helmet on the
person’s head with the chin strap properly fastened; or
(7) If under 16 years of age, operate the device unless, during the operation, the person is
under the direct visual and audible supervision of another person who is 18 years of age or older and is
responsible for the immediate care of the person under 16 years of age.
(C) No person who is under 14 years of age shall operate an electric personal assistive mobility
device.
(D) No person shall distribute or sell an electric personal assistive mobility device unless the device
is accompanied by a written statement that is substantially equivalent to the following: “WARNING: TO
REDUCE THE RISK OF SERIOUS INJURY, USE ONLY WHILE WEARING FULL PROTECTIVE
EQUIPMENT – HELMET, WRIST GUARDS, ELBOW PADS and KNEE PADS.”
(E) Nothing in this section affects or shall be construed to affect any rule of the Director of Natural
Resources or a Board of Park District Commissioners governing the operation of vehicles on lands under
the control of the Director or Board, as applicable.
(F) Penalty.
(1) Whoever violates division (B) or (C) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and
shall be punished as follows:
(a) The offender shall be fined $10; and
Traffic Rules 101
(b) If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of
division (B) or (C) of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, the
court, in addition to imposing the fine required under division (F)(1)(a) of this section, shall do one of
the following:
1. Order the impoundment for not less than one day but not more than 30 days of the
electric personal assistive mobility device that was involved in the current violation of that division. The
court shall order the device to be impounded at a safe indoor location designated by the court and may
assess storage fees of not more than $5 per day; provided the total storage, processing and release fees
assessed against the offender or the device in connection with the device’s impoundment or subsequent
release shall not exceed $50; or
2. If the court does not issue an impoundment order pursuant to division (F)(1)(b)1.
of this section, issue an order prohibiting the offender from operating any electric personal assistive
mobility device on the public streets, highways, sidewalks and paths and portions of roadways set aside
for the exclusive use of bicycles for not less than one day but not more than 30 days.
(2) Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.512)
(G) As used in this code, ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICE means a
self-balancing two non-tandem wheeled device that is designed to transport only one person, has an
electric propulsion system of an average of 750 watts, and when ridden on a paved level surface by an
operator who weighs 170 pounds has a maximum speed of less than 20 mph.
(R.C. § 4501.01(TT)) (1985 Code, § 72.40)
GRADE CROSSINGS
§ 72.45 STOP SIGNS AT GRADE CROSSINGS.
(A) As used in this section, ACTIVE GRADE CROSSING WARNING DEVICE has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 5733.43.
(B) The Department of Transportation and local authorities, with the approval of the Department,
may designate dangerous highway crossings over railroad tracks and erect stop signs thereat.
(C) (1) The Department and local authorities shall erect stop signs at a railroad highway grade
crossing in either of the following circumstances:
(a) New warning devices that are not active grade crossing warning devices are being
installed at the grade crossing, and railroad crossbucks were the only warning devices at the grade
crossing prior to the installation of the new warning devices; or
102 Madeira - Traffic Code
(b) The grade crossing is constructed after July 1, 2013 and only warning devices that are
not active grade crossing warning devices are installed at the grade crossing.
(2) Division (C)(1) of this section does not apply to a railroad highway grade crossing that the
Director of Transportation has exempted from that division because of traffic flow or other
considerations or factors.
(D) When stop signs are erected pursuant to division (B) or (C) of this section, the operator of any
vehicle shall stop within 50, but not less than 15, feet from the nearest rail of the railroad tracks and shall
exercise due care before proceeding across such grade crossing.
(E) Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates division (D) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender
previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.61) (1985 Code, § 72.45)
§ 72.46 DRIVING VEHICLE ACROSS RAILROAD GRADE CROSSING.
(A) (1) Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing, the person
shall stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of the railroad if any of the
following circumstances exist at the crossing:
(a) A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives warning of the immediate
approach of a train;
(b) A crossing gate is lowered;
(c) A flagperson gives or continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a train;
(d) There is insufficient space on the other side of the railroad grade crossing to
accommodate the vehicle the person is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles,
pedestrians or railroad trains, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed;
(e) An approaching train is emitting an audible signal or is plainly visible, and is in
hazardous proximity to the crossing; or
(f) There is insufficient undercarriage clearance to safely negotiate the crossing.
(2) A person who is driving a vehicle and who approaches a railroad grade crossing shall not
proceed as long as any of the circumstances described in divisions (A)(1)(a) through (A)(1)(f) of this
section exist at the crossing.
Traffic Rules 103
(B) No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier at a
railroad crossing while the gate or barrier is closed, or is being opened or closed unless the person is
signaled by a law enforcement officer or flagperson that it is permissible to do so.
(C) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4511.62) (1985 Code, § 72.46)
§ 72.47 VEHICLES REQUIRED TO STOP AT GRADE CROSSINGS.
(A) Except as provided in division (B) of this section, the operator of any bus, any school vehicle
or any vehicle transporting material required to be placarded under 49 C.F.R. Parts 100 through 185,
before crossing at grade any track of a railroad, shall stop the vehicle, and while so stopped, shall listen
through an open door or open window, and look in both directions along the track for any approaching
train and for signals indicating the approach of a train, and shall proceed only upon exercising due care
after stopping, looking and listening as required by this section. Upon proceeding, the operator of such
a vehicle shall cross only in a gear that will ensure there will be no necessity for changing gears while
traversing the crossing, and shall not shift gears while crossing the tracks.
(B) This section does not apply at grade crossings when any local authority has filed an application
with the Public Utilities Commission requesting the approval of an exempt crossing, and the Public
Utilities Commission has authorized and approved an exempt crossing as provided in R.C. § 4511.63(B).
(C) As used in this section:
BUS. Means any vehicle originally designed by its manufacturer to transport 16 or more
passengers, including the driver, or carries 16 or more passengers, including the driver.
EXEMPT CROSSING. Means a highway rail grade crossing authorized and approved by the
Public Utilities Commission under R.C. § 4511.63(B) at which vehicles may cross without making the
stop otherwise required by this section.
SCHOOL VEHICLE. Means any vehicle used for the transportation of pupils to and from a
school or school-related function if the vehicle is owned or operated by, or operated under contract with,
a public or nonpublic school.
(D) Except as otherwise provided in this division (D), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more
violations of this section or R.C. § 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.762, 4511.764, 4511.77 or
4511.79, or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of those sections, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4511.63) (1985 Code, § 72.47)
104 Madeira - Traffic Code
§ 72.48 SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES OR EQUIPMENT CROSSING RAILROAD TRACKS.
(A) No person shall operate or move any crawler-type tractor, steam shovel, derrick, roller or any
equipment or structure having a normal operating speed of six or less mph or a vertical body or load
clearance of less than nine inches above the level surface of a roadway, upon or across any tracks at a
railroad grade crossing without first complying with divisions (A)(1) and (A)(2) of this section.
(1) Before making any such crossing, the person operating or moving any such vehicle or
equipment shall first stop the same, and while stopped, the person shall listen and look in both directions
along the track for any approaching train and for signals indicating the approach of a train, and shall
proceed only upon exercising due care.
(2) No such crossing shall be made when warning is given by automatic signal, crossing gates
or a flagperson, or otherwise of the immediate approach of a railroad train or car.
(B) If the normal sustained speed of the vehicle, equipment or structure is not more than three mph,
the person owning, operating or moving the same shall also give notice of the intended crossing to a
station agent or superintendent of the railroad, and a reasonable time shall be given to the railroad to
provide proper protection for the crossing. Where the vehicles or equipment are being used in
constructing or repairing a section of highway lying on both sides of a railroad grade crossing, and in
this construction or repair it is necessary to repeatedly move the vehicles or equipment over the crossing,
one daily notice specifying when the work will start and stating the hours during which it will be
prosecuted is sufficient.
(C) Except as otherwise provided in this division (C), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.64) (1985 Code, § 72.48)
THROUGH HIGHWAYS
§ 72.50 THROUGH HIGHWAYS.
(A) All state routes are hereby designated as through highways, provided that stop signs, yield signs
or traffic-control signals shall be erected at all intersections with such through highways by the
Department of Transportation as to highways under its jurisdiction and by local authorities as to
highways under their jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this section. Where two or more state
routes that are through highways intersect, and no traffic-control signal is in operation, stop signs or
yield signs shall be erected at one or more entrances thereto by the Department or by local authorities
Traffic Rules 105
having jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this section. Whenever the Director of
Transportation determines on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that stop signs are
necessary to stop traffic on a through highway for safe and efficient operation, nothing in this section
shall be construed to prevent such installations. When circumstances warrant, the Director also may omit
stop signs on roadways intersecting through highways under his or her jurisdiction. Before the Director
either installs or removes a stop sign under this division (A), he or she shall give notice, in writing, of
that proposed action to the affected local authority at least 30 days before installing or removing the stop
sign.
(B) Other streets or highways, or portions thereof, are hereby designated as through highways if
they are within the municipality, if they have a continuous length of more than one mile between the
limits of the street or highway or portion thereof, and if they have stop or yield signs or traffic-control
signals at the entrances of the majority of intersecting streets or highways. For purposes of this section,
the limits of the street or highway, or portion thereof, shall be the municipal corporation line, the
physical terminus of the street or highway, or any point on the streets or highway at which vehicular
traffic thereon is required by regulatory signs to stop or yield to traffic on the intersecting street,
provided, that in residence districts, the municipality may by ordinance designate such street or highway,
or portion thereof, not to be a through highway and thereafter the affected residence district shall be
indicated by official traffic-control devices. Where two or more through highways designated under this
division (B) intersect and no traffic-control signal is in operation, stop signs or yield signs shall be
erected at one or more entrances thereto by the Department or by local authorities having jurisdiction,
except as otherwise provided in this section.
(C) The Department or local authorities having jurisdiction need not erect stop signs at intersections
they find to be so constructed as to permit traffic to safely enter a through highway without coming to
a stop. Signs shall be erected at such intersections indicating that the operator of a vehicle shall yield the
right-of-way to or merge with all traffic proceeding on the through highway.
(D) Local authorities, with reference to highways under their jurisdiction, may designate additional
through highways, and shall erect stop signs, yield signs or traffic-control signals at all streets and
highways intersecting such through highways, or may designate any intersection as a stop or yield
intersection, and shall erect like signs at one or more entrances to the intersection.
(R.C. § 4511.65) (1985 Code, § 72.50)
PROHIBITIONS
§ 72.55 OBSTRUCTION AND INTERFERENCE AFFECTING VIEW AND CONTROL OF
DRIVER.
(A) No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there are in the front seat such
number of persons, as to obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle, or to
interfere with the driver’s control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
106 Madeira - Traffic Code
(B) No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in a position as to interfere with the driver’s view ahead
or to the sides, or to interfere with the driver’s control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
(C) No person shall open the door of a vehicle on the side available to moving traffic unless and
until it is reasonably safe to do so, and can be done without interfering with the movement of other
traffic, nor shall any person leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a
period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.
(D) Except as otherwise provided in this division (D), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.70) (1985 Code, § 72.55) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977)
§ 72.56 OCCUPYING TRAVEL TRAILER WHILE IN MOTION.
(A) No person shall occupy any travel trailer or manufactured or mobile home while it is being used
as a conveyance upon a street or highway.
(B) Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.701) (1985 Code, § 72.56)
§ 72.57 DRIVING UPON CLOSED HIGHWAY PROHIBITED.
(A) No person shall drive upon, along or across a street or highway, or any part of a street or
highway that has been closed in the process of its construction, reconstruction or repair, and posted with
appropriate signs by the authority having jurisdiction to close the highway.
(B) Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.71) (1985 Code, § 72.57)
Traffic Rules 107
§ 72.58 DRIVING UPON SIDEWALK AREA OR PATHS EXCLUSIVELY FOR BICYCLES.
(A) (1) No person shall drive any vehicle, other than a bicycle, upon a sidewalk or sidewalk area,
except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway.
(2) Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting local authorities from regulating
the operation of bicycles, except that no local authority may require that bicycles be operated on
sidewalks.
(R.C. § 4511.711(A)) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977)
(B) (1) No person shall operate a motor vehicle, snowmobile or all-purpose vehicle upon any path
set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, when an appropriate sign giving notice of such use is posted
on the path.
(2) Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect any rule of the Director of Natural
Resources governing the operation of motor vehicles, snowmobiles, all-purpose vehicles and bicycles
on lands under the Director’s jurisdiction.
(R.C. § 4511.713(A)) (Ord. 88-39, passed 10-3-1988)
(C) Except as otherwise provided in this division (C), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. §§ 4511.711(B), 4511.713(B))
(1985 Code, § 72.58)
§ 72.59 OBSTRUCTING PASSAGE OF OTHER VEHICLES.
(A) No driver shall enter an intersection or marked crosswalk, or drive onto any railroad grade
crossing, unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection, crosswalk or grade crossing
to accommodate the vehicle the driver is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles,
pedestrians or railroad trains, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed.
(B) Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.712) (1985 Code, § 72.59) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977)
108 Madeira - Traffic Code
§ 72.60 FOLLOWING AN EMERGENCY OR PUBLIC VEHICLE PROHIBITED;
APPROACHING STATIONARY PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE WITH CAUTION.
(A) Following an emergency or public vehicle prohibited. The driver of any vehicle, other than an
emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle on official business, shall not follow any emergency vehicle
or public safety vehicle traveling in response to an alarm closer than 500 feet, or drive into or park the
vehicle within the block where the fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm, unless directed
to do so by a police officer or a firefighter.
(R.C. § 4511.72(A)) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977)
(B) Approaching stationary public safety vehicle with caution.
(1) The driver of a motor vehicle, upon approaching a stationary public safety vehicle,
emergency vehicle, road service vehicle, vehicle used by the Public Utilities Commission to conduct
motor vehicle inspections in accordance with R.C. §§ 4923.04 and 4923.06 or a highway maintenance
vehicle that is displaying the appropriate visual signals by means of flashing, oscillating or rotating
lights, as prescribed in R.C. § 4513.17, shall do either of the following:
(a) If the driver of the motor vehicle is traveling on a highway that consists of at least two
lanes that carry traffic in the same direction of travel as that of the driver’s motor vehicle, the driver
shall proceed with due caution and, if possible and with due regard to the road, weather and traffic
conditions, shall change lanes into a lane that is not adjacent to that of the stationary public safety
vehicle, emergency vehicle, road service vehicle, vehicle
used by the Public Utilities Commission to conduct motor vehicle inspections in accordance with R.C.
§§ 4923.04 and 4923.06 or a highway maintenance vehicle; or
(b) If the driver is not traveling on a highway of a type described in division (B)(1)(a) of
this section, or if the driver is traveling on a highway of that type but it is not possible to change lanes
or if to do so would be unsafe, the driver shall proceed with due caution, reduce the speed of the motor
vehicle and maintain a safe speed for the road, weather and traffic conditions.
(2) This division (B) does not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle, emergency vehicle,
road service vehicle, vehicle used by the Public Utilities Commission to conduct motor vehicle
inspections in accordance with R.C. §§ 4923.04 and 4923.06, or a highway maintenance vehicle from
the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
(3) No person shall fail to drive a motor vehicle in compliance with divisions (B)(1)(a) or
(B)(1)(b) of this section when so required by division (B) of this section.
(R.C. § 4511.213(A) - (C))
(C) Penalty.
(1) Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(1), whoever violates this section is guilty
of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
Traffic Rules 109
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If within one year of the offense, the offender previously
has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(2) Notwithstanding § 130.99 or R.C. § 2929.28, upon a finding that a person operated a motor
vehicle in violation of division (B)(3) of this section, the court, in addition to all other penalties provided
by law, shall impose a fine of two times the usual amount imposed for the violation.
(R.C. §§ 4511.213(D), 4511.72(B))
(1985 Code, § 72.60)
§ 72.61 DRIVING OVER UNPROTECTED FIRE HOSE.
(A) No vehicle shall, without the consent of the Fire Department official in command, be driven
over any unprotected hose of a Fire Department that is laid down on any street or private driveway to
be used at any fire or alarm of fire.
(B) Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.73) (1985 Code, § 72.61) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977)
§ 72.62 PROHIBITION AGAINST PLACING INJURIOUS MATERIAL ON HIGHWAY.
(A) (1) No person shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a highway, lane, road, street or
alley any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails or other articles which may damage or injure any person,
vehicle or animal traveling along or upon the highway, except such substances that may be placed upon
the roadway by proper authority for the repair or construction thereof.
(2) Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown upon any highway any
destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove the same.
(3) Any person authorized to remove a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a highway shall
remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the highway from such vehicle.
(4) No person shall place any obstruction in or upon a highway without proper authority.
(B) No person, with intent to cause physical harm to a person or a vehicle, shall place or knowingly
drop upon any part of a highway, lane, road, street or alley any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails or other
110 Madeira - Traffic Code
articles which may damage or injure any person, vehicle or animal traveling along or upon such
highway, except such substances that may be placed upon the roadway by proper authority for the repair
or construction thereof.
(R.C. § 4511.74(A), (B))
(C) (1) Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(1), whoever violates division (A) of this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offenses, whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(2) Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4511.74(C))
(1985 Code, § 72.62)
§ 72.63 ASSEMBLAGES.
Pedestrians shall not gather and remain in crowds or assemblages at any place, or move in crowds
or assemblages from place to place, upon any highway or sidewalk, in such numbers and manner as to
interfere with ordinary vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
(1985 Code, § 72.63) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977)
Cross-reference:
Disorderly conduct, see § 132.04
§ 72.64 TRANSPORTING CHILD NOT IN CHILD RESTRAINT SYSTEM PROHIBITED.
(A) When any child who is in either or both of the following categories is being transported in a
motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4511.01, that is required
by the United States Department of Transportation to be equipped with seat belts at the time of
manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child properly secured in
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions in a child restraint system that meets federal motor
vehicle safety standards:
(1) A child who is less than four years of age; and/or
(2) A child who weighs less than 40 pounds.
(B) When any child who is in either or both of the following categories is being transported in a
motor vehicle, other than a taxicab, that is owned, leased or otherwise under the control of a nursery
school or day-care center, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child properly secured in
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions in a child restraint system that meets federal motor
vehicle safety standards:
Traffic Rules 111
(1) A child who is less than four years of age; and/or
(2) A child who weighs less than 40 pounds.
(C) When any child who is less than eight years of age and less than four feet nine inches in height,
who is not required by division (A) or (B) of this section to be secured in a child restraint system, is
being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety vehicle as defined in R.C.
§ 4511.01 or a vehicle that is regulated under R.C. § 5104.015, that is required by the United States
Department of Transportation to be equipped with seat belts at the time of manufacture or assembly, the
operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child properly secured in accordance with the manufacturer’s
instructions on a booster seat that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards.
(D) When any child who is at least eight years of age but not older than 15 years of age, and who
is not otherwise required by division (A), (B) or (C) of this section to be secured in a child restraint
system or booster seat, is being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety
vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4511.01, that is required by the United States Department of Transportation
to be equipped with seat belts at the time of manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle
shall have the child properly restrained either in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions in a
child restraint system that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards or in an occupant restraining
device as defined in R.C. § 4513.263.
(E) Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law enforcement officer shall cause
an operator of a motor vehicle being operated on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the
sole purpose of determining whether a violation of division (C) or (D) of this section has been or is being
committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation or summons for a violation of division (C)
or (D) of this section or causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation
of division (C) or (D) of this section, and absent another violation of law, a law enforcement officer’s
view of the interior or visual inspection of a motor vehicle being operated on any street or highway may
not be used for the purpose of determining whether a violation of division (C) or (D) of this section has
been or is being committed.
(F) The Director of Public Safety shall adopt such rules as are necessary to carry out this section.
(G) The failure of an operator of a motor vehicle to secure a child in a child restraint system, a
booster seat or an occupant restraining device as required in this section is not negligence imputable to
the child, is not admissible as evidence in any civil action involving the rights of the child against any
other person allegedly liable for injuries to the child, is not to be used as a basis for a criminal
prosecution of the operator of the motor vehicle other than a prosecution for a violation of this section,
and is not admissible as evidence in any criminal action involving the operator of the motor vehicle other
than a prosecution for a violation of this section.
(H) This section does not apply when an emergency exists that threatens the life of any person
operating or occupying a motor vehicle that is being used to transport a child who otherwise would be
required to be restrained under this section. This section does not apply to a person operating a motor
vehicle who has an affidavit signed by a physician licensed to practice in this state under R.C. Chapter
112 Madeira - Traffic Code
4731 or a chiropractor licensed to practice in this state under R.C. Chapter 4734 that states that the child
who otherwise would be required to be restrained under this section has a physical impairment that
makes use of a child restraint system, booster seat or an occupant restraining device impossible or
impractical, provided that the person operating the vehicle has safely and appropriately restrained the
child in accordance with any recommendations of the physician or chiropractor as noted on the affidavit.
(I) Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any person to carry with the person the
birth certificate of a child to prove the age of the child, but the production of a valid birth certificate for
a child showing that the child was not of an age to which this section applies is a defense against any
ticket, citation or summons issued for violating this section.
(J) (1) Whoever violates division (A), (B), (C) or (D) of this section shall be punished as follows,
provided that the failure of an operator of a motor vehicle to secure more than one child in a child
restraint system, booster seat or occupant restraining device as required by this section that occurred at
the same time, on the same day and at the same location is deemed to be a single violation of this section:
(a) Except as otherwise provided in division (J)(1)(b) of this section, the offender is guilty
of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $75.
(b) If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of
division (A), (B), (C) or (D) of this section or of a state law or municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent any of those divisions, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(2) All fines imposed pursuant to division (J)(1) of this section shall be forwarded to the State
Treasurer for deposit in the Child Highway Safety Fund created by R.C. § 4511.81(I).
(R.C. § 4511.81(A) - (H), (K), (L)) (1985 Code, § 72.64) (Ord. 88-39, passed 10-3-1988)
§ 72.64.1 PROHIBITION AGAINST DEPOSITING LITTER FROM MOTOR VEHICLE.
(A) No operator or occupant of a motor vehicle shall, regardless of intent, throw, drop, discard or
deposit litter from any motor vehicle in operation upon any street, road or highway, except into a litter
receptacle in a manner that prevents its being carried away or deposited by the elements.
(B) No operator of a motor vehicle in operation upon any street, road or highway shall allow litter
to be thrown, dropped, discarded or deposited from the motor vehicle, except into a litter receptacle in
a manner that prevents its being carried away or deposited by the elements.
(C) As used in this section, LITTER means garbage, trash, waste, rubbish, ashes, cans, bottles,
wire, paper, cartons, boxes, automobile parts, furniture, glass or anything else of an unsightly or
unsanitary nature.
(R.C. § 4511.82(A), (B), (D)) (Ord. 88-39, passed 10-3-1988)
Traffic Rules 113
(D) Whoever violates division (A) or (B) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.82(C))
(1985 Code, § 72.641)
§ 72.64.2 OPERATING MOTOR VEHICLE WHILE WEARING EARPHONES OR
EARPLUGS.
(A) No person shall operate a motor vehicle while wearing earphones over, or earplugs in, both
ears. As used in this section, EARPHONES means any headset, radio, tape player or other similar
device that provides the listener with radio programs, music or other recorded information through a
device attached to the head and that covers all or a portion of both ears. The term does not include
speakers or other listening devices that are built into protective headgear.
(B) This section does not apply to:
(1) Any person wearing a hearing aid;
(2) Law enforcement personnel while on duty;
(3) Fire department personnel and emergency medical service personnel while on duty;
(4) Any person operating equipment for use in the maintenance or repair of any highway; and
(5) Any person engaged in the operation of refuse collection equipment.
(C) Except as otherwise provided in this division (C), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.84) (1985 Code, § 72.643)
§ 72.64.3 USE OF ENGINE BRAKES PROHIBITED.
(A) The non-emergency use of engine brakes within the municipality is prohibited.
(B) As used in this section, ENGINE BRAKES shall be defined to include but is not limited to Jake
Brakes, Jacobs Brakes, C Brakes, PacBrakes, TekBrakes and any other type of engine retarders
commonly utilized within the trucking industry.
114 Madeira - Traffic Code
(C) This section does not apply to emergency vehicles operated by fire, police or military units.
(D) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
§ 72.64.4 CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINES AND LIVERY SERVICES.
(A) The operator of a chauffeured limousine shall accept passengers only on the basis of prearranged
contracts, as defined in R.C. § 4501.01, and shall not cruise in search of patronage unless the limousine
is in compliance with any statute or ordinance governing the operation of taxicabs or other similar
vehicles for hire.
(B) The operator of a chauffeured limousine may provide transportation to passengers who arrange
for the transportation through an intermediary, including a digital dispatching service. Notwithstanding
any law to the contrary, when providing transportation arranged through an intermediary, the operator
of a chauffeured limousine may establish the fare and method of fare calculation, so long as the method
of fare calculation is provided to the passenger upon request.
(C) No person shall advertise or hold himself or herself out as doing business as a limousine service
or livery service or other similar designation unless each vehicle used by the person to provide the
service is registered in accordance with R.C. § 4503.24 and is in compliance with R.C. § 4509.80.
(D) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4511.85)
Statutory reference:
Chauffeured limousine, motor vehicle licensing, see R.C. § 4503.24
Proof of financial responsibility, see R.C. § 4509.80
§ 72.64.5 OPERATING TRACTION ENGINE UPON IMPROVED HIGHWAY.
(A) No person shall drive over the improved highways of this municipality a traction engine or
tractor with tires or wheels equipped with ice picks, spuds, spikes, chains or other projections of any
kind extending beyond the cleats, and no person shall tow or in any way pull another vehicle over the
improved highways of this municipality which towed or pulled vehicle has tires or wheels equipped with
ice picks, spuds, spikes, chains or other projections of any kind. As used in this section, “traction
engine” or “tractor” applies to all self-propelling engines equipped with metal-tired wheels operated or
propelled by any form of engine, motor or mechanical power.
(B) This municipality shall not adopt, enforce or maintain any ordinance, rule or regulation contrary
to or inconsistent with division (A) of this section, nor shall this municipality require any license tax
upon or registration fee for any traction engine, tractor or trailer, or any permit or license to operate.
Operators of traction engines or tractors shall have the same rights upon the public streets and highways
Traffic Rules 115
as the drivers of any other vehicles, unless some other safe and convenient way is provided, and no
public road open to traffic shall be closed to traction engines or tractors.
(R.C. § 5589.08)
(C) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 5589.99(B))
§ 72.64.6 CRACKING EXHAUST NOISES; PEELING OUT.
No person shall operate any motor vehicle, except when necessary for safe operation, or in
compliance with law, in such a manner that the vehicle is so rapidly accelerated or started from a stopped
position, or in the shifting of gears while in motion, that the exhaust system emits a loud, cracking or
chattering noise unusual to its normal operation, or that the rubber tires of such vehicle squeal or leave
tire marks on the roadway, commonly known as “peeling out.”
§ 72.64.7 SHORTCUTTING ACROSS PRIVATE PROPERTY.
No operator of a motor vehicle shall enter upon private property for the sole purpose of driving
across such property, between abutting streets or other public ways thereof. The failure to stop on such
property in connection with or in furtherance of the enterprise or activities being conducted on the
property shall constitute prima facie evidence of the violation.
§ 72.64.8 TEXTING WHILE DRIVING PROHIBITED.
(A) No person shall drive a motor vehicle on any street, highway or property open to the public for
vehicular traffic while using a handheld electronic wireless communications device to write, send or read
a text-based communication.
(B) Division (A) of this section does not apply to any of the following:
(1) A person using a handheld electronic wireless communications device in that manner for
emergency purposes, including an emergency contact with a law enforcement agency, hospital or health
care provider, fire department, or other similar emergency agency or entity;
(2) A person driving a public safety vehicle who uses a handheld electronic wireless
communications device in that manner in the course of the person’s duties;
(3) A person using a handheld electronic wireless communications device in that manner whose
motor vehicle is in a stationary position and who is outside a lane of travel;
(4) A person reading, selecting or entering a name or telephone number in a handheld
electronic wireless communications device for the purpose of making or receiving a telephone call;
116 Madeira - Traffic Code
(5) A person receiving wireless messages on a device regarding the operation or navigation of
a motor vehicle; safety-related information, including emergency, traffic or weather alerts; or data used
primarily by the motor vehicle;
(6) A person receiving wireless messages via radio waves;
(7) A person using a device for navigation purposes;
(8) A person conducting wireless interpersonal communication with a device that does not
require manually entering letters, numbers or symbols or reading text messages, except to activate,
deactivate or initiate the device or a feature or function of the device;
(9) A person operating a commercial truck while using a mobile data terminal that transmits
and receives data; or
(10) A person using a handheld electronic wireless communications device in conjunction with
a voice-operated or hands-free device feature or function of the vehicle.
(C) Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law enforcement officer shall cause
an operator of an automobile being operated on any street or highway to stop the automobile for the sole
purpose of determining whether a violation of division (A) of this section has been or is being committed
or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or summons for a violation of that nature or causing
the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation of that nature, and no law
enforcement officer shall view the interior or visually inspect any automobile being operated on any
street or highway for the sole purpose of determining whether a violation of that nature has been or is
being committed.
(D) Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(E) A prosecution for a violation of R.C. § 4511.204 does not preclude a prosecution for a violation
of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance based on the same conduct. However, if an offender
is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.204 and is also convicted of or pleads guilty
to a violation of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance based on the same conduct, the two
offenses are allied offenses of similar import under R.C. § 2941.25.
(F) As used in this section:
ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Includes any of the following:
(a) A wireless telephone;
(b) A text-messaging device;
Traffic Rules 117
(c) A personal digital assistant;
(d) A computer, including a laptop computer and a computer tablet; or
(e) Any other substantially similar wireless device that is designed or used to communicate
text.
VOICE-OPERATED OR HANDS-FREE DEVICE. A device that allows the user to vocally
compose or send, or to listen to a text-based communication without the use of either hand except to
activate or deactivate a feature or function.
WRITE, SEND OR READ A TEXT-BASED COMMUNICATION. To manually write or send,
or read a text-based communication using an electronic wireless communications device, including
manually writing or sending, or reading communications referred to as text messages, instant messages
or electronic mail.
(R.C. § 4511.204)
Statutory reference:
No preemption for local regulations imposing greater penalties, see R.C. § 4511.204(E)
§ 72.64.9 USE OF ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATION DEVICES BY MINORS
OR PROBATIONARY DRIVERS WHILE DRIVING PROHIBITED.
(A) No holder of a temporary instruction permit who has not attained the age of 18 years and no
holder of a probationary driver’s license shall drive a motor vehicle on any street, highway, or property
used by the public for purposes of vehicular traffic or parking while using in any manner an electronic
wireless communications device.
(B) Division (A) of this section does not apply to either of the following:
(1) A person using an electronic wireless communications device for emergency purposes,
including an emergency contact with a law enforcement agency, hospital or health care provider, fire
department, or other similar emergency agency or entity;
(2) A person using an electronic wireless communications device whose motor vehicle is in a
stationary position and the motor vehicle is outside a lane of travel; and
(3) A person using a navigation device in a voice-operated or hands-free manner who does not
manipulate the device while driving.
(C) (1) Except as provided in division (C)(2) of this section, whoever violates division (A) of this
section shall be fined $150. In addition, the court shall impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s
driver’s license or permit for a definite period of 60 days.
118 Madeira - Traffic Code
(2) If the person previously has been adjudicated a delinquent child or a juvenile traffic
offender for a violation of this section, whoever violates this section shall be fined $300. In addition, the
court shall impose a class seven suspension of the person’s driver’s license or permit for a definite period
of one year.
(D) The filing of a sworn complaint against a person for a violation of R.C. § 4511.205 does not
preclude the filing of a sworn complaint for a violation of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance
for the same conduct. However, if a person is adjudicated a delinquent child or a juvenile traffic offender
for a violation of R.C. § 4511.205 and is also adjudicated a delinquent child or a juvenile traffic offender
for a violation of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance for the same conduct, the two offenses
are allied offenses of similar import under R.C. § 2941.25.
(E) As used in this section, ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS DEVICE includes
any of the following:
(1) A wireless telephone;
(2) A personal digital assistant;
(3) A computer, including a laptop computer and a computer tablet;
(4) A text-messaging device; and
(5) Any other substantially similar electronic wireless device that is designed or used to
communicate via voice, image or written word.
(R.C. § 4511.205)
SCHOOL BUSES
§ 72.65 REGULATIONS CONCERNING SCHOOL BUSES.
(A) The driver of a vehicle, upon meeting or overtaking from either direction any school bus
stopped for the purpose of receiving or discharging any school child, person attending programs offered
by community boards of mental health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or child attending
a program offered by a head start agency, shall stop at least ten feet from the front or rear of the school
bus and shall not proceed until such school bus resumes motion, or until signaled by the school bus
driver to proceed. It is no defense to a charge under this division (A) that the school bus involved failed
to display or be equipped with an automatically extended stop warning sign as required by division (B)
of this section.
Traffic Rules 119
(B) Every school bus shall be equipped with amber and red visual signals meeting the requirements
of R.C. § 4511.771 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and an automatically extended stop
warning sign of a type approved by the state Board of Education, which shall be actuated by the driver
of the bus whenever but only whenever the bus is stopped or stopping on the roadway for the purpose
of receiving or discharging school children, persons attending programs offered by community boards
of mental health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or children attending programs offered
by head start agencies. A school bus driver shall not actuate the visual signals or the stop warning sign
in designated school bus loading areas where the bus is entirely off the roadway or at school buildings
when children or persons attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and county
boards of developmental disabilities are loading or unloading at curbside or at buildings when children
attending programs offered by head start agencies are loading or unloading at curbside. The visual
signals and stop warning sign shall be synchronized or otherwise operated as required by rule of the
Board.
(C) Where a highway has been divided into four or more traffic lanes, a driver of a vehicle need
not stop for a school bus approaching from the opposite direction which has stopped for the purpose of
receiving or discharging any school child, persons attending programs offered by community boards of
mental health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or children attending programs offered
by head start agencies. The driver of any vehicle overtaking the school bus shall comply with division
(A) above.
(D) School buses operating on divided highways or on highways with four or more traffic lanes shall
receive and discharge all school children, persons attending programs offered by community boards of
mental health and county boards of developmental disabilities, and children attending programs offered
by head start agencies on their residence side of the highway.
(E) No school bus driver shall start the driver’s bus until after any child, person attending programs
offered by community boards of mental health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or child
attending a program offered by a head start agency who may have alighted therefrom has reached a place
of safety on the child’s or person’s residence side of the road.
(F) (1) Whoever violates division (A) of this section may be fined an amount not to exceed $500.
A person who is issued a citation for a violation of division (A) of this section is not permitted to enter
a written plea of guilty and waive the person’s right to contest the citation in a trial but instead must
appear in person in the proper court to answer the charge.
(2) In addition to and independent of any other penalty provided by law, the court or Mayor
may impose upon an offender who violates this section a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s
license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7). When a license is suspended under
this section, the court or Mayor shall cause the offender to deliver the license to the court, and the court
or Clerk of the court immediately shall forward the license to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, together
with notice of the court’s action.
120 Madeira - Traffic Code
(G) As used in this section:
HEAD START AGENCY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3301.32.
SCHOOL BUS. As used in relation to children who attend a program offered by a head start
agency, means a bus that is owned and operated by a head start agency, is equipped with an
automatically extended stop warning sign of a type approved by the State Board of Education, is painted
the color and displays the markings described in R.C. § 4511.77, and is equipped with amber and red
visual signals meeting the requirements of R.C. § 4511.77, irrespective of whether or not the bus has
15 or more children aboard at any time. The term does not include a van owned and operated by a head
start agency, irrespective of its color, lights or markings.
(R.C. § 4511.75) (1985 Code, § 72.65)
§ 72.65.1 VIOLATION OF REGULATIONS; REPORT; INVESTIGATION; CITATION;
WARNING.
(A) As used in this section, LICENSE PLATE includes but is not limited to any temporary license
placard issued under R.C. § 4503.182 or substantially equivalent law of another jurisdiction.
(B) When the operator of a school bus believes that a motorist has violated R.C. § 4511.75(A) or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the operator shall report the license plate number and
general description of the vehicle and of the operator of the vehicle to the law enforcement agency
exercising jurisdiction over the area where the alleged violation occurred. The information contained in
the report relating to the license plate number and to the general description of the vehicle and the
operator of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation may be supplied by any person with first-hand
knowledge of the information. Information of which the operator of the school bus has first-hand
knowledge also may be corroborated by any other person.
(C) Upon receipt of the report of the alleged violation of R.C. § 4511.75(A) or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the law enforcement agency shall conduct an investigation to attempt
to determine the identity of the operator of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation. If the identity
of the operator at the time of the alleged violation is established, the reporting of the license plate number
of the vehicle shall establish probable cause for the law enforcement agency to issue a citation for the
violation of R.C. § 4511.75(A) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance. However, if the
identity of the operator of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation cannot be established, the law
enforcement agency shall issue a warning to the owner of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation,
except in the case of a leased or rented vehicle when the warning shall be issued to the lessee at the time
of the alleged violation.
(R.C. § 4511.751) (1985 Code, § 72.651)
Traffic Rules 121
§ 72.66 RESTRICTIONS ON THE OPERATION OF SCHOOL BUSES.
(A) No person shall operate a vehicle used for pupil transportation within this municipality in
violation of the rules of the Department of Education of the Department of Public Safety. No person,
being the owner thereof, or having the supervisory responsibility therefor, shall permit the operation of
a vehicle used for pupil transportation within this municipality in violation of the rules of the Department
of Education or the Department of Public Safety.
(B) As used in this section, VEHICLE USED FOR PUPIL TRANSPORTATION means any
vehicle that is identified as such by the Department of Education by rule and that is subject to O.A.C.
Chapter 3301-83.
(C) Except as otherwise provided in this division (C), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more
violations of this section or R.C. § 4511.76, or R.C. § 4511.63, 4511.761, 4511.762, 4511.764,
4511.77 or 4511.79 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of those sections,
whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4511.76(C), (E), (F)) (1985 Code, § 72.66)
§ 72.67 SCHOOL BUS INSPECTION.
(A) No person shall operate, nor shall any person being the owner thereof, or having supervisory
responsibility therefor, permit the operation of, a school bus within this municipality, unless there is
displayed thereon the decals issued by the state highway patrol bearing the proper date of inspection for
the calendar year for which the inspection decals were issued.
(B) Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more
violations of this section or R.C. § 4511.761, or R.C. § 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.762, 4511.764,
4511.77 or 4511.79 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of those sections,
whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(C) Whenever a person is found guilty in a court of record of a violation of this section, the trial
judge, in addition to or independent of all other penalties provided by law, may suspend for any period
of time not exceeding three years, or cancel the license of any person, partnership, association or
corporation, issued under R.C. § 4511.763.
(R.C. § 4511.761) (1985 Code, § 72.67)
§ 72.68 SCHOOL BUS NOT USED FOR SCHOOL PURPOSES.
(A) Except as provided in division (B) of this section, no person who is the owner of a bus that
previously was registered as a school bus that is used or is to be used exclusively for purposes other than
the transportation of children shall operate the bus or permit it to be operated within this municipality
122 Madeira - Traffic Code
unless the bus has been painted a color different from that prescribed for school buses by R.C. § 4511.77
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance and painted in such a way that the words “stop” and
“school bus” are obliterated.
(B) Any church bus that previously was registered as a school bus and is registered under R.C.
§ 4503.07 may retain the paint color prescribed for school buses by R.C. § 4511.77 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance if the bus complies with all of the following:
(1) The words “school bus” required by R.C. § 4511.77 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance are covered or obliterated and the bus is marked on the front and rear with the words “church
bus” painted in black lettering not less than ten inches in height;
(2) The automatically extending stop warning sign required by R.C. § 4511.75 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance is removed and the word “stop” required by R.C. § 4511.77
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance is covered or obliterated;
(3) The flashing red and amber lights required by R.C. § 4511.771 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance are covered or removed;
(4) The inspection decal required by R.C. § 4511.761 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance is covered or removed; and
(5) The identification number assigned under R.C. § 4511.764 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance and marked in black lettering on the front and rear of the bus is covered or
obliterated.
(C) Except as otherwise provided in this division (C), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more
violations of this section or R.C. § 4511.762, or R.C. § 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.764,
4511.77 or 4511.79 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of those sections,
whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(D) Whenever a person is found guilty in a court of record of a violation of this section, the trial
judge, in addition to or independent of all other penalties provided by law, may suspend for any period
of time not exceeding three years, or cancel the license of any person, partnership, association or
corporation, issued under R.C. § 4511.763.
(R.C. § 4511.762) (1985 Code, § 72.68)
§ 72.69 LICENSING BY DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY.
(A) No person, partnership, association or corporation shall transport pupils to or from school on
a school bus or enter into a contract with a board of education of any school district for the transportation
of pupils on a school bus without being licensed by the Department of Public Safety.
Traffic Rules 123
(B) Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.763) (1985 Code, § 72.69)
§ 72.70 REGISTRATION AND IDENTIFICATION OF SCHOOL BUSES.
(A) No person shall operate, nor shall any person being the owner thereof or having supervisory
responsibility therefor, permit the operation of a school bus within this municipality unless there is
displayed thereon an identifying number in accordance with R.C. § 4511.764.
(B) Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more
violations of R.C. § 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.762, 4511.77 or 4511.79 or a municipal
ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of those sections, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4511.764) (1985 Code, § 72.70)
§ 72.71 SCHOOL BUS MARKING.
(A) No person shall operate, nor shall any person being the owner thereof or having supervisory
responsibility therefor permit the operation of, a school bus within this municipality unless it is painted
national school bus yellow and is marked on both front and rear with the words “school bus” in black
lettering not less than eight inches in height and on the rear of the bus with the word “stop” in black
lettering not less than ten inches in height.
(B) Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more
violations of this section or R.C. § 4511.77, or R.C. § 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.762,
4511.764 or 4511.79 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of those sections,
whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(C) Whenever a person is found guilty in a court of record of a violation of this section, the trial
judge, in addition to or independent of all other penalties provided by law, may suspend, for any period
of time not exceeding three years, or cancel the license of any person, partnership, association or
corporation issued under R.C. § 4511.763.
(R.C. § 4511.77) (1985 Code, § 72.71)
124 Madeira - Traffic Code
§ 72.72 FLASHING RED LIGHT SIGNAL LAMPS.
(A) Every school bus shall, in addition to any other equipment and distinctive markings required
pursuant to R.C. §§ 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.764 and 4511.77, and any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinances, be equipped with signal lamps mounted as high as practicable, which shall display
to the front two alternately flashing red lights and two alternately flashing amber lights located at the
same level and to the rear two alternately flashing red lights and alternately flashing amber lights located
at the same level, and these lights shall be visible at 500 feet in normal sunlight. The alternately flashing
red lights shall be spaced as widely as practicable, and the alternately flashing amber lights shall be
located next to them.
(B) Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.771) (1985 Code, § 72.72)
§ 72.73 OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICE FOR OPERATOR.
(A) On and after May 6, 1986, no person, school board or governmental entity shall purchase, lease
or rent a new school bus unless the school bus has an occupant restraining device, as defined in R.C.
§ 4513.263, installed for use in its operator’s seat.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.772) (1985 Code, § 72.73)
Cross-reference:
Occupant restraining devices generally, see § 74.38
CHAPTER 73: MOTOR VEHICLE CRIMES
Section
General Provisions
73.01 Driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs
73.02 Driving commercial vehicle with impaired alertness or ability; use of drugs
73.03 Implied consent
73.04 Physical control of vehicle while under the influence
73.04.1 Immobilizing or disabling device violation
Reckless Operation
73.05 Reckless operation of vehicles
73.06 Reckless operation off streets and highways; competitive operation
73.07 Operator to be in reasonable control
Speed Regulations
73.10 Speed limits
73.11 Slow speed
73.12 Emergency vehicles excepted from speed limitation
73.13 Street racing defined; prohibited on public highways
73.14 Speed regulations on bridges
Resisting Officer
73.15 Prohibition against resisting officer
73.16 Presenting false name or information to officer
73.17 Operation restricted for mini-trucks and low-speed, under-speed or utility vehicles
Stopping After Accident
73.20 Exchange of identity and vehicle registration
73.21 Accident involving injury to persons or property
73.22 Accident involving damage to realty
73.23 Failure to report accident
125
126 Madeira - Traffic Code
Illegal Use of Automobile Keys, Licenses, and Identity
73.26 Officer may remove ignition key
73.27 Use of unauthorized plates
73.28 Operating without license plates
73.29 Operating with number of former owner
73.30 Resident operating with number issued by foreign state
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 73.01 DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL OR DRUGS.
(A) (1) No person shall operate any vehicle within this municipality, if, at the time of the operation,
any of the following apply:
(a) The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse or a combination of them;
(b) The person has a concentration of 0.08% or more but less than 0.17% by weight per
unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood;
(c) The person has a concentration of 0.096% or more but less than 0.204% by weight per
unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or plasma;
(d) The person has a concentration of 0.08 grams or more but less than 0.17 grams by
weight of alcohol per 210 liters of the person’s breath;
(e) The person has a concentration of 0.11 grams or more but less than 0.238 grams by
weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s urine;
(f) The person has a concentration of 0.17% or more by weight per unit volume of alcohol
in the person’s whole blood;
(g) The person has a concentration of 0.204% or more by weight per unit volume of
alcohol in the person’s blood serum or plasma;
(h) The person has a concentration of 0.17 grams or more by weight of alcohol per 210
liters of the person’s breath;
(i) The person has a concentration of 0.238 grams or more by weight of alcohol per 100
milliliters of the person’s urine; or
Motor Vehicle Crimes 127
(j) Except as provided in division (K) of this section, the person has a concentration of
any of the following controlled substances or metabolites of a controlled substance in the person’s whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds any of the following:
1. The person has a concentration of amphetamine in the person’s urine of at least
500 nanograms of amphetamine per milliliter of the person’s urine or has a concentration of
amphetamine in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 100 nanograms of
amphetamine per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma;
2. The person has a concentration of cocaine in the person’s urine of at least 150
nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of the person’s urine or has a concentration of cocaine in the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma;
3. The person has a concentration of cocaine metabolite in the person’s urine of at
least 150 nanograms of cocaine metabolite per milliliter of the person’s urine or has a concentration of
cocaine metabolite in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms of
cocaine metabolite per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma;
4. The person has a concentration of heroin in the person’s urine of at least 2,000
nanograms of heroin per milliliter of the person’s urine or has a concentration of heroin in the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms of heroin per milliliter of the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma;
5. The person has a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) in
the person’s urine of at least ten nanograms of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter
of the person’s urine or has a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) in the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least ten nanograms of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl
morphine) per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma;
6. The person has a concentration of L.S.D. in the person’s urine of at least 25
nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the person’s urine or a concentration of L.S.D. in the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least ten nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
7. The person has a concentration of marihuana in the person’s urine of at least ten
nanograms of marihuana per milliliter of the person’s urine or has a concentration of marihuana in the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least two nanograms of marihuana per milliliter
of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
8. Either of the following applies:
a. The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a
combination of them, and, as measured by gas chromatography mass spectrometry, the person has a
concentration of marihuana metabolite in the person’s urine of at least 15 nanograms of marihuana
128 Madeira - Traffic Code
metabolite per milliliter of the person’s urine or has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least five nanograms of marihuana metabolite per
milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma; or
b. As measured by gas chromatography mass spectrometry, the person has a
concentration of marihuana metabolite in the person’s urine of at least 35 nanograms of marihuana
metabolite per milliliter of the person’s urine or has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms of marihuana metabolite per
milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
9. The person has a concentration of methamphetamine in the person’s urine of at
least 500 nanograms of methamphetamine per milliliter of the person’s urine or has a concentration of
methamphetamine in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 100 nanograms of
methamphetamine per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma;
10. The person has a concentration of phencyclidine in the person’s urine of at least
25 nanograms of phencyclidine per milliliter of the person’s urine or has a concentration of phencyclidine
in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least ten nanograms of phencyclidine per
milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma; or
11. The State Board of Pharmacy has adopted a rule pursuant to R.C. § 4729.041 that
specifies the amount of salvia divinorum and the amount of salvinorin A that constitute concentrations
of salvia divinorum and salvinorin A in a person’s urine, in a person’s whole blood, or in a person’s
blood serum or plasma at or above which the person is impaired for purposes of operating any vehicle
within this state, the rule is in effect, and the person has a concentration of salvia divinorum or salvinorin
A of at least that amount so specified by rule in the person’s urine, in the person’s whole blood, or in
the person’s blood serum or plasma.
(2) No person who, within 20 years of the conduct described in division (A)(2)(a) of this
section, previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this division or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of division (A)(1) or (B) of this
section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or any other equivalent offense
shall do both of the following:
(a) Operate any vehicle within this municipality while under the influence of alcohol, a
drug of abuse, or a combination of them; and
(b) Subsequent to being arrested for operating the vehicle as described in division (A)(2)(a)
of this section, being asked by a law enforcement officer to submit to a chemical test or tests under R.C.
§ 4511.191 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and being advised by the officer in
accordance with R.C. § 4511.192 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance of the
consequences of the person’s refusal or submission to the test or tests, refuse to submit to the test or
tests.
Motor Vehicle Crimes 129
(B) No person under 21 years of age shall operate any vehicle within this municipality, if, at the
time of the operation, any of the following apply:
(1) The person has a concentration of at least 0.02% but less than 0.08% by weight per unit
volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood;
(2) The person has a concentration of at least 0.03% but less than 0.096% by weight per unit
volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or plasma;
(3) The person has a concentration of at least 0.02 grams but less than 0.08 grams by weight
of alcohol per 210 liters of the person’s breath; or
(4) The person has a concentration of at least 0.028 grams but less than 0.11 grams by weight
of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s urine.
(C) In any proceeding arising out of one incident, a person may be charged with a violation of
division (A)(1)(a) or (A)(2) and a violation of division (B)(1), (B)(2), or (B)(3) of this section, but the
person may not be convicted of more than one violation of these divisions.
(D) (1) (a) In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a violation of division
(A)(1)(a) of this section or for an equivalent offense that is vehicle-related, the result of any test of any
blood or urine withdrawn and analyzed at any health care provider, as defined in R.C. § 2317.02, may
be admitted with expert testimony to be considered with any other relevant and competent evidence in
determining the guilt or innocence of the defendant.
(b) In any criminal prosecution for a violation of division (A) or (B) of this section or for
an equivalent offense that is vehicle-related, the court may admit evidence on the concentration of
alcohol, drugs of abuse, controlled substances, metabolites of a controlled substance, or a combination
of them in the defendant’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, urine, or other bodily substance
at the time of the alleged violation as shown by chemical analysis of the substance withdrawn within
three hours of the time of the alleged violation. The three-hour time limit specified in this division
regarding the admission of evidence does not extend or affect the two-hour time limit specified in R.C.
§ 4511.192(A) as the maximum period of time during which a person may consent to a chemical test or
tests as described in that section. The court may admit evidence on the concentration of alcohol, drugs
of abuse, or a combination of them as described in this division when a person submits to a blood test
at the request of a law enforcement officer under R.C. § 4511.191 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, or a blood or urine sample is obtained pursuant to a search warrant. Only a physician, a
registered nurse, an emergency medical technician-intermediate, an emergency medical technicianparamedic, or a qualified technician, chemist or phlebotomist shall withdraw a blood sample for the
purpose of determining the alcohol, drug, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled substance, or
combination content of the whole blood, blood serum, or blood plasma. This limitation does not apply
to the taking of breath or urine specimens. A person authorized to withdraw blood under this division
may refuse to withdraw blood under this division, if in that person’s opinion, the physical welfare of the
130 Madeira - Traffic Code
person would be endangered by the withdrawing of blood. The bodily substance withdrawn under this
division (D)(1)(b) shall be analyzed in accordance with methods approved by the Director of Health by
an individual possessing a valid permit issued by the Director pursuant to R.C. § 3701.143.
(c) As used in division (D)(1)(b) of this section, EMERGENCY MEDICAL
TECHNICIAN-INTERMEDIATE and EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-PARAMEDIC have
the same meanings as in R.C. § 4765.01.
(2) In a criminal prosecution for a violation of division (A) of this section or for an equivalent
offense that is vehicle-related, if there was at the time the bodily substance was withdrawn a
concentration of less than the applicable concentration of alcohol specified in divisions (A)(1)(b),
(A)(1)(c), (A)(1)(d) and (A)(1)(e) of this section or less than the applicable concentration of a listed
controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance specified for a violation of division
(A)(1)(j) of this section, that fact may be considered with other competent evidence in determining the
guilt or innocence of the defendant. This division does not limit or affect a criminal prosecution for a
violation of division (B) of this section.
(3) Upon the request of the person who was tested, the results of the chemical test shall be
made available to the person or the person’s attorney, immediately upon the completion of the chemical
test analysis. If the chemical test was obtained pursuant to division (D)(1)(b) of this section, the person
tested may have a physician, a registered nurse, or a qualified technician, chemist, or phlebotomist of
the person’s own choosing administer a chemical test or tests, at the person’s expense, in addition to any
administered at the request of a law enforcement officer. If the person was under arrest as described in
R.C. § 4511.191(A)(5), the arresting officer shall advise the person at the time of the arrest that the
person may have an independent chemical test taken at the person’s own expense. If the person was
under arrest other than described in R.C. § 4511.191(A)(5), the form to be read to the person to be
tested, as required under § 73.02, shall state that the person may have an independent test performed at
the person’s expense. The failure or inability to obtain an additional chemical test by a person shall not
preclude the admission of evidence relating to the chemical test or tests taken at the request of a law
enforcement officer.
(4) (a) As used in division (D)(4)(b) and (D)(4)(c) of this section, NATIONAL HIGHWAY
TRAFFIC SAFETY ADMINISTRATION means the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration
established as an administration of the United States Department of Transportation under 96 Stat. 2415
(1983), 49 U.S.C. § 105.
(b) In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a violation of division (A)
or (B) of this section, of a municipal ordinance relating to operating a vehicle while under the influence
of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or alcohol and a drug of abuse, or of a municipal ordinance relating to
operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite
of a controlled substance in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine, if a law
enforcement officer has administered a field sobriety test to the operator of the vehicle involved in the
violation and if it is shown by clear and convincing evidence that the officer administered the test in
substantial compliance with the testing standards for any reliable, credible, and generally accepted field
Motor Vehicle Crimes 131
sobriety tests that were in effect at the time the tests were administered, including but not limited to any
testing standards then in effect that were set by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, all
of the following apply:
1. The officer may testify concerning the results of the field sobriety test so
administered;
2. The prosecution may introduce the results of the field sobriety test so administered
as evidence in any proceedings in the criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding; and
3. If testimony is presented or evidence is introduced under division (D)(4)(b)1. or
(D)(4)(b)2. of this section and if the testimony or evidence is admissible under the Rules of Evidence,
the court shall admit the testimony or evidence and the trier of fact shall give it whatever weight the trier
of fact considers to be appropriate.
(c) Division (D)(4)(b) of this section does not limit or preclude a court, in its determination
of whether the arrest of a person was supported by probable cause or its determination of any other
matter in a criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding of a type described in that division, from
considering evidence or testimony that is not otherwise disallowed by division (D)(4)(b) of this section.
(E) (1) Subject to division (E)(3) of this section, in any criminal prosecution or juvenile court
proceeding for a violation of division (A)(1)(b), (A)(1)(c), (A)(1)(d), (A)(1)(e), (A)(1)(f), (A)(1)(g),
(A)(1)(h), (A)(1)(i), or (A)(1)(j) or (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3), or (B)(4) of this section or for an equivalent
offense that is substantially equivalent to any of those divisions, a laboratory report from any laboratory
personnel issued a permit by the Department of Health authorizing an analysis as described in this
division that contains an analysis of the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, urine, or other
bodily substance tested and that contains all of the information specified in this division shall be admitted
as prima facie evidence of the information and statements that the report contains. The laboratory report
shall contain all of the following:
(a) The signature, under oath, of any person who performed the analysis;
(b) Any findings as to the identity and quantity of alcohol, a drug of abuse, a controlled
substance, a metabolite of a controlled substance, or a combination of them that was found;
(c) A copy of a notarized statement by the laboratory director of a designee of the director
that contains the name of each certified analyst or test performer involved with the report, the analyst’s
or test performer’s employment relationship with the laboratory that issued the report, and a notation that
performing an analysis of the type involved is part of the analyst’s or test performer’s regular duties; and
(d) An outline of the analyst’s or test performer’s education, training, and experience in
performing the type of analysis involved and a certification that the laboratory satisfies appropriate
quality control standards in general and, in this particular analysis, under rules of the Department of
Health.
132 Madeira - Traffic Code
(2) Notwithstanding any other provision of law regarding the admission of evidence, a report
of the type described in division (E)(1) of this section is not admissible against the defendant to whom
it pertains in any proceeding, other than a preliminary hearing or a grand jury proceeding, unless the
prosecutor has served a copy of the report on the defendant’s attorney or, if the defendant has no
attorney, on the defendant.
(3) A report of the type described in division (E)(1) of this section shall not be prima facie
evidence of the contents, identity, or amount of any substance if, within seven days after the defendant
to whom the report pertains or the defendant’s attorney receives a copy of the report, the defendant or
the defendant’s attorney demands the testimony of the person who signed the report. The judge in the
case may extend the seven-day time limit in the interest of justice.
(F) (1) Except as otherwise provided in this division, any physician, registered nurse, emergency
medical technician-intermediate, emergency medical technician-paramedic, or qualified technician,
chemist, or phlebotomist who withdraws blood from a person pursuant to this section or R.C. § 4511.19,
4511.191 or 4511.192, and any hospital, first-aid station, or clinic at which blood is withdrawn from
a person pursuant to this section or R.C. § 4511.19, 4511.191 or 4511.192, is immune from criminal
liability and civil liability based upon a claim of assault and battery or any other claim that is not a claim
of malpractice, for any act performed in withdrawing blood from the person. The immunity provided
in this division also extends to an emergency medical service organization that employs an emergency
medical technician-intermediate or emergency medical technician-paramedic who withdraws blood under
this section. The immunity provided in this division is not available to a person who withdraws blood
if the person engages in willful or wanton misconduct.
(2) As used in division (F)(1), EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-INTERMEDIATE
and EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-PARAMEDIC have the same meanings as in R.C.
§ 4765.01.
(G) (1) Whoever violates any provisions of divisions (A)(1)(a) through (A)(1)(i) or (A)(2) of this
section is guilty of operating a vehicle under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination
of them. Whoever violates division (A)(1)(j) of this section is guilty of operating a vehicle while under
the influence of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance. The court
shall sentence the offender for either offense under R.C. Chapter 2929, except as otherwise authorized
or required by divisions (G)(1)(a) through (G)(1)(e) of this section.
(a) Except as otherwise provided in division (G)(1)(b), (G)(1)(c), (G)(1)(d), or (G)(1)(e)
of this section, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree, and the court shall sentence
the offender to all of the penalties and sanctions provided in R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(a)(i) through
(G)(1)(a)(iv).
(b) Except as otherwise provided in division (G)(1)(e) of this section, an offender who,
within six years of the offense, previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of
division (A) or (B) of this section or one other equivalent offense is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the penalties and sanctions provided in R.C.
§ 4511.19(G)(1)(b)(i) through (G)(1)(b)(v).
Motor Vehicle Crimes 133
(c) Except as otherwise provided in division (G)(1)(e) of this section, an offender who,
within six years of the offense, previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of
division (A) or (B) of this section or other equivalent offenses is guilty of a misdemeanor. The court shall
sentence the offender to all of the penalties and sanctions provided in R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(c)(i) through
(G)(1)(c)(vi).
(d) Except as otherwise provided in division (G)(1)(e) of this section, an offender who,
within six years of the offense, previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more
violations of division (A) or (B) of this section or other equivalent offenses or an offender who, within
20 years of the offense, previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to five or more violations of
that nature is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(e) An offender who previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of
R.C. § 4511.19(A) that was a felony, regardless of when the violation and the conviction or guilty plea
occurred, is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(2) An offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of division (A) of this section
and who subsequently seeks reinstatement of the driver’s or occupational driver’s license or permit or
nonresident operating privilege suspended under this section or R.C. § 4511.19 as a result of the
conviction or guilty plea shall pay a reinstatement fee as provided in R.C. § 4511.191(F)(2).
(3) (a) If an offender is sentenced to a jail term under R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(b)(i) or
(G)(1)(b)(ii) or (G)(1)(c)(i) or (G)(1)(c)(ii) and if, within 60 days of sentencing of the offender, the court
issues a written finding on the record that, due to the unavailability of space at the jail where the offender
is required to serve the term, the offender will not be able to begin serving that term within the 60-day
period following the date of sentencing, the court may impose an alternative sentence as specified in R.C.
§ 4511.19(G)(3) that includes a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring, with continuous alcohol
monitoring, or with both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol monitoring.
(b) As an alternative to the mandatory jail terms as required by R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1), the
court may sentence the offender as provided in R.C. § 4511.19(G)(3).
(4) If an offender’s driver’s or occupational driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating
privilege is suspended under division (G) of this section or R.C. § 4511.19(G) and if R.C. § 4510.13
permits the court to grant limited driving privileges, the court may grant the limited driving privileges
in accordance with that section. If division (A)(7) of that section requires the court impose as a condition
of the privileges that the offender must display on the vehicle that is driven subject to the privileges
restricted license plates that are issued under R.C. § 4503.231, except as provided in division (B) of that
section, the court shall impose that condition as one of the conditions of the limited driving privileges
granted to the offender, except as provided in R.C. § 4503.231(B).
(5) Fines imposed under this section for a violation of division (A) of this section shall be
distributed as provided in R.C. § 4511.19(G)(5).
134 Madeira - Traffic Code
(6) If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to an order of criminal forfeiture under division
(G)(1)(c), (G)(1)(d), or (G)(1)(e) of this section is assigned or transferred and R.C. § 4503.234(B)(2)
or (B)(3) applies, in addition to or independent of any other penalty established by law, the court may
fine the offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of the National Automobile
Dealers Association. The proceeds of any fine so imposed shall be distributed in accordance with division
(C)(2) of that section.
(7) In all cases in which an offender is sentenced under division (G) of this section, the offender
shall provide the court with proof of financial responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender
fails to provide that proof of financial responsibility, the court, in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, may order restitution pursuant to § 130.99(G) or R.C. § 2929.18 or 2929.28 in an
amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the
direct and proximate result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or after committing
the offense for which the offender is sentenced under division (G) of this section.
(8) As used in division (G) of this section, ELECTRONIC MONITORING has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
(H) Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of operating a motor vehicle after
underage alcohol consumption and shall be punished as follows:
(1) Except as otherwise provided in division (H)(2) of this section, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. In addition to any other sanction imposed for the offense, the court
shall impose a class six suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege form the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(6).
(2) If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one or more violations of division (A) or (B) of this section or other equivalent offense or
offenses, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. In addition to any other sanction
imposed for the offense, the court shall impose a class four suspension of the offender’s driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating
privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4).
(3) If the offender also is convicted of or also pleads guilty to a specification of the type
described in R.C. § 2941.1414 and if the court imposes a jail term for the violation of division (B) of
this section, the court shall impose upon the offender an additional definite jail term pursuant to R.C.
§ 2929.24(E).
(4) The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial responsibility as defined in R.C.
§ 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any
other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to § 130.99(G) or R.C.
§ 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision
that was the direct and proximate result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or after
committing the violation of division (B) of this section.
Motor Vehicle Crimes 135
(I) (1) No court shall sentence an offender to an alcohol treatment program under this section
unless the treatment program complies with the minimum standards for alcohol treatment programs
adopted under R.C. Chapter 5119 by the Director of Mental Health and Addiction Services.
(2) An offender who stays in a drivers’ intervention program or in an alcohol treatment
program under an order issued under this section shall pay the cost of the stay in the program. However,
if the court determines that an offender who stays in an alcohol treatment program under an order issued
under this section is unable to pay the cost of the stay in the program, the court may order that the cost
be paid from the court’s Indigent Drivers’ Alcohol Treatment Fund.
(J) If a person whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating
privilege is suspended under this section or R.C. § 4511.19 files an appeal regarding any aspect of the
person’s trial or sentence, the appeal itself does not stay the operation of the suspension.
(K) Division (A)(1)(j) of this section does not apply to a person who operates a vehicle while the
person has a concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance
in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds the amount specified
in that division, if both of the following apply:
(1) The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a prescription issued by a licensed
health professional authorized to prescribe drugs; and
(2) The person injected, ingested, or inhaled the controlled substance in accordance with the
health professional’s directions.
(L) The prohibited concentrations of a controlled substance or a metabolite of a controlled substance
listed in division (A)(1)(j) of this section also apply in a prosecution of a violation of R.C. § 2923.16(D)
in the same manner as if the offender is being prosecuted for a prohibited concentration of alcohol.
(M) All terms defined in R.C. § 4510.01 apply to this section. If the meaning of a term defined in
R.C. § 4510.01 conflicts with the meaning of the same term as defined in R.C. § 4501.01 or 4511.01,
the term as defined in R.C. § 4510.01 applies to this section.
(R.C. § 4511.19(A) - (M))
(N) As used in this section, § 73.02 and § 73.03:
COMMUNITY RESIDENTIAL SANCTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
CONTINUOUS ALCOHOL MONITORING. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
DRUG OF ABUSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4506.01.
EQUIVALENT OFFENSE. Means any of the following:
(a) A violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B);
136 Madeira - Traffic Code
(b) A violation of a municipal OVI ordinance;
(c) A violation of R.C. § 2903.04 in a case in which the offender was subject to the
sanctions described in division (D) of that section;
(d) A violation of R.C. § 2903.06(A)(1) or R.C. § 2903.08 or a municipal ordinance that
is substantially equivalent to either of those divisions;
(e) A violation of R.C. § 2903.06(A)(2), (A)(3), or (A)(4), R.C. § 2903.08(A)(2), or
former R.C. § 2903.07, or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of those divisions
or that former section, in a case in which a judge or jury as the trier of fact found that the offender was
under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them;
(f) A violation of R.C. § 1547.11(A) or (B);
(g) A violation of a municipal ordinance prohibiting a person from operating or being in
physical control of any vessel underway or from manipulating any water skis, aquaplane, or similar
device on the waters of this state while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination
of them or prohibiting a person from operating or being in physical control of any vessel underway or
from manipulating any water skis, aquaplane, or similar device on the waters of this state with a
prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in
the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine;
(h) A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance, law of another state, or law
of the United States that is substantially equivalent to R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B) or R.C. § 1547.11(A)
or (B); or
(i) A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially equivalent to R.C.
§ 4511.19(A) or (B) or R.C. § 1547.11(A) or (B).
EQUIVALENT OFFENSE THAT IS VEHICLE-RELATED. Means an equivalent offense that
is any of the following:
(a) A violation described in division (a), (b), (c), (d), or (e) of the definition for
“equivalent offense” provided in this division (N);
(b) A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance, law of another state, or law
of the United States that is substantially equivalent to R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B); or
(c) A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially equivalent to R.C.
§ 4511.19(A) or (B).
JAIL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
Motor Vehicle Crimes 137
MANDATORY JAIL TERM. Means the mandatory term in jail of 3, 6, 10, 20, 30, or 60 days
that must be imposed under R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(a), (G)(1)(b), or (G)(1)(c) upon an offender convicted
of a violation of division (A) of that section and in relation to which all of the following apply:
(a) Except as specifically authorized under R.C. § 4511.19, the term must be served in
a jail; and
(b) Except as specifically authorized under R.C. § 4511.19, the term cannot be suspended,
reduced, or otherwise modified pursuant to R.C. §§ 2929.21 through 2929.28 or any other provision
of the Ohio Revised Code.
MANDATORY PRISON TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
MANDATORY TERM OF LOCAL INCARCERATION. Has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 2929.01.
MUNICIPAL OVI ORDINANCE and MUNICIPAL OVI OFFENSE. Mean any municipal
ordinance prohibiting a person from operating a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of
abuse, or a combination of them or prohibiting a person from operating a vehicle with a prohibited
concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine.
PRISON TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
SANCTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
(R.C. § 4511.181)
(1985 Code, § 73.01)
Cross-reference:
Endangering children, see § 135.17
Statutory reference:
Mandatory suspension periods; immobilizing or disabling device; restricted license, see
 R.C. § 4510.13
Trial judge to suspend driver’s license, see R.C. § 4510.05
§ 73.02 DRIVING COMMERCIAL VEHICLE WITH IMPAIRED ALERTNESS OR
ABILITY; USE OF DRUGS.
(A) No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle, as defined in R.C. § 4506.01, or a
commercial car or commercial tractor, as defined in R.C. § 4501.01, while the person’s ability or
alertness is so impaired by fatigue, illness or other causes that it is unsafe for the person to drive such
vehicle. No driver shall use any drug which would adversely affect the driver’s ability or alertness.
(Ord. 1567, passed 12-7-1981)
138 Madeira - Traffic Code
(B) No owner, as defined in R.C. § 4501.01, of a commercial motor vehicle, commercial car or
commercial tractor, or a person employing or otherwise directing the driver of such vehicle, shall require
or knowingly permit a driver in any such condition described in division (A) of this section to drive such
vehicle upon any street or highway.
(C) Except as otherwise provided in this division (C), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more
violations of this section or R.C. § 4511.79 or R.C. § 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.762, 4511.764
or 4511.77 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of those sections, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4511.79) (1985 Code, § 73.02)
§ 73.03 IMPLIED CONSENT.
(A) (1) As used in this section:
ALCOHOL MONITORING DEVICE. Means any device that provides for continuous
alcohol monitoring, any ignition interlock device, any immobilizing or disabling device other than an
ignition interlock device that is constantly available to monitor the concentration of alcohol in a person’s
system, or any other device that provides for the automatic testing and periodic reporting of alcohol
consumption by a person and that a court orders a person to use as a sanction imposed as a result of the
person’s conviction of or plea of guilty to an offense.
PHYSICAL CONTROL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.194.
(2) Any person who operates a vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used
by the public for vehicular travel or parking within this municipality or who is in physical control of a
vehicle shall be deemed to have given consent to a chemical test or tests of the person’s whole blood,
blood serum or plasma, breath or urine to determine the alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance,
metabolite of a controlled substance, or combination content of the person’s whole blood, blood serum
or plasma, breath or urine if arrested for a violation of § 73.01(A) or (B), § 73.03, R.C. § 4511.19(A)
or (B), R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or any other municipal OVI
ordinance.
(3) The chemical test or tests under division (A)(2) of this section shall be administered at the
request of a law enforcement officer having reasonable grounds to believe the person was operating or
in physical control of a vehicle in violation of a division, section or ordinance identified in division
(A)(2) of this section. The law enforcement agency by which the officer is employed shall designate
which of the tests shall be administered.
(4) Any person who is dead or unconscious, or who otherwise is in a condition rendering the
person incapable of refusal, shall be deemed to have consented as provided in division (A)(2) of this
section, and the test or tests may be administered, subject to R.C. §§ 313.12 through 313.16.
Motor Vehicle Crimes 139
(5) (a) If a law enforcement officer arrests a person for a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or
(B), R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or a municipal OVI ordinance
and if the person if convicted would be required to be sentenced under R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(c), (d) or
(e), the law enforcement officer shall request the person to submit, and the person shall submit, to a
chemical test or tests of the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine for the
purpose of determining the alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled
substance, or combination content of the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine.
A law enforcement officer who makes a request pursuant to this division (A)(5)(a) that a person submit
to a chemical test or tests is not required to advise the person of the consequences of submitting to, or
refusing to submit to, the test or tests and is not required to give the person the form described in
division (C) of this section, but the officer shall advise the person at the time of the arrest that if the
person refuses to take a chemical test the officer may employ whatever reasonable means are necessary
to ensure that the person submits to a chemical test of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma. The officer shall also advise the person at the time of the arrest that the person may have an
independent chemical test taken at the person’s own expense. Divisions (A)(3) and (A)(4) of this section
apply to the administration of a chemical test or tests pursuant to this division (A)(5)(a).
(b) If a person refuses to submit to a chemical test upon a request made pursuant to
division (A)(5)(a) of this section, the law enforcement officer who made the request may employ
whatever reasonable means are necessary to ensure that the person submits to a chemical test of the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma. A law enforcement officer who acts pursuant to this
division (A)(5)(b) to ensure that a person submits to a chemical test of the person’s whole blood or blood
serum or plasma is immune from criminal and civil liability based upon a claim for assault and battery
or any other claim for the acts, unless the officer so acted with malicious purpose, in bad faith, or in a
wanton or reckless manner.
(R.C. § 4511.191(A))
(B) Except as provided in division (A)(5) of this section, the arresting law enforcement officer shall
give advice in accordance with this section to any person under arrest for a violation of § 73.01(A) or
(B), § 73.03, R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, or any other municipal OVI ordinance. The officer shall give that advice in a written form
that contains the information described in division (C) of this section and shall read the advice to the
person. The form shall contain a statement that the form was shown to the person under arrest and read
to the person by the arresting officer. One or more persons shall witness the arresting officer’s reading
of the form, and the witnesses shall certify to this fact by signing the form. The person must submit to
the chemical test or tests, subsequent to the request of the arresting officer, within two hours of the time
of the alleged violation and, if the person does not submit to the test or tests within that two-hour time
limit, the failure to submit automatically constitutes a refusal to submit to the test or tests.
(C) Except as provided in division (A)(5) of this section, if a person is under arrest as described in
division (B) of this section, before the person may be requested to submit to a chemical test or tests to
determine the alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled substance, or
combination content of the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine, the arresting
officer shall read the following form to the person:
140 Madeira - Traffic Code
You now are under arrest for (specifically state the offense under state law or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance for which the person was arrested – operating a vehicle under
the influence of alcohol, a drug, or a combination of them; operating a vehicle while under the
influence of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance;
operating a vehicle after underage alcohol consumption; or having physical control of a vehicle
while under the influence).
If you refuse to take any chemical test required by law, your Ohio driving privileges will be
suspended immediately, and you will have to pay a fee to have the privileges reinstated. If you
have a prior conviction of OVI, OVUAC, or operating a vehicle while under the influence of
a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance under state or
municipal law within the preceding 20 years, you are now under arrest for state OVI, and, if
you refuse to take a chemical test, you will face increased penalties if you subsequently are
convicted of the state OVI.
(Read this part unless the person is under arrest for solely having physical control of a vehicle
while under the influence.) If you take any chemical test required by law and are found to be
at or over the prohibited amount of alcohol, a controlled substance or a metabolite of a
controlled substance in your whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine as set by law,
your Ohio driving privileges will be suspended immediately, and you will have to pay a fee to
have the privileges reinstated.
If you take a chemical test, you may have an independent chemical test taken at your own
expense.
(D) If the arresting law enforcement officer does not ask a person under arrest as described in
division (B) of this section or division (A)(5) of this section to submit to a chemical test or tests under
R.C. § 4511.191 or this section, the arresting officer shall seize the Ohio or out-of-state driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit of the person and immediately forward it to the court in which the
arrested person is to appear on the charge. If the arrested person is not in possession of the person’s
license or permit or it is not in the person’s vehicle, the officer shall order the person to surrender it to
the law enforcement agency that employs the officer within 24 hours after the arrest, and, upon the
surrender, the agency immediately shall forward the license or permit to the court in which the person
is to appear on the charge. Upon receipt of the license or permit, the court shall retain it pending the
arrested person’s initial appearance and any action taken under R.C. § 4511.196.
(E) (1) If a law enforcement officer asks a person under arrest as described in division (A)(5) of
this section to submit to a chemical test or tests under that division and the test results indicate a
prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance or a metabolite of a controlled substance in
the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine at the time of the alleged offense, or
if a law enforcement officer asks a person under arrest as described in division (B) of this section to
submit to a chemical test or tests under R.C. § 4511.191 or this section, if the officer advises the person
in accordance with this section of the consequences of the person’s refusal or submission, and if either
the person refuses to submit to the test or tests or, unless the arrest was for a violation of § 73.03, R.C.
§ 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the person submits to the test or tests and
Motor Vehicle Crimes 141
the test results indicate a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance or a metabolite of
a controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine at the time
of the alleged offense, the arresting officer shall do all of the following:
(a) On behalf of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, notify the person that, independent of
any penalties or sanctions imposed upon the person, the person’s Ohio driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or permit or nonresident operating privilege is suspended immediately, that the suspension will
last at least until the person’s initial appearance on the charge, which will be held within five days after
the date of the person’s arrest or the issuance of a citation to the person, and that the person may appeal
the suspension at the initial appearance or during the period of time ending 30 days after that initial
appearance;
(b) Seize the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit of the person and
immediately forward it to the Registrar. If the arrested person is not in possession of the person’s license
or permit or it is not in the person’s vehicle, the officer shall order the person to surrender it to the law
enforcement agency that employs the officer within 24 hours after the person is given notice of the
suspension, and, upon the surrender, the officer’s employing agency immediately shall forward the
license or permit to the Registrar;
(c) Verify the person’s current residence and, if it differs from that on the person’s driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or permit, notify the Registrar of the change; and
(d) Send to the Registrar, within 48 hours after the arrest of the person, a sworn report
that includes all of the following statements:
1. That the officer had reasonable grounds to believe that, at the time of the arrest,
the arrested person was operating a vehicle in violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B) or a municipal OVI
ordinance or for being in physical control of a stationary vehicle in violation of R.C. § 4511.194 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
2. That the person was arrested and charged with a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A)
or (B), R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or a municipal OVI
ordinance;
3. Unless division (E)(1)(d)5. of this section applies, that the officer asked the person
to take the designated chemical test or tests, advised the person in accordance with this section of the
consequences of submitting to, or refusing to take, the test or tests, and gave the person the form
described in division (C) of this section;
4. Unless division (E)(1)(d)5. of this section applies, that either the person refused
to submit to the chemical test or tests or, unless the arrest was for a violation of R.C. § 4511.194 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the person submitted to the chemical test or tests and the
test results indicate a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance or a metabolite of a
controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine at the time of
the alleged offense; and
142 Madeira - Traffic Code
5. If the person was under arrest as described in division (A)(5) of this section and
the chemical test or tests were performed in accordance with that division, that the person was under
arrest as described in that division, that the chemical test or tests were performed in accordance with that
division, and that test results indicated a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance or
a metabolite of a controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or
urine at the time of the alleged offense.
(2) Division (E)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is arrested for a violation of
§ 73.03, R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, who is asked by a law
enforcement officer to submit to a chemical test or tests under this section, and who submits to the test
or tests, regardless of the amount of alcohol, a controlled substance or a metabolite of a controlled
substance that the test results indicate is present in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma,
breath or urine.
(F) The arresting officer shall give the officer’s sworn report that is completed under this section
to the arrested person at the time of the arrest, or the Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall send the report
to the person by regular first class mail as soon as possible after receipt of the report, but not later than
14 days after receipt of it. An arresting officer may give an unsworn report to the arrested person at the
time of the arrest provided the report is complete when given to the arrested person and subsequently
is sworn to by the arresting officer. As soon as possible, but not later than 48 hours after the arrest of
the person, the arresting officer shall send a copy of the sworn report to the court in which the arrested
person is to appear on the charge for which the person was arrested.
(G) The sworn report of an arresting officer completed under this section is prima facie proof of the
information and statements that it contains. It shall be admitted and considered as prima facie proof of
the information and statements that it contains in any appeal under R.C. § 4511.197 relative to any
suspension of a person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating
privilege that results from the arrest covered by the report.
(R.C. § 4511.192)
(H) (1) A suspension of a person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident
operating privilege under this section for the time described in R.C. § 4511.191(B) or (C) is effective
immediately from the time at which the arresting officer serves the notice of suspension upon the arrested
person. Any subsequent finding that the person is not guilty of the charge that resulted in the person’s
being requested to take the chemical test or tests under division (A) of this section does not affect the
suspension.
(2) If a person arrested for operating a vehicle in violation of § 73.01(A) or (B), R.C.
§ 4511.19(A) or (B), or any other municipal OVI ordinance, or for being in physical control of a vehicle
in violation of § 73.03 or R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, regardless
of whether the person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating
privilege is or is not suspended under R.C. § 4511.191(B) or (C) or R.C. Chapter 4510, the person’s
Motor Vehicle Crimes 143
initial appearance on the charge resulting from the arrest shall be held within five days of the persons’
arrest or the issuance of the citation to him or her, subject to any continuance granted by the court
pursuant to R.C. § 4511.197 regarding the issues specified in that section.
(R.C. § 4511.191(D))
(1985 Code, § 73.04)
Statutory reference:
Continuous alcohol monitoring, see R.C. § 4511.198
Disposition of fines, immobilization of vehicle and impoundment of license plates, criminal forfeiture
 for municipal ordinance conviction, see R.C. § 4511.193
Effect of refusal to submit to test, seizure of license, suspension periods, appeal procedures,
 occupational driving privileges, and Indigent Drivers Alcohol Treatment Funds, see
 R.C. § 4511.191
Judicial pretrial suspension, initial appearance, see R.C. § 4511.196
Mandatory suspension periods; immobilizing or disabling device; restricted license, see
 R.C. § 4510.13
Seizure of vehicles upon arrest, see R.C. § 4511.195
§ 73.04 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF VEHICLE WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE.
(A) As used in this section, PHYSICAL CONTROL means being in the driver’s position of the front
seat of a vehicle and having possession of the vehicle’s ignition key or other ignition device.
(B) No person shall be in physical control of a vehicle if, at the time of the physical control, any
of the following apply:
(1) The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse or a combination of them;
(2) The person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine contains at least the
concentration of alcohol specified in § 73.01(A)(1)(b), (A)(1)(c), (A)(1)(d) or (A)(1)(e); or
(3) Except as provided in division (E) of this section, the person has a concentration of a listed
controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood
serum or plasma or urine that equals or exceeds the concentration specified in § 73.01(A)(1)(j).
(C) (1) In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a violation of this section, if
a law enforcement officer has administered a field sobriety test to the person in physical control of the
vehicle involved in the violation and if it is shown by clear and convincing evidence that the officer
administered the test in substantial compliance with the testing standards for any reliable, credible and
generally acceptable field sobriety tests that were in effect at the time the tests were administered,
including but not limited to any testing standards then in effect what were set by the National Highway
Traffic Safety Administration, all of the following apply:
144 Madeira - Traffic Code
(a) The officer may testify concerning the results of the field sobriety test so administered;
(b) The prosecution may introduce the results of the field sobriety test so administered as
evidence in any proceedings in the criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding; and
(c) If testimony is presented or evidence is introduced under division (C)(1)(a) or (C)(1)(b)
of this section and if the testimony or evidence is admissible under the Rules of Evidence, the court shall
admit the testimony or evidence, and the trier of fact shall give it whatever weight the trier of fact
considers to be appropriate.
(2) Division (C)(1) of this section does not limit or preclude a court, in its determination of
whether the arrest of a person was supported by probable cause or its determination of any other matter
in a criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding of a type described in that division, from
considering evidence or testimony that is not otherwise disallowed by division (C)(1) of this section.
(D) Whoever violates this section is guilty of having physical control of a vehicle while under the
influence, a misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition to other sanctions imposed, the court may
impose on the offender a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident operating privilege from the
range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
(E) Division (B)(3) of this section does not apply to a person who is in physical control of a vehicle
while the person has a concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled
substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds the
amount specified in § 73.01(A)(1)(j) if both of the following apply:
(1) The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a prescription issued by a licensed
health professional authorized to prescribe drugs; and
(2) The person injected, ingested or inhaled the controlled substance in accordance with the
health professional’s directions.
(R.C. § 4511.194) (1985 Code, § 73.041)
§ 73.04.1 IMMOBILIZING OR DISABLING DEVICE VIOLATION.
(A) (1) No offender with limited driving privileges, during any period that the offender is required
to operate only a motor vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling device, shall request or
permit any other person to breathe into the device if it is an ignition interlock device or another type of
device that monitors the concentration of alcohol in a person’s breath or to otherwise start the motor
vehicle equipped with the device, for the purpose of providing the offender with an operable motor
vehicle.
Motor Vehicle Crimes 145
(2) (a) Except as provided in division (A)(2)(b) of this section, no person shall breathe into
an immobilizing or disabling device that is an ignition interlock device or another type of device that
monitors the concentration of alcohol in a person’s breath or otherwise start a motor vehicle equipped
with an immobilizing or disabling device, for the purpose of providing an operable motor vehicle to an
offender with limited driving privileges who is permitted to operate only a motor vehicle equipped with
an immobilizing or disabling device.
(b) Division (A)(2)(a) of this section does not apply to a person in the following
circumstances:
1. The person is an offender with limited driving privileges;
2. The person breathes into an immobilizing or disabling device that is an ignition
interlock device or another type of device that monitors the concentration of alcohol in a person’s breath
or otherwise starts a motor vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling device; and
3. The person breathes into the device or starts the vehicle for the purpose of
providing the person with an operable motor vehicle.
(3) No unauthorized person shall tamper with or circumvent the operation of an immobilizing
or disabling device.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of an immobilizing or disabling device violation, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4510.44) (1985 Code, § 73.042)
RECKLESS OPERATION
§ 73.05 RECKLESS OPERATION OF VEHICLES.
(A) No person shall operate a vehicle on any street or highway in willful or wanton disregard of the
safety of persons or property.
(B) Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.20) (1985 Code, § 73.05)
146 Madeira - Traffic Code
§ 73.06 RECKLESS OPERATION OFF STREETS AND HIGHWAYS; COMPETITIVE
OPERATION.
(A) (1) No person shall operate a vehicle on any public or private property other than streets or
highways in willful or wanton disregard of the safety of persons or property.
(2) This section does not apply to the competitive operation of vehicles on public or private
property when the owner of such property knowingly permits such operation thereon.
(B) Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.201) (1985 Code, § 73.06)
§ 73.07 OPERATOR TO BE IN REASONABLE CONTROL.
(A) No person shall operate a motor vehicle, agricultural tractor or agricultural tractor that is
towing, pulling or otherwise drawing a unit of farm machinery on any street, highway or property open
to the public for vehicular traffic without being in reasonable control of the vehicle, agricultural tractor
or unit of farm machinery.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a motor vehicle or agricultural tractor
without being in control of it, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.202) (1985 Code, § 73.07)
SPEED REGULATIONS
§ 73.10 SPEED LIMITS.
(A) No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a speed greater or less than is reasonable or proper,
having due regard for the traffic, surface and width of the street or highway and any other conditions,
and no person shall drive any motor vehicle in and upon any street or highway at a greater speed than
will permit him or her to bring it to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead.
(B) It is prima facie lawful, in the absence of a lower limit declared or established pursuant to this
section by the Director of Transportation or local authorities, for the operator of a motor vehicle to
operate the same at a speed not exceeding the following:
Motor Vehicle Crimes 147
(1) (a) Twenty mph in school zones during school recess and while children are going to or
leaving school during the opening or closing hours, and when 20 mph school speed limit signs are
erected, except that on controlled-access highways and expressways, if the right-of-way line fence has
been erected without pedestrian opening, the speed shall be governed by division (B)(4) of this section,
and on freeways, if the right-of-way line fence has been erected without pedestrian opening, the speed
shall be governed by divisions (B)(9) and (B)(10) of this section. The end of every school zone may be
marked by a sign indicating the end of the zone. Nothing in this section or in the Manual and
Specifications for a Uniform System of Traffic-Control Devices shall be construed to require school zones
to be indicated by signs equipped with flashing or other lights, or giving other special notice of the hours
in which the school zone speed limit is in effect.
(b) As used in this section, SCHOOL means any school chartered under R.C. § 3301.16
and any nonchartered school that during the preceding year filed with the Department of Education in
compliance with O.A.C. § 3301-35-08, a copy of the school’s report for the parents of the school’s
pupils certifying that the school meets state minimum standards for nonchartered, nontax-supported
schools and presents evidence of this filing to the jurisdiction from which it is requesting the
establishment of a school zone. The term also includes a special elementary school that in writing
requests the County Engineer to create a school zone at the location of the school. Upon receipt of such
written request, the County Engineer shall create a school zone at that location by erecting appropriate
signs.
(c) As used in this section, SCHOOL ZONE means that portion of a street or highway
passing a school fronting upon the street or highway that is encompassed by projecting the school
property lines to the fronting street or highway, and also includes that portion of a state highway. Upon
request from local authorities for streets and highways under their jurisdiction and that portion of a state
highway under the jurisdiction of the Director of Transportation or a request from a County Engineer
in the case of a school zone for a special elementary school, the Director may extend the traditional
school zone boundaries. The distances in divisions (B)(1)(c)1. through (B)(1)(c)3. below shall not exceed
300 feet per approach per direction, and are bounded by whichever of the following distances or
combination thereof the Director approves as most appropriate:
1. The distance encompassed by projecting the school building lines normal to the
fronting highway and extending a distance of 300 feet on each approach direction;
2. The distance encompassed by projecting the school property lines intersecting the
fronting highway and extending a distance of 300 feet on each approach direction; or
3. The distance encompassed by the special marking of the pavement for a principal
school pupil crosswalk plus a distance of 300 feet on each approach direction of the highway.
(d) Nothing in this section shall be construed to invalidate the Director’s initial action on
August 9, 1976, establishing all school zones at the traditional school zone boundaries defined by
projecting school property lines, except when those boundaries are extended as provided in divisions
(B)(1)(a) and (B)(1)(c) of this section.
148 Madeira - Traffic Code
(e) As used in this division, CROSSWALK has the meaning given that term in R.C.
§ 4511.01(LL)(2).
(f) The Director may, upon request by resolution of the Legislative Authority and upon
submission by the municipality of such engineering, traffic, and other information as the Director
considers necessary, designate a school zone on any portion of a state route lying within the municipality
that includes a crosswalk customarily used by children going to or leaving a school during recess and
opening and closing hours, whenever the distance, as measured in a straight line, from the school
property line nearest the crosswalk to the nearest point of a crosswalk is no more than 1,320 feet. Such
a school zone shall include the distance encompassed by the crosswalk and extending 300 feet in each
appropriate direction of the state route.
(g) As used in this section, SPECIAL ELEMENTARY SCHOOL means a school that
meets all of the following:
1. It is not chartered and does not receive tax revenue from any source;
2. It does not educate children beyond the eighth grade;
3. It is located outside the limits of a municipal corporation;
4. A majority of the total number of students enrolled at the school are not related
by blood; and
5. The principal or other person in charge of the special elementary school annually
sends a report to the superintendent of the school district in which the special elementary school is
located indicating the total number of students enrolled at the school, but otherwise the principal or other
person in charge does not report any other information or data to the superintendent.
(2) Twenty-five mph in all other portions of the municipality, except on state routes outside
business districts, through highways outside business districts, and alleys;
(3) Thirty-five mph on all state routes or through highways within the municipality outside
business districts, except as provided in divisions (B)(4) and (B)(6) of this section;
(4) Fifty mph on controlled-access highways and expressways within the municipality;
(5) Fifty-five mph on highways outside the municipality, other than highways within island
jurisdictions as provided in division (B)(8) of this section, highways as provided in division (B)(9) of this
section, and highways, expressways and freeways as provided in divisions (B)(12), (B)(13), (B)(14) and
(B)(16) of this section;
(6) Fifty mph on state routes within the municipality outside urban districts unless a lower
prima facie speed is established as further provided in this section;
Motor Vehicle Crimes 149
(7) Fifteen mph on all alleys within the municipality;
(8) Thirty-five mph on highways outside the municipality that are within an island jurisdiction;
(9) Sixty mph on two-lane state routes outside municipal corporations as established by the
Director under R.C. § 4511.21(H)(2);
(10) Fifty-five mph at all times on freeways with paved shoulders inside the municipality, other
than freeways as provided in divisions (B)(14) and (B)(16) of this section;
(11) Fifty-five mph at all times on freeways outside the municipality, other than freeways as
provided in divisions (B)(14) and (B)(16) of this section;
(12) Sixty mph for operators of any motor vehicle at all times on all portions of rural divided
highways;
(13) Sixty-five mph for operators of any motor vehicle at all times on all rural expressways
without traffic control signals;
(14) Seventy mph for operators of any motor vehicle at all times on all rural freeways;
(15) Fifty-five mph for operators of any motor vehicle at all times on all portions of freeways
in congested areas as determined by the Director and that are part of the interstate system and are located
within a municipal corporation or within an interstate freeway outerbelt; and
(16) Sixty-five mph for operators of any motor vehicle at all times on all portions of freeways
in urban areas as determined by the Director and that are part of the interstate system and are part of an
interstate freeway outerbelt.
(C) It is prima facie unlawful for any person to exceed any of the speed limitations in divisions
(B)(1)(a), (B)(2), (B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(6), (B)(7) and (B)(8) of this section or any declared or established
pursuant to this section by the Director or local authorities and it is unlawful for any person to exceed
any of the speed limitations in division (D) of this section. No person shall be convicted of more than
one violation of this section for the same conduct, although violations of more than one provision of this
section may be charged in the alternative in a single affidavit.
(D) No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon a street or highway as follows:
(1) At a speed exceeding 55 mph, except upon a two-lane state route as provided in division
(B)(9) of this section and upon a highway, expressway or freeway as provided in divisions (B)(12),
(B)(13), (B)(14) and (B)(16) of this section;
(2) At a speed exceeding 60 mph upon a two-lane state route as provided in division (B)(9) of
this section and upon a highway as provided in division (B)(12) of this section;
150 Madeira - Traffic Code
(3) At a speed exceeding 65 mph upon an expressway as provided in division (B)(13) of this
section or upon a freeway as provided in division (B)(16) of this section, except upon a freeway as
provided in division (B)(14) of this section;
(4) At a speed exceeding 70 mph upon a freeway as provided in division (B)(14) of this section;
or
(5) At a speed exceeding the posted speed limit upon a highway, expressway or freeway for
which the Director has determined and declared a speed limit pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(I)(2) or (L)(2).
(E) Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(E), in every charge of violating this section, the affidavit and
warrant shall specify the time, place and speed at which the defendant is alleged to have driven, and in
charges made in reliance upon division (C) of this section also the speed which division (B)(1)(a), (B)(2),
(B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(6), (B)(7) or (B)(8) of, or a limit declared or established pursuant to, this section or
R.C. § 4511.21 declares is prima facie lawful at the time and place of such alleged violation, except that
in affidavits where a person is alleged to have driven at a greater speed than will permit the person to
bring the vehicle to stop within the assured clear distance ahead, the affidavit and warrant need not
specify the speed at which the defendant is alleged to have driven.
(F) Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(F), when a speed in excess of both a prima facie limitation and a
limitation in division (D) of this section is alleged, the defendant shall be charged in a single affidavit,
alleging a single act, with a violation indicated of both division (B)(1)(a), (B)(2), (B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(6),
(B)(7) or (B)(8) of this section, or of a limit declared or established pursuant to this section or R.C.
§ 4511.21 by the Director or local authorities, and of the limitation in division (D) of this section. If the
court finds a violation of division (B)(1)(a), (B)(2), (B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(6), (B)(7) or (B)(8) of, or a limit
declared or established pursuant to, this section or R.C. § 4511.21 has occurred, it shall enter a judgment
of conviction under such division and dismiss the charge under division (D) of this section. If it finds
no violation of division (B)(1)(a), (B)(2), (B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(6), (B)(7) or (B)(8) of, or a limit declared
or established pursuant to, this section or R.C. § 4511.21, it shall then consider whether the evidence
supports a conviction under division (D) of this section.
(G) Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(G), points shall be assessed for a violation of a limitation under
division (D) of this section in accordance with R.C. § 4510.036.
(R.C. § 4511.21(A) - (G))
(H) Whenever, in accordance with R.C. § 4511.21(H) through (N), the maximum prima facie speed
limitations as established herein have been altered, either higher or lower, and the appropriate signs
giving notice have been erected as required, operators of motor vehicles shall be governed by the speed
limitations set forth on such signs. It is prima facie unlawful for any person to exceed the speed limits
posted upon such signs.
(I) As used in this section:
COMMERCIAL BUS. Means a motor vehicle designed for carrying more than nine passengers
and used for the transportation of persons for compensation.
Motor Vehicle Crimes 151
INTERSTATE SYSTEM. Has the same meaning as in 23 U.S.C. § 101.
NONCOMMERCIAL BUS. Includes but is not limited to a school bus, or a motor vehicle
operated solely for the transportation of persons associated with a charitable or nonprofit organization.
OUTERBELT. A portion of a freeway that is part of the interstate system and is located in the
outer vicinity of a major municipal corporation or group of municipal corporations, as designated by the
Director.
RURAL. Outside urbanized areas, as designated in accordance with 23 U.S.C. § 101, and
outside of a business or urban district.
(R.C. § 4511.21(O)) (Ord. 87-44, passed 9-8-1987; Ord. 88-39, passed 10-3-1988)
(J) Speed limits for private roads and driveways.
(1) The owner of a private road or driveway located in a private residential area containing 20
or more dwelling units may establish a speed limit on the road or driveway by complying with all of the
following requirements:
(a) The speed limit is not less than 25 mph and is indicated by a sign that is in a proper
position, is sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person, and meets the specifications
for the basic speed limit sign included in the manual adopted by the Department of Transportation
pursuant to R.C. § 4511.09; and
(b) The owner has posted a sign at the entrance of the private road or driveway that is in
plain view and clearly informs persons entering the road or driveway that they are entering private
property, a speed limit has been established for the road or driveway, and the speed limit is enforceable
by law enforcement officers under state law.
(2) No person shall operate a vehicle upon a private road or driveway as provided in division
(J)(1) of this section at a speed exceeding any speed limit established and posted pursuant to division
(J)(1).
(3) When a speed limit is established and posted in accordance with division (J)(1) of this
section, a law enforcement officer may apprehend a person violating the speed limit of the residential
area by utilizing any of the means described in R.C. § 4511.091 or by any other accepted method of
determining the speed of a motor vehicle and may stop and charge the person with exceeding the speed
limit.
(4) Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.211(D), points shall be assessed for violation of a speed limit
established and posted in accordance with division (J)(1) of this section in accordance with R.C.
§ 4510.036.
152 Madeira - Traffic Code
(5) As used in this division (J):
OWNER. Includes but is not limited to a person who holds title to the real property in fee
simple, a condominium owners’ association, a property owners’ association, a board of directors or
trustees of a private community, and a nonprofit corporation governing a private community.
PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL AREA CONTAINING 20 OR MORE DWELLING UNITS.
Does not include a Chautauqua assembly as defined in R.C. § 4511.90.
(R.C. § 4511.211(A) - (E))
(K) Penalties.
(1) Divisions (A) through (I).
(a) A violation of any provision of divisions (A) through (I) of this section is one of the
following:
1. Except as otherwise provided in divisions (K)(1)(a)2., (K)(1)(a)3., (K)(1)(b) and
(K)(1)(c) of this section, a minor misdemeanor;
2. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to two violations of any provision of divisions (A) through (I) of this section, R.C.
§ 4511.21, or any provision of any other municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any
provision of that section, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; and
3. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of any provision of divisions (A) through (I) of this section,
R.C. § 4511.21, or any provision of any other municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any
provision of that section, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(b) If the offender has not previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of
any provision of division (A) through (I) of this section, R.C. § 4511.21, or any other municipal
ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any provision of that section, and operated a motor vehicle
faster than 35 mph in a business district of the municipality, faster than 50 mph in other portions of the
municipality, or faster than 35 miles an hour in a school zone during recess or while children are going
to or leaving school during the school’s opening or closing hours, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(c) Notwithstanding division (K)(1)(a) of this section, if the offender operated a motor
vehicle in a construction zone where a sign was then posted in accordance with R.C. § 4511.98, the
court, in addition to all other penalties provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a fine of two
times the usual amount imposed for the violation. No court shall impose a fine of two times the usual
amount imposed for the violation upon an offender if the offender alleges, in an affidavit filed with the
Motor Vehicle Crimes 153
court prior to the offender’s sentencing, that the offender is indigent and is unable to pay the fine
imposed pursuant to this division and if the court determines that the offender is an indigent person and
unable to pay the fine.
(R.C. § 4511.21(P))
(2) Division (J). A violation of division (J)(2) of this section is one of the following:
(a) Except as otherwise provided in divisions (K)(2)(b) and (K)(2)(c) of this section, a
minor misdemeanor;
(b) If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to two violations of division (J)(2) of this section, R.C. § 4511.211(B), or any other
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to that division, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree;
or
(c) If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to three or more violations of division (J)(2) of this section, R.C. § 4511.211(B), or any
other municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to that division, a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(R.C. § 4511.211(F)) (1985 Code, § 73.10)
Statutory reference:
Alteration of speed limits with approval of Director, see R.C. § 4511.21(H) through (N)
Arrest pending warrant when radar, electrical or mechanical timing device used to determine
 violation, see R.C. § 4511.091
§ 73.11 SLOW SPEED OR STOPPING.
(A) No person shall stop or operate a vehicle at such an unreasonably slow speed as to impede or
block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when stopping or reduced speed is
necessary for safe operation or to comply with law.
(B) Whenever the Director of Transportation or local authorities determine on the basis of an
engineering and traffic investigation that slow speeds on any part of a controlled-access highway,
expressway or freeway consistently impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, the Director
or such local authority may declare a minimum speed limit below which no person shall operate a motor
vehicle, except when necessary for safe operation or in compliance with the law. No minimum speed
limit established hereunder shall be less than 30 mph, greater than 50 mph, nor effective until the
provisions of R.C. § 4511.21 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, relating to appropriate
signs, have been fulfilled and local authorities have obtained the approval of the Director.
(C) In a case involving a violation of this section, the trier of fact, in determining whether the
vehicle was being operated at an unreasonably slow speed, shall consider the capabilities of the vehicle
and its operator.
154 Madeira - Traffic Code
(D) Except as otherwise provided in this division (D), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.22) (1985 Code, § 73.11) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977)
§ 73.12 EMERGENCY VEHICLES EXCEPTED FROM SPEED LIMITATION.
The prima facie speed limitations set forth in R.C. § 4511.21 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance do not apply to emergency vehicles or public safety vehicles when they are responding to
emergency calls and are equipped with and displaying at least one flashing, rotating or oscillating light
visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle, and
when the drivers thereof sound audible signals by bell, siren or exhaust whistle. This section does not
relieve the driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard
for the safety of all persons using the street or highway.
(R.C. § 4511.24) (1985 Code, § 73.12) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977)
§ 73.13 STREET RACING DEFINED; PROHIBITED ON PUBLIC HIGHWAYS.
(A) As used in this section, STREET RACING means the operation of two or more vehicles from
a point side by side at accelerating speeds in a competitive attempt to outdistance each other, or the
operation of one or more vehicles over a common selected course, from the same point to the same
point, wherein timing is made of the participating vehicles involving competitive accelerations or speeds.
Persons rendering assistance in any manner to such competitive use of vehicles shall be equally charged
as the participants. The operation of two or more vehicles side by side either at speeds in excess of prima
facie lawful speeds established by R.C. § 4511.21(B)(1)(a) through (B)(8) or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, or rapidly accelerating from a common starting point to a speed in excess of such
prima facie lawful speeds shall be prima facie evidence of street racing.
(B) No person shall participate in street racing upon any public road, street or highway in this
municipality.
(C) Whoever violates this section is guilty of street racing, a misdemeanor of the first degree. In
addition to any other sanctions, the court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s license, commercial
driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident operating privileges
for not less than 30 days or more than three years. No judge shall suspend the first 30 days of any
suspension of an offender’s license, permit or privilege imposed under this division (C).
(R.C. § 4511.251) (1985 Code, § 73.13)
Motor Vehicle Crimes 155
§ 73.14 SPEED REGULATIONS ON BRIDGES.
(A) (1) No person shall operate a vehicle over any bridge or other elevated structure constituting
a part of a highway at a speed which is greater than the maximum speed that can be maintained with
safety to such bridge or structure, when such structure is posted with signs as provided in this section.
(2) The Department of Transportation upon request from any local authority shall, or upon its
own initiative may, conduct an investigation of any bridge or other elevated structure constituting a part
of a highway, and if it finds that such structure cannot with safety withstand traffic traveling at the speed
otherwise permissible under this Traffic Code, the Department shall determine and declare the maximum
speed of traffic which such structure can withstand, and shall cause or permit suitable signs stating such
maximum speed to be erected and maintained at a distance of a least 100 feet before each end of the
structure.
(3) Upon the trial of any person charged with a violation of this section, proof of such
determination of the maximum speed by the Department and the existence of such signs shall constitute
prima facie evidence of the maximum speed which can be maintained with safety to such bridge or
structure.
(B) Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.23)
RESISTING OFFICER
§ 73.15 PROHIBITION AGAINST RESISTING OFFICER.
(A) No person shall resist, hinder, obstruct or abuse any Sheriff, constable or other official while
that official is attempting to arrest offenders under any provision of this Title VII. No person shall
interfere with any person charged under any provision of this Title VII with the enforcement of the law
relative to public highways.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(C) It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the hindrance, obstruction, resistance or
interference alleged consisted of constitutionally protected speech only.
(R.C. § 4513.36) (1985 Code, § 73.15)
156 Madeira - Traffic Code
§ 73.16 PRESENTING FALSE NAME OR INFORMATION TO OFFICER.
(A) No person shall knowingly present, display or orally communicate a false name, Social Security
number or date of birth to a law enforcement officer who is in the process of issuing to the person a
traffic ticket or complaint.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4513.361) (1985 Code, § 73.16)
§ 73.17 OPERATION RESTRICTED FOR MINI-TRUCKS AND LOW-SPEED,
UNDER-SPEED OR UTILITY VEHICLES.
(A) (1) No person shall operate a low-speed vehicle upon any street or highway having an
established speed limit greater than 35 mph.
(2) No person shall operate an under-speed or utility vehicle or a mini-truck upon any street
or highway except as follows:
(a) Upon a street or highway having an established speed limit not greater than 35 mph
and only upon such streets or highways where the municipality has granted permission for such operation
in accordance with division (E) of this section; and
(b) A state park or political subdivision employee or volunteer operating a utility vehicle
exclusively within the boundaries of state parks or political subdivision parks for the operation or
maintenance of state or political subdivision park facilities.
(3) No person shall operate a motor-driven cycle or motor scooter upon any street or highway
having an established speed limit greater than 45 mph.
(B) This section does not prohibit either of the following:
(1) A person operating a low-speed, under-speed or utility vehicle or a mini-truck from
proceeding across an intersection of a street or highway having a speed limit greater than 35 mph; or
(2) A person operating a motor-driven cycle or motor scooter from proceeding across an
intersection of a street or highway having a speed limit greater than 45 mph.
(C) Nothing in this section shall prevent the municipality from adopting more stringent local
ordinances, resolutions or regulations governing the operation of a low-speed vehicle or a mini-truck,
or a motor-driven cycle or motor scooter.
(D) Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates division (A) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this
Motor Vehicle Crimes 157
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If within one year of the offense, the offender
previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.214)
(E) By ordinance or resolution, the municipality may authorize the operation of under-speed or
utility vehicles or mini-trucks on a public street or highway under its jurisdiction. The municipality shall
do all of the following:
(1) Limit the operation of those vehicles to streets and highways having an established speed
limit not greater than 35 mph;
(2) Require the vehicle owner who wishes to operate an under-speed or utility vehicle or a
mini-truck on the public streets or highways to submit the vehicle to an inspection conducted by a local
law enforcement agency that complies with inspection requirements established by the Department of
Public Safety under R.C. § 4513.02;
(3) Permit the operation on public streets or highways of only those vehicles that successfully
pass the required vehicle inspection, are registered in accordance with R.C. Chapter 4503, and are titled
in accordance with R.C. Chapter 4505; and
(4) Notify the Director of Public Safety, in a manner the Director determines, of the
authorization for the operation of under-speed or utility vehicles or mini-trucks.
(F) The municipality may establish additional requirements for the operation of under-speed or
utility vehicles or mini-trucks on its streets and highways.
(R.C. § 4511.215)
(G) (1) Except as provided in this division (G) and divisions (E) and (F) of this section, no person
shall operate a mini-truck within this municipality.
(2) A person may operate a mini-truck on a farm for agricultural purposes only when the owner
of the farm qualifies for the current agricultural use valuation tax credit. A mini-truck may be operated
by or on behalf of such a farm owner on public roads and rights-of-way only when traveling from one
farm field to another.
(3) A person may operate a mini-truck on property owned or leased by a dealer who sells
mini-trucks at retail.
(4) Whoever violates this division (G) shall be penalized as provided in division (D) of this
section.
(R.C. § 4519.401)
158 Madeira - Traffic Code
(H) This section will take effect on January 1, 2017.
STOPPING AFTER ACCIDENT
§ 73.20 EXCHANGE OF IDENTITY AND VEHICLE REGISTRATION.
(A) (1) In case of accident to or collision with persons or property upon any of the public roads or
highways, due to the driving or operation thereon of any motor vehicle, the person driving or operating
the motor vehicle, having knowledge of the accident or collision, immediately shall stop the driver’s or
operator’s motor vehicle at the scene of the accident or collision and shall remain at the scene of the
accident or collision until the driver or operator has given the driver’s or operator’s name and address
and, if the driver or operator is not the owner, the name and address of the owner of that motor vehicle,
together with the registered number of that motor vehicle, to any person injured in the accident or
collision or to the operator, occupant, owner or attendant of any motor vehicle damaged in the accident
or collision, or to any police officer at the scene of the accident or collision.
(2) In the event the injured person is unable to comprehend and record the information required
to be given by this section, the other driver involved in the accident or collision forthwith shall notify
the nearest police authority concerning the location of the accident or collision, and the driver’s name,
address, and the registered number of the motor vehicle the driver was operating, and then remain at the
scene of the accident or collision until a police officer arrives, unless removed from the scene by an
emergency vehicle operated by a political subdivision or an ambulance.
(3) If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or unattended motor vehicle, the operator
who collides with the motor vehicle shall securely attach the information required to be given in this
section, in writing, to a conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or unattended motor vehicle.
(B) (1) Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of failure to stop after an accident,
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the accident or collision results in serious physical harm or death
to a person, failure to stop after an accident is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. The
court, in addition to any other penalties provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a class five
suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit,
probationary license or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C.
§ 4510.02(A)(5). No judge shall suspend the first six months of suspension of an offender’s license,
permit or privilege required by this division (B)(1).
(2) The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial responsibility as defined in R.C.
§ 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any
other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to § 130.99(G) or R.C.
§ 2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss arising from an accident
Motor Vehicle Crimes 159
or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle
before, during or after committing the offense charged under this section.
(R.C. § 4549.02) (1985 Code, § 73.20) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977)
§ 73.21 ACCIDENT INVOLVING INJURY TO PERSONS OR PROPERTY.
(A) (1) In case of accident or collision resulting in injury or damage to persons or property upon
any public or private property other than public roads or highways, due to the driving or operation
thereon of any motor vehicle, the person driving or operating the motor vehicle, having knowledge of
the accident or collision, shall stop, and, upon request of the person injured or damaged, or any other
person, shall give that person the driver’s or operator’s name and address, and, if the driver or operator
is not the owner, the name and address of the owner of that motor vehicle, together with the registered
number of that motor vehicle, and, if available, exhibit the driver’s or operator’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license.
(2) If the owner or person in charge of the damaged property is not furnished such information,
the driver of the motor vehicle involved in the accident or collision, within 24 hours after the accident
or collision, shall forward to the Police Department of the municipality the same information required
to be given to the owner or person in control of the damaged property and give the date, time and
location of the accident or collision.
(3) If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or unattended motor vehicle, the operator
who collides with the motor vehicle shall securely attach the information required to be given in this
section, in writing, to a conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or unattended motor vehicle.
(B) (1) Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of failure to stop after a nonpublic
road accident, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the accident or collision results in serious physical
harm or death to a person, failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law. The court, in addition to any other penalties provided by law, shall impose
upon the offender a class five suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(5). No judge shall suspend the first six months of suspension of an
offender’s license, permit or privilege required by this division (B)(1).
(2) The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial responsibility as defined in R.C.
§ 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any
other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to § 130.99(G) or R.C.
§ 2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss arising from an accident
or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle
before, during or after committing the offense charged under this section.
(R.C. § 4549.021) (1985 Code, § 73.21) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977)
160 Madeira - Traffic Code
§ 73.22 ACCIDENT INVOLVING DAMAGE TO REALTY.
(A) (1) The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in damage to real property, or
personal property attached to real property, legally upon or adjacent to a public road or highway
immediately shall stop and take reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of
the property of that fact, of the driver’s name and address, and of the registration number of vehicle the
driver is driving and, upon request and if available, shall exhibit the driver’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license.
(2) If the owner or person in charge of the property cannot be located after reasonable search,
the driver of the vehicle involved in the accident resulting in damage to the property, within 24 hours
after accident, shall forward to the Police Department of the municipality the same information required
to be given to the owner or person in control of the property and give the location of the accident and
a description of the damage insofar as it is known.
(B) (1) Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of failure to stop after an accident
involving the property of others, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(2) The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial responsibility as defined in R.C.
§ 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any
other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to § 130.99(G) or R.C.
§ 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision
that was the direct and proximate result of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before, during
or after committing the offense charged under this section.
(R.C. § 4549.03) (1985 Code, § 73.22) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977)
§ 73.23 FAILURE TO REPORT ACCIDENT.
(A) No person shall fail to report a motor vehicle accident as required under state or local law.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4509.74)
ILLEGAL USE OF AUTOMOBILE KEYS, LICENSES, AND IDENTITY
§ 73.26 OFFICER MAY REMOVE IGNITION KEY.
A law enforcement officer may remove the ignition key left in the ignition switch of an unlocked
and unattended motor vehicle parked on a street or highway. The officer removing the key shall place
notification upon the vehicle detailing his or her name and badge number, the place where the key may
Motor Vehicle Crimes 161
be reclaimed and the procedure for reclaiming the key. The key shall be returned to the owner of the
motor vehicle upon presentation of proof of ownership.
(R.C. § 4549.05) (1985 Code, § 73.26)
§ 73.27 USE OF UNAUTHORIZED PLATES.
(A) No person shall operate or drive a motor vehicle upon the public roads and highways in this
municipality if it displays a license plate or a distinctive number or identification mark that meets any
of the following criteria:
(1) It is fictitious;
(2) It is a counterfeit or an unlawfully made copy of any distinctive number or identification
mark; or
(3) It belongs to another motor vehicle, provided that this section does not apply to a motor
vehicle that is operated on the public roads and highways in this municipality when the motor vehicle
displays license plates that originally were issued for a motor vehicle that previously was owned by the
same person who owns the motor vehicle that is operated on the public roads and highways in this
municipality during the 30-day period described in R.C. § 4503.12(A)(4).
(B) A person who fails to comply with the transfer of registration provisions of R.C. § 4503.12 and
is charged with a violation of that section shall not be charged with a violation of this section.
(C) Whoever violates division (A)(1), (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this section is guilty of operating a motor
vehicle bearing an invalid license plate or identification mark, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on
a first offense and a misdemeanor of the third degree on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 4549.08) (1985 Code, § 73.28) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977)
§ 73.28 OPERATING WITHOUT LICENSE PLATES.
(A) No person shall operate or cause to be operated upon a public road or highway a motor vehicle
of a manufacturer or dealer unless the vehicle carries and displays two placards, except as provided in
R.C. § 4503.21, issued by the Director of Public Safety that bear the registration number of its
manufacturer or dealer.
(B) Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of illegal operation of a manufacturer’s
or dealer’s motor vehicle, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4549.10) (1985 Code, § 73.29)
162 Madeira - Traffic Code
§ 73.29 OPERATING WITH NUMBER OF FORMER OWNER.
(A) No person shall operate or drive upon the highways of this municipality a motor vehicle
acquired from a former owner who has registered the motor vehicle, while the motor vehicle displays
the distinctive number or identification mark assigned to it upon its original registration.
(R.C. § 4549.11(A))
(B) Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of operation of a motor vehicle bearing
license plates or an identification mark issued to another, a minor misdemeanor on a first offense and
a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 4549.11(B))
(1985 Code, § 73.30) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977)
§ 73.30 RESIDENT OPERATING WITH NUMBER ISSUED BY FOREIGN STATE.
(A) No person who is the owner of a motor vehicle and a resident of this state shall operate or drive
the motor vehicle upon the highways of this municipality while it displays a distinctive number or
identification mark issued by or under the authority of another state, without complying with the laws
of this state relating to the registration and identification of motor vehicles.
(R.C. § 4549.12(A))
(B) Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of illegal operation by a resident of this
state of a motor vehicle bearing the distinctive number or identification mark issued by a foreign
jurisdiction, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4549.12(B))
(1985 Code, § 73.31) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977)
CHAPTER 74: EQUIPMENT AND LOADS
Section
Equipment
74.01 Unsafe vehicles, prohibition against operation
74.02 Bumpers on motor vehicles
74.03 Lighted lights required
74.04 Headlights
74.05 Taillights and illumination of rear license plate
74.06 Red reflectors required
74.07 Safety lighting of commercial vehicles
74.08 Stoplight regulations
74.09 Obscured lights on vehicles
74.10 Red light or flag required
74.11 Lights on parked vehicles
74.12 Lights and emblem on slow-moving vehicles; lights and reflectors on multi-wheel
agricultural tractors or farm machinery
74.13 Spotlight and auxiliary driving lights
74.14 Cowl, fender and backup lights
74.15 Two lights displayed
74.16 Headlights required
74.17 Lights of less intensity
74.18 Number of lights permitted; red and flashing lights
74.19 Standards for lights on snow removal equipment and oversize vehicles
74.20 Flashing lights permitted for certain types of vehicles
74.21 Lights and sign on transportation for preschool children
74.22 Focus and aim of headlights
74.23 Brake equipment; specifications
74.24 Brake fluid
74.25 Minimum standards for brakes and components
74.26 Horns, sirens and warning devices
74.27 Mufflers; excessive smoke or gas
74.28 Rearview mirrors
74.29 Windshields and wipers
74.30 Solid tire requirements
74.31 Requirements for safety glass in motor vehicles; use of tinted glass or reflectorized
material
163
164 Madeira - Traffic Code
74.32 Directional signals
74.33 Installation and sale of seat safety belts required; definition
74.34 Requirements for extra signal equipment
74.35 Display of warning devices on disabled vehicles
74.36 Requirements for vehicles transporting explosives
74.37 Studded tires; seasonal use permitted
74.38 Occupant restraining devices
74.39 Safety inspection decals for buses
74.40 Air bags
Loads
74.55 Limitation of load extension on left side of vehicle
74.56 All loads shall be properly secured
74.57 Towing requirements; exception to size and weight restrictions
74.58 Load limits
74.59 Permit required to exceed load limits
74.60 Weighing of vehicle; removal of excess load
74.61 Operation of vehicle exceeding weight limits prohibited
74.62 Maximum width, height and length
74.63 Statement of gross vehicle weight
74.64 Wheel protectors required on heavy commercial vehicles
74.65 Liability for damages; prosecution; application of monies
74.66 Weight exceptions for certain vehicles
EQUIPMENT
§ 74.01 UNSAFE VEHICLES, PROHIBITION AGAINST OPERATION.
(A) No person shall drive or move, or cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved, on any
highway any vehicle or combination of vehicles which is in such unsafe condition as to endanger any
person.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.02(A), (H)) (1985 Code, § 74.01) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977)
§ 74.02 BUMPERS ON MOTOR VEHICLES.
(A) For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
Equipment and Loads 165
GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING. Means the manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating
established for that vehicle.
MANUFACTURER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
MULTIPURPOSE PASSENGER VEHICLE. Means a motor vehicle with motive power,
except a motorcycle, designed to carry ten persons or less, that is constructed either on a truck chassis
or with special features for occasional off-road operation.
PASSENGER CAR. Means any motor vehicle with motive power, designed for carrying ten
persons or less, except a multipurpose passenger vehicle or motorcycle.
TRUCK. Means every motor vehicle, except trailers and semitrailers, designed and used to
carry property and having a gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds or less.
(B) Rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety, in accordance with R.C. Chapter 119, shall
govern the maximum bumper height or, in the absence of bumpers and in cases where bumper height
have been lowered or modified, the maximum height to the bottom of the frame rail of any passenger
car, multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck.
(C) No person shall operate upon a street or highway any passenger car, multipurpose passenger
vehicle or truck registered in this state that does not conform to the requirements of this section or any
applicable rule adopted pursuant to R.C. § 4513.021.
(D) No person shall modify any motor vehicle registered in this state in such a manner as to cause
the vehicle body or chassis to come in contact with the ground, expose the fuel tank to damage from
collision, or cause the wheels to come in contact with the body under normal operation, and no person
shall disconnect any part of the original suspension system of the vehicle to defeat the safe operation of
that system.
(E) Nothing contained in this section or in the rules adopted pursuant to R.C. § 4513.021 shall be
construed to prohibit either of the following:
(1) The installation upon a passenger car, multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck registered
in this state of heavy duty equipment, including shock absorbers and overload springs; or
(2) The operation on a street or highway of a passenger car, multipurpose passenger vehicle
or truck registered in this state with normal wear to the suspension system if the normal wear does not
adversely affect the control of the vehicle.
(F) This section and the rules adopted pursuant to R.C. § 4513.021 do not apply to any specially
designed or modified passenger car, multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck when operated off a street
or highway in races and similar events.
166 Madeira - Traffic Code
(G) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.021) (1985 Code, § 74.02) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977; Ord. 88-39, passed
10-3-1988)
§ 74.03 LIGHTED LIGHTS REQUIRED.
(A) Every vehicle, other than a motorized bicycle, operated upon a street or highway within this
state shall display lighted lights and illuminating devices as required by R.C. §§ 4513.04 to 4513.37
during all of the following times:
(1) The time from sunset to sunrise;
(2) At any other time when, due to insufficient natural light or unfavorable atmospheric
conditions, persons, vehicles and substantial objects on the highway are not discernible at a distance of
1,000 feet ahead; and
(3) At any time when the windshield wipers of the vehicle are in use because of precipitation
on the windshield.
(B) Every motorized bicycle shall display at such times lighted lights meeting the rules adopted by
the Ohio Director of Public Safety under R.C. § 4511.521. No motor vehicle, during any time specified
in this section, shall be operated upon a street or highway within this state using only parking lights as
illumination.
(C) Whenever in such sections a requirement is declared as to the distance from which certain lamps
and devices shall render objects visible, or within which such lamps or devices shall be visible, such
distance shall be measured upon a straight level unlighted highway under normal atmospheric conditions
unless a different condition is expressly stated.
(D) Whenever in such sections a requirement is declared as to the mounted height of lights or
devices, it shall mean from the center of such light or device to the level ground upon which the vehicle
stands.
(E) Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law enforcement officer shall cause
the operator of a vehicle being operated upon a street or highway within this state to stop the vehicle
solely because the officer observes that a violation of division (A)(3) of this section has been or is being
committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation or summons for a violation of that division,
or causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation of that division.
(F) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.03) (1985 Code, § 74.03)
Equipment and Loads 167
§ 74.04 HEADLIGHTS.
(A) (1) Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, shall be equipped with at least two headlights
with at least one near each side of the front of the motor vehicle.
(2) Every motorcycle shall be equipped with at least one and not more than two headlights.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.04) (1985 Code, § 74.04) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977)
§ 74.05 TAILLIGHTS AND ILLUMINATION OF REAR LICENSE PLATE.
(A) (1) Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer or vehicle which is being drawn at the
end of a train of vehicles shall be equipped with at least one tail light mounted on the rear which, when
lighted, shall emit a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear, provided that in the case of
a train of vehicles only the tail light on the rearmost vehicle need be visible from the distance specified.
(2) Either a tail light or a separate light shall be so constructed and placed as to illuminate with
a white light the rear registration plate, when such registration plate is required, and render it legible
from a distance of 50 feet to the rear. Any tail light, together with any separate light for illuminating the
rear registration plate, shall be so wired as to be lighted whenever the headlights or auxiliary driving
lights are lighted, except where separate lighting systems are provided for trailers for the purpose of
illuminating such registration plate.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.05) (1985 Code, § 74.05) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977)
§ 74.06 RED REFLECTORS REQUIRED.
(A) (1) Every new motor vehicle sold after September 6, 1941, and operated on a highway, other
than a commercial tractor to which a trailer or semitrailer is attached, shall carry at the rear, either as
a part of the tail lamps or separately, two red reflectors meeting the requirements of this section, except
that vehicles of the type mentioned in R.C. § 4513.07 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance
shall be equipped with reflectors as required by the regulations provided for in that section.
(2) Every such reflector shall be of such size and characteristics and so maintained as to be
visible at night from all distances within 300 feet to 50 feet from such vehicle.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.06) (1985 Code, § 74.06)
168 Madeira - Traffic Code
§ 74.07 SAFETY LIGHTING OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.
(A) (1) When the Director of Public Safety prescribes and promulgates regulations relating to
clearance lights, marker lights, reflectors and stop lights on buses, trucks, commercial tractors, trailers,
semitrailers and pole trailers, when operated upon any highway, these vehicles shall be equipped as
required by such regulations, and such equipment shall be lighted at all times mentioned in R.C.
§ 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, except that clearance lights and side marker
lights need not be lighted on any such vehicle when it is operated within the municipality where there
is sufficient light to reveal any person or substantial object on the highway at a distance of 500 feet.
(2) Such equipment shall be in addition to all other lights specifically required by R.C.
§§ 4513.03 through 4513.16, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances.
(3) Vehicles operated under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission are not subject
to this section.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.07) (1985 Code, § 74.07)
§ 74.08 STOPLIGHT REGULATIONS.
(A) (1) Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer and pole trailer when operated upon a highway
shall be equipped with two or more stop lights, except that passenger cars manufactured or assembled
prior to January 1, 1967, motorcycles and motor-driven cycles shall be equipped with at least one stop
light. Stop lights shall be mounted on the rear of the vehicle, actuated upon application of the service
brake, and may be incorporated with other rear lights. Such stop lights when actuated shall emit a red
light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear; provided that in the case of a train of vehicles only
the stop lights on the rearmost vehicle need be visible from the distance specified.
(2) Such stop lights when actuated shall give a steady warning light to the rear of a vehicle or
train of vehicles to indicate the intention of the operator to diminish the speed of or stop a vehicle or train
of vehicles.
(3) When stop lights are used as required by this section, they shall be constructed or installed
so as to provide adequate and reliable illumination and shall conform to the appropriate rules and
regulations established under R.C. § 4513.19.
(4) Historical motor vehicles as defined in R.C. § 4503.181, not originally manufactured with
stop lights, are not subject to this section.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.071) (1985 Code, § 74.08)
Equipment and Loads 169
§ 74.09 OBSCURED LIGHTS ON VEHICLES.
Whenever motor and other vehicles are operated in combination during the time that lights are
required, any light, except tail lights, which by reason of its location on a vehicle of the combination
would be obscured by another vehicle of the combination, need not be lighted, but this section does not
affect the requirement that lighted clearance lights be displayed on the front of the foremost vehicle
required to have clearance lights or that all lights required on the rear of the rearmost vehicle of any
combination shall be lighted.
(R.C. § 4513.08) (1985 Code, § 74.09)
§ 74.10 RED LIGHT OR FLAG REQUIRED.
(A) Whenever the load upon any vehicle extends to the rear four feet or more beyond the bed or
body of this vehicle, there shall be displayed at the extreme rear end of the load, at the times specified
in R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, a red light or lantern plainly visible
from a distance of at least 500 feet to the sides and rear. The red light or lantern required by this section
is in addition to the red rear light required upon every vehicle. At any other time there shall be displayed
at the extreme rear end of such load a red flag or cloth not less than 16 inches square.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.09) (1985 Code, § 74.10)
§ 74.11 LIGHTS ON PARKED VEHICLES.
(A) Except in case of an emergency, whenever a vehicle is parked or stopped upon a roadway open
to traffic or a shoulder adjacent thereto, whether attended or unattended, during the times mentioned in
R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, such vehicle shall be equipped with
one or more lights which shall exhibit a white or amber light on the roadway side visible from a distance
of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle, and a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear. No
lights need be displayed upon any such vehicle when it is stopped or parked within the municipality
where there is sufficient light to reveal any person or substantial object within a distance of 500 feet upon
such highway. Any lighted headlights upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed.
(R.C. § 4513.10)
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
(1985 Code, § 74.11)
170 Madeira - Traffic Code
§ 74.12 LIGHTS AND EMBLEM ON SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES; LIGHTS AND
REFLECTORS ON MULTI-WHEEL AGRICULTURAL TRACTORS OR FARM
MACHINERY.
(A) All vehicles other than bicycles, including animal-drawn vehicles and vehicles referred to in
R.C. § 4513.02(G), not specifically required to be equipped with lamps or other lighting devices by R.C.
§§ 4513.03 through 4513.10, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, shall, at the times
specified in R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, be equipped with at least
one lamp displaying a white light visible from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the front of the
vehicle and also shall be equipped with two lamps displaying red light visible from a distance of not less
than 1,000 feet to the rear of the vehicle, or as an alternative, one lamp displaying a red light visible
from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the rear and two red reflectors visible from all distances
of 600 feet to 100 feet to the rear when illuminated by the lawful lower beams of headlamps. Lamps and
reflectors required by this section shall meet standards adopted by the Director of Public Safety.
(B) All boat trailers, farm machinery and other machinery, including all road construction
machinery, upon a street or highway, except when being used in actual construction and maintenance
work in an area guarded by a flagperson, or where flares are used, or when operating or traveling within
the limits of a construction area designated by the Director of Transportation, a city or village engineer,
or the county engineer of the several counties, when such construction area is marked in accordance with
requirements of the Director and the Manual and Specifications for a Uniform System of Traffic-Control
Devices, as set forth in R.C. § 4511.09, which is designed for operation at a speed of 25 mph or less,
shall be operated at a speed not exceeding 25 mph, and shall display a triangular slow-moving vehicle
emblem (SMV). The emblem shall be mounted so as to be visible from a distance of not less than 500
feet to the rear. The Director of Public Safety shall adopt standards and specifications for the design and
position of mounting the SMV emblem. The standards and specifications for SMV emblems referred to
in this section shall correlate with and, so far as possible, conform with those approved by the American
Society of Agricultural Engineers. A unit of farm machinery that is designed by its manufacturer to
operate at a speed greater than 25 mph may be operated on a street or highway at a speed greater than
25 mph provided it is operated in accordance with this section. As used in this division (B), “machinery”
does not include any vehicle designed to be drawn by an animal.
(C) The use of the SMV emblem shall be restricted to animal-drawn vehicles and to the
slow-moving vehicles specified in division (B) of this section operating or traveling within the limits of
the highway. Its use on slow-moving vehicles being transported upon other types of vehicles or on any
other type of vehicle or stationary object on the highway is prohibited.
(D) (1) No person shall sell, lease, rent or operate any boat trailer, farm machinery or other
machinery defined as a slow-moving vehicle in division (B) of this section, except those units designed
to be completely mounted on a primary power unit, which is manufactured or assembled on or after
April 1, 1966, unless the vehicle is equipped with a slow-moving vehicle emblem mounting device as
specified in division (B) of this section.
Equipment and Loads 171
(2) No person shall sell, lease, rent or operate on a street or highway any unit of farm
machinery that is designed by its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 mph unless the unit
displays a slow-moving vehicle emblem as specified in division (B) of this section and a speed
identification symbol that meets the specifications contained in the American Society of Agricultural
Engineers Standard ANSI/ASAE S584 JAN2005, Agricultural Equipment: Speed Identification Symbol
(SIS).
(E) Any boat trailer, farm machinery or other machinery defined as a slow-moving vehicle in
division (B) of this section, in addition to the use of the slow-moving vehicle emblem, and any unit of
farm machinery that is designed by its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 mph, in
addition to the display of a speed identification symbol, may be equipped with a red flashing light that
shall be visible from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the rear at all times specified in R.C.
§ 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance. When a double-faced light is used, it shall
display amber light to the front and red light to the rear. In addition to the lights described in this
division (E), farm machinery and motor vehicles escorting farm machinery may display a flashing,
oscillating or rotating amber light, as permitted by R.C. § 4513.17 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, and also may display simultaneously flashing turn signals or warning lights, as
permitted by that section.
(F) (1) Every animal-drawn vehicle upon a street or highway shall at all times be equipped in one
of the following ways:
(a) With a slow-moving vehicle emblem complying with division (B) of this section;
(b) With alternate reflective material complying with rules adopted under division (F)(2)
below; or
(c) With both a slow-moving vehicle emblem and alternate reflective material as specified
in division (F)(2) below.
(2) Rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety, subject to R.C. Chapter 119, establishing
standards and specifications for the position of mounting of the alternate reflective material authorized
by this division (F)(2), permit, as a minimum, the alternate reflective material to be black, gray or silver
in color. The alternate reflective material shall be mounted on the animal-drawn vehicle so as to be
visible, at all times specified in R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, from
a distance of not less than 500 feet to the rear when illuminated by the lawful lower beams of headlamps.
(G) (1) Every unit of farm machinery that is designed by its manufacturer to operate at a speed
greater than 25 mph shall display a slow-moving vehicle emblem and a speed identification symbol that
meets the specifications contained in the American Society of Agricultural Engineers Standard
ANSI/ASAE S584 JAN2005, Agricultural Equipment: Speed Identification Symbol (SIS) when the unit
is operated upon a street or highway, irrespective of the speed at which the unit is operated on the street
or highway. The speed identification symbol shall indicate the maximum speed in miles per hour at
which the unit of farm machinery is designed by its manufacturer to operate. The display of the speed
identification symbol shall be in accordance with the standard prescribed in this division (G)(1).
172 Madeira - Traffic Code
(2) If an agricultural tractor that is designed by its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater
than 25 mph is being operated on a street or highway at a speed greater than 25 mph and is towing,
pulling or otherwise drawing a unit of farm machinery, the unit of farm machinery shall display a
slow-moving vehicle emblem and a speed identification symbol that is the same as the speed
identification symbol that is displayed on the agricultural tractor.
(H) When an agricultural tractor that is designed by its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater
than 25 mph is being operated on a street or highway at a speed greater than 25 mph, the operator shall
possess some documentation published or provided by the manufacturer indicating the maximum speed
in miles per hour at which the manufacturer designed the agricultural tractor to operate.
(I) As used in this section, BOAT TRAILER means any vehicle designed and used exclusively to
transport a boat between a place of storage and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or
towed on a street or highway for a distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of 25 mph or less.
(R.C. § 4513.11)
(J) Lights and reflector requirements for multi-wheel agricultural tractors or farm machinery.
(1) (a) Every multi-wheel agricultural tractor whose model year was 2001 or earlier, when
being operated or traveling on a street or highway at the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, at a minimum shall be equipped with and display reflectors
and illuminated amber lamps so that the extreme left and right projections of the tractor are indicated by
flashing lamps displaying amber light, visible to the front and the rear; by amber reflectors, all visible
to the front; and by red reflectors, all visible to the rear.
(b) The lamps displaying amber light need not flash simultaneously and need not flash in
conjunction with any directional signals of the tractor.
(c) The lamps and reflectors required by division (J)(1)(a) of this section and their
placement shall meet standards and specifications contained in rules adopted by the Director of Public
Safety in accordance with R.C. Chapter 119. The rules governing the amber lamps, amber reflectors and
red reflectors and their placement shall correlate with and, as far as possible, conform with paragraphs
4.1.4.1, 4.1.7.1 and 4.1.7.2, respectively, of the American Society of Agricultural Engineers Standard
ANSI/ASAE S279.10 OCT98, Lighting and Marking of Agricultural Equipment on Highways.
(2) Every unit of farm machinery whose model year was 2002 or later, when being operated
or traveling on a street or highway at the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, shall be equipped with and display markings and illuminated lamps that meet or
exceed the lighting, illumination and marking standards and specifications that are applicable to that type
of farm machinery for the unit’s model year specified in the American Society of Agricultural Engineers
Standard ANSI/ASAE S279.11 APR01, Lighting and Marking of Agricultural Equipment on Highways,
or any subsequent revisions of that standard.
Equipment and Loads 173
(3) The lights and reflectors required by division (J)(1) of this section are in addition to the
slow-moving vehicle emblem and lights required or permitted by R.C. § 4513.11 or 4513.17, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, to be displayed on farm machinery being operated or
traveling on a street or highway.
(4) No person shall operate any unit of farm machinery on a street or highway or cause any
unit of farm machinery to travel on a street or highway in violation of divisions (J)(1) or (J)(2) of this
section.
(R.C. § 4513.111)
(K) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. §§ 4513.11(I), 4513.111(E))
(1985 Code, § 74.12)
§ 74.13 SPOTLIGHT AND AUXILIARY DRIVING LIGHTS.
(A) (1) Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than one spotlight and every lighted
spotlight shall be so aimed and used upon approaching another vehicle that no part of the high-intensity
portion of the beam will be directed to the left of the prolongation of the extreme left side of the vehicle,
nor more than 100 feet ahead of the vehicle.
(2) Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than three auxiliary driving lights
mounted on the front of the vehicle. Any such lights which do not conform to the specifications for
auxiliary driving lights and the regulations for their use prescribed by the Director of Public Safety shall
not be used.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.12) (1985 Code, § 74.13)
§ 74.14 COWL, FENDER AND BACKUP LIGHTS.
(A) (1) Any motor vehicle may be equipped with side cowl or fender lights which shall emit a white
or amber light without glare.
(2) Any motor vehicle may be equipped with lights on each side thereof which shall emit a
white or amber light without glare.
(3) Any motor vehicle may be equipped with back-up lights, either separately or in combination
with another light. No back-up lights shall be continuously lighted when the motor vehicle is in forward
motion.
174 Madeira - Traffic Code
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.13) (1985 Code, § 74.14)
§ 74.15 TWO LIGHTS DISPLAYED.
(A) At all times mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, at
least two lighted lights shall be displayed, one near each side of the front of every motor vehicle, except
when such vehicle is parked subject to the regulations governing lights on parked vehicles.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.14) (1985 Code, § 74.15)
§ 74.16 HEADLIGHTS REQUIRED.
(A) Whenever a motor vehicle is being operated on a roadway or shoulder adjacent thereto during
the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the driver shall
use a distribution of light, or composite beam, directed high enough and of sufficient intensity to reveal
persons, vehicles and substantial objects at a safe distance in advance of the vehicle, subject to the
following requirements:
(1) Whenever the driver of a vehicle approaches an oncoming vehicle, such driver shall use
a distribution of light, or composite beam, so aimed that the glaring rays are not projected into the eyes
of the oncoming driver.
(2) Every new motor vehicle registered in this state which has multiple-beam road lighting
equipment shall be equipped with a beam indicator, which shall be lighted whenever the uppermost
distribution of light from the headlights is in use, and shall not otherwise be lighted. This indicator shall
be so designed and located that, when lighted, it will be readily visible without glare to the driver of the
vehicle.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.15) (1985 Code, § 74.16)
§ 74.17 LIGHTS OF LESS INTENSITY.
(A) Any motor vehicle may be operated under the conditions specified in R.C. § 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance when it is equipped with two lighted lights upon the front
thereof capable of revealing persons and substantial objects 75 feet ahead, in lieu of lights required in
R.C. § 4513.14 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, provided that such vehicle shall not
be operated at a speed in excess of 20 mph.
Equipment and Loads 175
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.16) (1985 Code, § 74.17)
§ 74.18 NUMBER OF LIGHTS PERMITTED; RED AND FLASHING LIGHTS.
(A) Whenever a motor vehicle equipped with headlights is also equipped with any auxiliary lights
or spotlight or any other light on the front thereof projecting a beam of an intensity greater than 300
candlepower, not more than a total of five of any such lights on the front of a vehicle shall be lighted at
any one time when the vehicle is upon a highway.
(B) Any lighted light or illuminating device upon a motor vehicle, other than headlights, spotlights,
signal lights or auxiliary driving lights, that projects a beam of light of an intensity greater than 300
candlepower shall be so directed that no part of the beam will strike the level of the roadway on which
the vehicle stands at a distance of more than 75 feet from the vehicle.
(C) (1) Flashing lights are prohibited on motor vehicles, except as a means for indicating a right
or a left turn, or in the presence of vehicular traffic hazard requiring unusual care in approaching, or
overtaking or passing. This prohibition does not apply to emergency vehicles, road service vehicles
servicing or towing a disabled vehicle, rural mail delivery vehicles, vehicles as provided in R.C.
§ 4513.182 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, highway maintenance vehicles, funeral
hearses, funeral escort vehicles and similar equipment operated by the Department or local authorities,
which shall be equipped with and display, when used on a street or highway for the special purpose
necessitating such lights, a flashing, oscillating or rotating amber light, but shall not display a flashing,
oscillating or rotating light of any other color, nor to vehicles or machinery permitted by R.C. § 4513.11
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to have a flashing red light.
(2) When used on a street or highway, farm machinery and vehicles escorting farm machinery
may be equipped with and display a flashing, oscillating or rotating amber light, and the prohibition
contained in division (C)(1) of this section does not apply to such machinery or vehicles. Farm
machinery may also display the lights described in R.C. § 4513.11 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
(D) Except a person operating a public safety vehicle, as defined in R.C. § 4511.01(E), or a school
bus, no person shall operate, move or park upon or permit to stand within the right-of-way of any public
street or highway any vehicle or equipment that is equipped with and displaying a flashing red or a
flashing combination red and white light, or an oscillating or rotating red light, or a combination red and
white oscillating or rotating light; and except a public law enforcement officer, or other person sworn
to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state, operating a public safety vehicle when on duty, no
person shall operate, move or park upon or permit to stand within the right-of-way of any street or
highway any vehicle or equipment that is equipped with, or upon which is mounted, and displaying a
flashing blue or a flashing combination blue and white light, or an oscillating or rotating blue light, or
a combination blue and white oscillating or rotating light.
176 Madeira - Traffic Code
(E) This section does not prohibit the use of warning lights required by law or the simultaneous
flashing of turn signals on disabled vehicles or on vehicles being operated in unfavorable atmospheric
conditions in order to enhance their visibility. This section also does not prohibit the simultaneous
flashing of turn signals or warning lights whether on farm machinery or vehicles escorting farm
machinery when used on a street or highway.
(R.C. § 4513.17)
(F) (1) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a motor vehicle operated by a coroner, deputy
coroner or coroner’s investigator may be equipped with a flashing, oscillating or rotating red or blue
light and siren, whistle or bell capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance
of not less than 500 feet. Such a vehicle may display the flashing, oscillating or rotating red or blue light
and may give the audible signal of the siren, whistle or bell only when responding to a fatality or a fatal
motor vehicle accident on a street or highway and only at those locations where the stoppage of traffic
impedes the ability of the coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator to arrive at the site of the
fatality.
(2) This division (F) does not relieve the coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator
operating a motor vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons and
property upon the highway.
(R.C. § 4513.171)
(G) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. §§ 4513.17(F), 4513.171(B))
(1985 Code, § 74.18)
§ 74.19 STANDARDS FOR LIGHTS ON SNOW REMOVAL EQUIPMENT AND OVERSIZE
VEHICLES.
(A) It is unlawful to operate snow removal equipment on a highway unless the lights thereon comply
with and are lighted when and as required by the standards and specifications adopted by the Director
of Transportation pursuant to R.C. § 4513.18.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.18) (1985 Code, § 74.19)
§ 74.20 FLASHING LIGHTS PERMITTED FOR CERTAIN TYPES OF VEHICLES.
Rural mail delivery vehicles, state highway survey vehicles and funeral escort vehicles are permitted
to use flashing lights.
(R.C. § 4513.181) (1985 Code, § 74.20)
Equipment and Loads 177
§ 74.21 LIGHTS AND SIGN ON TRANSPORTATION FOR PRESCHOOL CHILDREN.
(A) No person shall operate any motor vehicle owned, leased or hired by a nursery school,
kindergarten or day-care center, while transporting preschool children to or from such an institution
unless the motor vehicle is equipped with and displaying two amber flashing lights mounted on a bar
attached to the top of the vehicle, and a sign bearing the designation “caution – children,” which shall
be attached to the bar carrying the amber flashing lights in such a manner as to be legible to persons both
in front of and behind the vehicle. The lights and sign shall meet standards and specifications adopted
by the Director of Public Safety.
(B) No person shall operate a motor vehicle displaying the lights and sign required by this section
for any purpose other than the transportation of preschool children as provided in this section.
(R.C. § 4513.182)
(C) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
(1985 Code, § 74.21)
§ 74.22 FOCUS AND AIM OF HEADLIGHTS.
(A) No person shall use any lights mentioned in R.C. §§ 4513.03 through 4513.18, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, upon any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer unless these
lights are equipped, mounted and adjusted as to focus and aim in accordance with regulations which are
prescribed by the Director of Public Safety.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.19) (1985 Code, § 74.22)
§ 74.23 BRAKE EQUIPMENT; SPECIFICATIONS.
(A) The following requirements govern as to brake equipment on vehicles.
(1) Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, when operated upon a highway shall be
equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and hold the motor vehicle,
including two separate means of applying the brakes, each of which means shall be effective to apply the
brakes to at least two wheels. If these two separate means of applying the brakes are connected in any
way, then on such motor vehicles, manufactured or assembled after January 1, 1942, they shall be so
constructed that failure of any one part of the operating mechanism shall not leave the motor vehicle
without brakes on at least two wheels.
(2) Every motorcycle, when operated upon a highway shall be equipped with at least one
adequate brake, which may be operated by hand or by foot.
178 Madeira - Traffic Code
(3) Every motorized bicycle shall be equipped with brakes meeting the rules adopted by the
Director of Public Safety under R.C. § 4511.521.
(4) When operated upon the highways, the following vehicles shall be equipped with brakes
adequate to control the movement of and to stop and to hold the vehicle, designed to be applied by the
driver of the towing motor vehicle from its cab, and also designed and connected so that, in case of a
breakaway of the towed vehicle, the brakes shall be automatically applied:
(a) Except as otherwise provided in this section, every trailer or semitrailer, except a pole
trailer, with an empty weight of 2,000 pounds or more, manufactured or assembled on or after January
1, 1942; and
(b) Every manufactured home or travel trailer with an empty weight of 2,000 pounds or
more, manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 2001.
(5) Every watercraft trailer with a gross weight or manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating
of 3,000 pounds or more that is manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 2008, shall have
separate brakes equipped with hydraulic surge or electrically operated brakes on two wheels.
(6) In any combination of motor-drawn trailers or semitrailers equipped with brakes, means
shall be provided for applying the rearmost brakes in approximate synchronism with the brakes on the
towing vehicle, and developing the required braking effort on the rearmost wheels at the fastest rate; or
means shall be provided for applying braking effort first on the rearmost brakes; or both of the above
means, capable of being used alternatively, may be employed.
(7) Every vehicle and combination of vehicles, except motorcycles and motorized bicycles, and
except trailers and semitrailers of a gross weight of less than 2,000 pounds, and pole trailers, shall be
equipped with parking brakes adequate to hold the vehicle on any grade on which it is operated, under
all conditions of loading, on a surface free from snow, ice or loose material. The parking brakes shall
be capable of being applied in conformance with the foregoing requirements by the driver’s muscular
effort or by spring action or by equivalent means. Their operation may be assisted by the service brakes
or other source of power provided that failure of the service brake actuation system or other power
assisting mechanism will not prevent the parking brakes from being applied in conformance with the
foregoing requirements. The parking brakes shall be so designed that when once applied they shall
remain applied with the required effectiveness despite exhaustion of any source of energy or leakage of
any kind.
(8) The same brake drums, brake shoes and lining assemblies, brake shoe anchors and
mechanical brake shoe actuation mechanism normally associated with the wheel brake assemblies may
be used for both the service brakes and the parking brakes. If the means of applying the parking brakes
and the service brakes are connected in any way, they shall be so constructed that failure of any one part
shall not leave the vehicle without operative brakes.
Equipment and Loads 179
(9) Every motor vehicle or combination of motor-drawn vehicles shall, at all times and under
all conditions of loading, be capable of being stopped on a dry, smooth, level road free from loose
material, upon application of the service or foot brake, within the following specified distances, or shall
be capable of being decelerated at a sustained rate corresponding to these distances:
(a) Vehicles or combinations of vehicles having brakes on all wheels shall come to a stop
in 30 feet or less from a speed of 20 mph; and
(b) Vehicles or combinations of vehicles not having brakes on all wheels shall come to a
stop in 40 feet or less from a speed of 20 mph.
(10) All brakes shall be maintained in good working order and shall be so adjusted as to operate
as equally as practicable with respect to the wheels on opposite sides of the vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.20)
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
(1985 Code, § 74.23)
§ 74.24 BRAKE FLUID.
(A) No hydraulic brake fluid for use in motor vehicles shall be sold in this municipality if the brake
fluid is below the minimum standard of specifications for heavy duty type brake fluid established by the
society of automotive engineers and the standard of specifications established by 49 C.F.R. § 571.116,
as amended.
(B) All manufacturers, packers or distributors of brake fluid selling such fluid in this municipality
shall state on the containers that the brake fluid meets or exceeds the applicable minimum SAE standard
of specifications, and the standard of specifications established in 49 C.F.R. § 571.116, as amended.
(R.C. § 4513.201)
(C) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
(1985 Code, § 74.24)
§ 74.25 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR BRAKES AND COMPONENTS.
(A) No brake lining, brake lining material or brake lining assemblies for use as repair and
replacement parts in motor vehicles shall be sold in this municipality if these items do not meet or exceed
the minimum standard of specifications established by the Society of Automotive Engineers and the
standard of specifications established in 49 C.F.R. § 571.105, as amended, and 49 C.F.R. § 571.135,
as amended.
180 Madeira - Traffic Code
(B) All manufacturers or distributors of brake lining, brake lining material or brake lining
assemblies selling these items for use as repair and replacement parts in motor vehicles shall state that
the items meet or exceed the applicable minimum standard of specifications.
(C) As used in this section, MINIMUM STANDARD OF SPECIFICATIONS means a minimum
standard for brake system or brake component performance that meets the need for motor vehicle safety
and complies with the applicable SAE standards and recommended practices, and the federal motor
vehicle safety standards that cover the same aspect of performance for any brake lining, brake lining
material or brake lining assemblies.
(R.C. § 4513.202)
(D) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
(1985 Code, § 74.25)
§ 74.26 HORNS, SIRENS AND WARNING DEVICES.
(A) (1) Every motor vehicle when operated upon a highway shall be equipped with a horn which
is in good working order and capable of emitting sound audible, under normal conditions, from a
distance of not less than 200 feet.
(2) No motor vehicle shall be equipped with, nor shall any person use upon a vehicle, any
siren, whistle or bell. Any vehicle may be equipped with a theft alarm signal device which shall be so
arranged that it cannot be used as an ordinary warning signal. Every emergency vehicle shall be
equipped with a siren, whistle or bell, capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from
a distance of not less than 500 feet and of a type approved by the Director of Public Safety. Such
equipment shall not be used except when such vehicle is operated in response to an emergency call or
is in the immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, in which case the driver of the
emergency vehicle shall sound such equipment when it is necessary to warn pedestrians and other drivers
of the approach thereof.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.21) (1985 Code, § 74.26)
§ 74.27 MUFFLERS; EXCESSIVE SMOKE OR GAS.
(A) (1) Every motor vehicle and motorcycle with an internal combustion engine shall at all times
be equipped with a muffler which is in good working order and in constant operation to prevent
excessive or unusual noise, and no person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar device upon a
motor vehicle on a highway. Every motorcycle muffler shall be equipped with baffle plates.
Equipment and Loads 181
(2) No person shall own, operate or have in the person’s possession any motor vehicle or
motorcycle equipped with a device for producing excessive smoke or gas, or so equipped as to permit
oil or any other chemical to flow into or upon the exhaust pipe or muffler of such vehicle, or equipped
in any way to produce or emit smoke or dangerous or annoying gases from any portion of such vehicle,
other than the ordinary gases emitted by the exhaust of an internal combustion engine under normal
operation.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.22) (1985 Code, § 74.27) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977)
§ 74.28 REARVIEW MIRRORS.
(A) Every motor vehicle and motorcycle shall be equipped with a mirror so located as to reflect to
the operator a view of the highway to the rear of such vehicle or motorcycle. Operators of vehicles and
motorcycles shall have a clear and unobstructed view to the front and to both sides of their vehicles and
motorcycles and shall have a clear view to the rear of their vehicles and motorcycles by mirror.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.23) (1985 Code, § 74.28) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977)
§ 74.29 WINDSHIELDS AND WIPERS.
(A) No person shall drive any motor vehicle on a street or highway in this municipality, other than
a motorcycle or motorized bicycle, that is not equipped with a windshield.
(B) (1) No person shall drive any motor vehicle, other than a bus, with any sign, poster or other
nontransparent material upon the front windshield, sidewings, side or rear windows of such vehicle other
than a certificate or other paper required to be displayed by law, except that there may be in the lower
left-hand or right-hand corner of the windshield a sign, poster or decal not to exceed four inches in
height by six inches in width. No sign, poster or decal shall be displayed in the front windshield in such
a manner as to conceal the vehicle identification number for the motor vehicle when, in accordance with
federal law, that number is located inside the vehicle passenger compartment and so placed as to be
readable through the vehicle glazing without moving any part of the vehicle.
(2) Division (B)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is driving a passenger car
with an electronic device, including an antenna, electronic tolling or other transponder, camera,
directional navigation device or other similar electronic device located in the front windshield if the
device meets both of the following:
(a) It does not restrict the vehicle operator’s sight lines to the road and highway signs and
signals; and
182 Madeira - Traffic Code
(b) It does not conceal the vehicle identification number.
(3) Division (B)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is driving a commercial car
with an electronic device, including an antenna, electronic tolling or other transponder, camera,
directional navigation device or other similar electronic device located in the front windshield if the
device meets both of the following:
(a) It does not restrict the vehicle operator’s sight lines to the road and highway signs and
signals; and
(b) It is mounted not more than six inches below the upper edge of the windshield and is
outside the area swept by the vehicle’s windshield wipers.
(C) The windshield on every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a device for cleaning rain, snow
or other moisture from the windshield. The device shall be maintained in good working order and so
constructed as to be controlled or operated by the operator of the vehicle.
(D) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.24) (1985 Code, § 74.29)
§ 74.30 SOLID TIRE REQUIREMENTS.
(A) Every solid tire, as defined in R.C. § 4501.01, on a vehicle shall have rubber or other resilient
material on its entire traction surface at least one inch thick above the edge of the flange of the entire
periphery.
(R.C. § 4513.25)
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
(1985 Code, § 74.30)
§ 74.31 REQUIREMENTS FOR SAFETY GLASS IN MOTOR VEHICLES; USE OF TINTED
GLASS OR REFLECTORIZED MATERIAL.
(A) Safety glass.
(1) No person shall sell any new motor vehicle nor shall any new motor vehicle be registered,
and no person shall operate any motor vehicle, which is registered in this state and which has been
manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1936, unless the motor vehicle is equipped with safety
glass, wherever glass is used in the windshields, doors, partitions, rear windows and windows on each
side immediately adjacent to the rear window.
Equipment and Loads 183
(2) As used in this section, SAFETY GLASS means any product composed of glass so
manufactured, fabricated or treated as substantially to prevent shattering and flying of the glass when it
is struck or broken, or such other or similar product as may be approved by the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles.
(3) Glass other than safety glass shall not be offered for sale, or sold for use in or installed in
any door, window, partition or windshield that is required by this section to be equipped with safety
glass.
(R.C. § 4513.26)
(B) Tinted or reflectorized material.
(1) No person shall operate, on any highway or other public or private property open to the
public for vehicular travel or parking, lease, or rent any motor vehicle that is registered in this state
unless the motor vehicle conforms to the requirements concerning tinted glass and reflectorized material
of R.C. § 4513.241 and of any applicable rule adopted under that section.
(2) No person shall install in or on any motor vehicle, any glass or other material that fails to
conform to the requirements of R.C. § 4513.241 or of any rule adopted under that section.
(3) (a) No used motor vehicle dealer or new motor vehicle dealer, as defined in R.C.
§ 4517.01, shall sell any motor vehicle that fails to conform to the requirements of R.C. § 4513.241 or
of any rule adopted under that section.
(b) No manufacturer, remanufacturer, or distributor, as defined in R.C. § 4517.01, shall
provide to a motor vehicle dealer licensed under R.C. Chapter 4517 or to any other person, a motor
vehicle that fails to conform to the requirements of R.C. § 4513.241 or of any rule adopted under that
section.
(4) No reflectorized materials shall be permitted upon or in any front windshield, side
windows, sidewings, or rear window.
(5) This division (B) does not apply to the manufacturer’s tinting or glazing of motor vehicle
windows or windshields that is otherwise in compliance with or permitted by Federal Motor Vehicle
Safety Standard #205.
(6) With regard to any side window behind a driver’s seat or any rear window other than any
window on an emergency door, this division (B) does not apply to any school bus used to transport a
child with disabilities pursuant to R.C. Chapter 3323, whom it is impossible or impractical to transport
by regular school bus in the course of regular route transportation provided by a school district. As used
in this division, CHILD WITH DISABILITIES has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3323.01.
(7) This division (B) does not apply to any school bus that is to be sold and operated outside
the municipality.
184 Madeira - Traffic Code
(8) (a) This division (B) does not apply to a motor vehicle used by a law enforcement agency
under either of the following circumstances:
1. The vehicle does not have distinctive markings of a law enforcement vehicle but
is operated by or on behalf of the law enforcement agency in an authorized investigation or other activity
requiring that the presence and identity of the vehicle occupants be undisclosed.
2. The vehicle primarily is used by the law enforcement canine unit for transporting
a police dog.
(b) As used in this division, LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY means a police
department, the office of a sheriff, the State Highway Patrol, a county prosecuting attorney, or a federal,
state, or local governmental body that enforces criminal laws and that has employees who have a
statutory power of arrest.
(R.C. § 4513.241(C) - (J))
(C) (1) Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
(2) Whoever violates division (B)(1),(B)(3)(b) or (B)(4) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(3) Whoever violates division (B)(3)(a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor if the
dealer or the dealer’s agent knew of the nonconformity at the time of sale.
(4) (a) Whoever violates division (B)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree, except that an organization may not be convicted unless the act of installation was authorized by
the board of directors, trustees, partners, or by a high managerial officer acting on behalf of the
organization, and installation was performed by an employee of the organization acting within the scope
of the person’s employment.
(b) In addition to any other penalty imposed under this section, whoever violates division
(B)(2) of this section is liable in a civil action to the owner of a motor vehicle on which was installed the
nonconforming glass or material for any damages incurred by that person as a result of the installation
of the nonconforming glass or material, costs of maintaining the civil action, and attorney fees.
(c) In addition to any other penalty imposed under this section, if the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (B)(2) of this section and the offender
is a motor vehicle repair operator registered under R.C. Chapter 4775 or a motor vehicle dealer licensed
under R.C. Chapter 4517, whoever violates division (B)(2) of this section is subject to a registration or
license suspension, as applicable, for a period of not more than 180 days.
(R.C. § 4513.241(K))
(1985 Code, § 74.31) (Ord. 88-39, passed 10-3-1988)
Equipment and Loads 185
§ 74.32 DIRECTIONAL SIGNALS.
(A) (1) No person shall operate any motor vehicle manufactured or assembled on or after January
1, 1954, unless the vehicle is equipped with electrical or mechanical directional signals.
(2) No person shall operate any motorcycle or motor-driven cycle manufactured or assembled
on or after January 1, 1968, unless the vehicle is equipped with electrical or mechanical directional
signals.
(B) As used in this section, DIRECTIONAL SIGNALS means an electrical or mechanical signal
device capable of clearly indicating an intention to turn either to the right or to the left and which shall
be visible from both the front and rear.
(C) All mechanical signal devices shall be self-illuminating devices when in use at the times
mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(D) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.261) (1985 Code, § 74.32)
§ 74.33 INSTALLATION AND SALE OF SEAT SAFETY BELTS REQUIRED;
DEFINITION.
(A) As used in this section and in R.C. § 4513.263 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the component parts of a seat safety belt include a belt, anchor attachment assembly, and a
buckle or closing device.
(B) No person shall sell, lease, rent or operate any passenger car, as defined in R.C. § 4501.01(E),
that is registered or to be registered in this state and that is manufactured or assembled on or after
January 1, 1962, unless the passenger car is equipped with sufficient anchorage units at the attachment
points for attaching at least two sets of seat safety belts to its front seat. Such anchorage units at the
attachment points shall be of such construction, design and strength to support a loop load pull of not
less than 4,000 pounds for each belt.
(C) No person shall sell, lease or rent any passenger car, as defined in R.C. § 4501.01(E), that is
registered or to be registered in this state and that is manufactured or assembled on or after January 1,
1966, unless the passenger car has installed in its front seat at least two seat safety belt assemblies.
(D) After January 1, 1966, neither any seat safety belt for use in a motor vehicle nor any component
part of any such seat safety belt shall be sold in this municipality unless the seat safety belt or the
component part satisfies the minimum standard of specifications established by the society of automotive
engineers for automotive seat belts and unless the seat safety belt or component part is labeled so as to
indicate that it meets those minimum standard specifications.
(E) Each sale, lease or rental in violation of this section constitutes a separate offense.
186 Madeira - Traffic Code
(F) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.262) (1985 Code, § 74.33)
§ 74.34 REQUIREMENTS FOR EXTRA SIGNAL EQUIPMENT.
(A) No person shall operate any motor truck, bus or commercial tractor upon any highway at any
time from sunset to sunrise unless there is carried in such vehicle, except as provided in division (B) of
this section, the following equipment which shall be of the types approved by the Director of
Transportation:
(1) At least three flares or three red reflectors or three red electric lanterns, each of which is
capable of being seen and distinguished at a distance of 500 feet under normal atmospheric conditions
at nighttime;
(2) At least three red-burning fusees, unless red reflectors or red electric lanterns are carried;
(3) At least two red cloth flags, not less than two inches square, with standards to support
them; and
(4) The type of red reflectors shall comply with such standards and specifications in effect on
September 16, 1963, or later established by the Interstate Commerce Commission and must be certified
as meeting such standards by Underwriters Laboratories.
(B) No person shall operate at the time and under the conditions stated in this section any motor
vehicle used in transporting flammable liquids in bulk, or in transporting compressed flammable gases,
unless there is carried in such vehicle three red electric lanterns or three red reflectors meeting the
requirements stated in division (A) of this section. There shall not be carried in any such vehicle any
flare, fusee or signal produced by a flame.
(C) This section does not apply to any person who operates any motor vehicle in a work area
designated by protection equipment devices that are displayed and used in accordance with the manual
adopted by the Department of Transportation under R.C. § 4511.09.
(R.C. § 4513.27)
(D) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
(1985 Code, § 74.34)
§ 74.35 DISPLAY OF WARNING DEVICES ON DISABLED VEHICLES.
(A) Whenever any motor truck, bus, commercial tractor, trailer, semitrailer or pole trailer is
disabled upon any freeway, expressway, thruway and connecting, entering or exiting ramps within the
municipality, at any time when lighted lamps are required on vehicles, the operator of such vehicle shall
Equipment and Loads 187
display the following warning devices upon the highway during the time the vehicle is so disabled on the
highway except as provided in division (B) of this section.
(1) A lighted fusee shall be immediately placed on the roadway at the traffic side of such
vehicle, unless red electric lanterns or red reflectors are displayed.
(2) Within the burning period of the fusee and as promptly as possible, three lighted flares or
pot torches, or three red reflectors or three red electric lanterns shall be placed on the roadway as
follows:
(a) One at a distance of 40 paces or approximately 100 feet in advance of the vehicle;
(b) One at a distance of 40 paces or approximately 100 feet to the rear of the vehicle,
except as provided in this section, each in the center of the lane of traffic occupied by the disabled
vehicle; and
(c) One at the traffic side of the vehicle.
(B) Whenever any vehicle used in transporting flammable liquids in bulk, or in transporting
compressed flammable gases, is disabled upon a highway at any time or place mentioned in division (A)
of this section, the driver of such vehicle shall display upon the roadway the following warning devices:
(1) One red electric lantern or one red reflector shall be immediately placed on the roadway
at the traffic side of the vehicle; and
(2) Two other red electric lanterns or two other red reflectors shall be placed to the front and
rear of the vehicle in the same manner prescribed for flares in division (A) of this section.
(C) When a vehicle of a type specified in division (B) of this section is disabled, the use of flares,
fusees or any signal produced by flame as warning signals is prohibited.
(D) Whenever any vehicle of a type referred to in this section is disabled upon any freeway,
expressway, thruway and connecting, entering or exiting ramps within the municipality, at any time
when the display of fusees, flares, red reflectors or electric lanterns is not required, the operator of such
vehicle shall display two red flags upon the roadway in the lane of traffic occupied by the disabled
vehicle, one at a distance of 40 paces or approximately 100 feet in advance of the vehicle, and one at a
distance of 40 paces or approximately 100 feet to the rear of the vehicle, except as provided in this
section.
(E) The flares, fusees, lanterns, red reflectors and flags to be displayed as required in this section
shall conform with the applicable requirements of R.C. § 4513.27 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
188 Madeira - Traffic Code
(F) In the event the vehicle is disabled near a curve, crest of a hill or other obstruction of view, the
flare, flag, reflector or lantern in that direction shall be placed as to afford ample warning to other users
of the highway, but in no case shall it be placed less than 40 paces or approximately 100 feet nor more
than 120 paces or approximately 300 feet from the disabled vehicle.
(G) This section does not apply to the operator of any vehicle in a work area designated by
protection equipment devices that are displayed and used in accordance with the manual adopted by the
Department of Transportation under R.C. § 4511.09.
(H) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.28) (1985 Code, § 74.35)
§ 74.36 REQUIREMENTS FOR VEHICLES TRANSPORTING EXPLOSIVES.
(A) Any person operating any vehicle transporting explosives upon a highway shall at all times
comply with the following requirements.
(1) The vehicle shall be marked or placarded on each side and on the rear with the word
“EXPLOSIVES” in letters not less than eight inches high, or there shall be displayed on the rear of such
vehicle a red flag not less than 24 inches square marked with the word “DANGER” in white letters six
inches high, or shall be marked or placarded in accordance with § 177.823 of the United States
Department of Transportation regulations.
(2) The vehicle shall be equipped with not less than two fire extinguishers, filled and ready for
immediate use, and placed at convenient points on such vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.29)
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
(1985 Code, § 74.36)
§ 74.37 STUDDED TIRES; SEASONAL USE PERMITTED.
(A) For the purposes of this section, STUDDED TIRE means any tire designed for use on a vehicle
and equipped with metal studs or studs of wear-resisting material that project beyond the tread of the
traction surface of the tire.
(B) (1) Except as provided in division (B)(2) of this section, no person shall operate any motor
vehicle other than a public safety vehicle or school bus that is equipped with studded tires on any street
or highway in this municipality, except during the period extending from November 1 of each year
through April 15 of the succeeding year.
Equipment and Loads 189
(2) A person may operate a motor vehicle that is equipped with retractable studded tires with
the studs retracted at any time of the year, but shall operate the motor vehicle with the studs extended
only as provided in division (B)(1) of this section.
(C) This section does not apply to the use of tire chains when there is snow or ice on the streets or
highways where such chains are being used, or the immediate vicinity thereof.
(R.C. § 5589.081)
§ 74.38 OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICES.
(A) Definitions. As used in this section:
AUTOMOBILE. Means any commercial tractor, passenger car, commercial car or truck that
is required to be factory-equipped with an occupant restraining device for the operator or any passenger
by regulations adopted by the United States Secretary of Transportation pursuant to the National Traffic
and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966, 80 Stat. 719, 15 U.S.C. § 1392.
COMMERCIAL CAR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
COMMERCIAL TRACTOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICE. A seat safety belt, shoulder belt, harness or other
safety device for restraining a person who is an operator of or passenger in an automobile and that
satisfies the minimum federal vehicle safety standards established by the United States Department of
Transportation.
PASSENGER. Any person in an automobile, other than its operator, who is occupying a
seating position for which an occupant restraining device is provided.
PASSENGER CAR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
TORT ACTION. A civil action for damages for injury, death or loss to person or property.
The term includes a product liability claim, as defined in R.C. § 2307.71, and as asbestos claim, as
defined in R.C. § 2307.91, but does not include a civil action for damages for breach of contract or
another agreement between persons.
VEHICLE and MOTOR VEHICLE. As used in the definitions of the terms set forth above,
VEHICLE and MOTOR VEHICLE have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4511.01.
(B) Prohibited acts. No person shall do any of the following:
(1) Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless he or she is wearing all of the
available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device, or operate a school bus that has
190 Madeira - Traffic Code
an occupant restraining device installed for use in its operator’s seat unless he or she is wearing all of
the available elements of the device, as properly adjusted;
(2) Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless each passenger in the automobile
who is subject to the requirement set forth in division (B)(3) of this section is wearing all of the available
elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device;
(3) Occupy, as a passenger, a seating position on the front seat of an automobile being operated
on any street or highway unless he or she is wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted
occupant restraining device; or
(4) Operate a taxicab on any street or highway unless all factory-equipped occupant restraining
devices in the taxicab are maintained in usable form.
(C) Exceptions. Division (B)(3) of this section does not apply to a person who is required by R.C.
§ 4511.81 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to be secured in a child restraint device or
booster seat. Division (B)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is an employee of the United
States Postal Service or of a newspaper home delivery service, during any period in which the person
is engaged in the operation of an automobile to deliver mail or newspapers to addressees. Divisions
(B)(1) and (B)(3) of this section do not apply to a person who has an affidavit signed by a physician
licensed to practice in this state under R.C. Chapter 4731 or a chiropractor licensed to practice in this
state under R.C. Chapter 4734 that states that the person has a physical impairment that makes use of
an occupant restraining device impossible or impractical.
(D) Officers not permitted to stop cars to determine violation. Notwithstanding any provision of law
to the contrary, no law enforcement officer shall cause an operator of an automobile being operated on
any street or highway to stop the automobile for the sole purpose of determining whether a violation of
division (B) of this section has been or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket,
citation or summons for the violation or for causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a
person for the violation. No law enforcement officer shall view the interior or visually inspect any
automobile being operated on any street or highway for the sole purpose of determining whether the
violation has been or is being committed.
(E) Use of fines for educational program. All fines collected for violations of division (B) of this
section shall be forwarded to the State Treasurer for deposit in the funds as set forth in R.C.
§ 4513.263(E).
(F) Limitations on evidence used for prosecution.
(1) Subject to division (F)(2) of this section, the failure of a person to wear all of the available
elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device in violation of division (B)(1) or (B)(3) of
this section or the failure of a person to ensure that each minor who is a passenger of an automobile
being operated by that person is wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant
Equipment and Loads 191
restraining device in violation of division (B)(2) of this section shall not be considered or used by the
trier of fact in a tort action as evidence of negligence or contributory negligence. But, the trier of fact
may determine based on evidence admitted consistent with the Ohio Rules of Evidence that the failure
contributed to the harm alleged in the tort action and may diminish a recovery of compensatory damages
that represents non-economic loss, as defined in R.C. § 2307.011, in a tort action that could have been
recovered but for the plaintiff’s failure to wear all of the available elements of a properly adjusted
occupant restraining device. Evidence of that failure shall not be used as a basis for a criminal
prosecution of the person other than a prosecution for a violation of this section; and shall not be
admissible as evidence in a criminal action involving the person other than a prosecution for a violation
of this section.
(2) If, at the time of an accident involving a passenger car equipped with occupant restraining
devices, any occupant of the passenger car who sustained injury or death was not wearing an available
occupant restraining device, was not wearing all of the available elements of such a device, or was not
wearing such a device as properly adjusted, then, consistent with the Rules of Evidence, the fact that the
occupant was not wearing the available occupant restraining device, was not wearing all of the available
elements of such a device, or was not wearing such a device as properly adjusted is admissible in
evidence in relation to any claim for relief in a tort action to the extent that the claim for relief satisfies
all of the following:
(a) It seeks to recover damages for injury or death to the occupant;
(b) The defendant in question is the manufacturer, designer, distributor or seller of the
passenger car; and
(c) The claim for relief against the defendant in question is that the injury or death
sustained by the occupant was enhanced or aggravated by some design defect in the passenger car or that
the passenger car was not crashworthy.
(G) Penalty.
(1) Whoever violates division (B)(1) of this section shall be fined $30.
(2) Whoever violates division (B)(2) shall be subject to the penalty set forth in § 70.99(B).
(3) Whoever violates division (B)(3) of this section shall be fined $20.
(4) Except as otherwise provided in this division (G)(4), whoever violates division (B)(4) of
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (B)(4) of this section, whoever violates division (B)(4) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4513.263) (1985 Code, § 74.42)
192 Madeira - Traffic Code
§ 74.39 SAFETY INSPECTION DECALS FOR BUSES.
(A) Definitions. As used in this section:
BUS.
(a) Means any vehicle used for the transportation of passengers that meets at least one of
the following:
1. Was originally designed by the manufacturer to transport more than 15 passengers,
including the driver; or
2. Either the gross vehicle weight rating or the gross vehicle weight exceeds 10,000
pounds.
(b) The term does not include a church bus as defined in R.C. § 4503.07 or a school bus
unless the church bus or school bus is used in the transportation of passengers by a motor carrier.
(c) The term also does not include any of the following:
1. Any vehicle operated exclusively on a rail or rails;
2. A trolley bus operated by electric power derived from a fixed overhead wire
furnishing local passenger transportation similar to street-railway service; or
3. Vehicles owned or leased by government agencies or political subdivisions.
MOTOR CARRIER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4923.01
(R.C. § 4513.50)
(B) Safety inspection decals.
(1) Except as provided in division (B)(2) of this section, on and after July 1, 2001, no person
shall operate a bus, nor shall any person being the owner of a bus or having supervisory responsibility
for a bus, permit the operation of any bus unless the bus displays a valid, current safety inspection decal
issued by the State Highway Patrol under R.C. § 4513.52.
(2) For the purpose of complying with the requirements of this section and R.C. § 4513.52,
the owner or other operator of a bus may drive the bus directly to an inspection site conducted by the
State Highway Patrol and directly back to the person’s place of business without a valid registration and
without displaying a safety inspection decal, provided that no passengers may occupy the bus during such
operation.
(R.C. § 4513.51(A), (B))
Equipment and Loads 193
(C) Whoever violates division (B)(1) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4513.51(D))
(1985 Code, § 74.44)
§ 74.40 AIR BAGS.
(A) As used in this section:
AIR BAG. Has the same meaning as in 49 C.F.R. § 579.4, as amended.
COUNTERFEIT AIR BAG. An air bag displaying a mark identical or similar to the genuine
mark of a motor vehicle manufacturer, without the authorization of the motor vehicle manufacturer.
NONFUNCTIONAL AIR BAG. Any of the following:
(a) A replacement air bag that has been previously deployed or damaged;
(b) A replacement air bag that has an electrical fault that is detected by the air bag
diagnostic system of a vehicle after the air bag is installed; or
(c) A counterfeit air bag, air bag cover or some other object that is installed in a vehicle
to deceive an owner or operator of the vehicle into believing that a functional air bag has been installed.
(B) No person shall install or reinstall in any motor vehicle a counterfeit or nonfunctional air bag
or any object intended to fulfill the function of an air bag other than an air bag that was designed in
conformance with or that is regulated by Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 208 for the
make, model, and model year of the vehicle, knowing that the object is not in accordance with that
standard.
(C) No person shall knowingly manufacture, import, sell or offer for sale any of the following:
(1) A counterfeit air bag;
(2) A nonfunctional air bag;
(3) Any other object that is intended to be installed in a motor vehicle to fulfill the function of
an air bag and that is not in conformance with Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 208 for
the make, model and model year of the vehicle in which the object is intended to be installed.
(D) No person shall knowingly sell, install or reinstall a device in a motor vehicle that causes the
diagnostic system of a vehicle to inaccurately indicate that the vehicle is equipped with a functional air
bag.
194 Madeira - Traffic Code
(E) (1) Whoever violates division (B) or (D) of this section is guilty of improper replacement of
a motor vehicle air bag, a misdemeanor of the first degree on a first offense. On each subsequent
offense, or if the violation results in serious physical harm to an individual, the person is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(2) A violation of division (C) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(3) Each manufacture, importation, installation, reinstallation, sale or offer for sale in violation
of this section shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.
(R.C. § 4549.20) (1985 Code, § 74.45)
LOADS
§ 74.55 LIMITATION OF LOAD EXTENSION ON LEFT SIDE OF VEHICLE.
(A) No passenger-type vehicle shall be operated on a highway with any load carried on the vehicle
which extends more than six inches beyond the line of the fenders on the vehicle’s left side.
(R.C. § 4513.30)
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
(1985 Code, § 74.37)
§ 74.56 ALL LOADS SHALL BE PROPERLY SECURED.
(A) No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any highway unless the vehicle is so constructed,
loaded, or covered as to prevent any of its load from dropping, sifting, leaking, or otherwise escaping
therefrom, except that sand or other substances may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or
water or other substances may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining the roadway.
(B) Except for a farm vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural production
materials or a rubbish vehicle in the process of acquiring its load, no vehicle loaded with garbage, swill,
cans, bottles, waste paper, ashes, refuse, trash, rubbish, waste, wire, paper, cartons, boxes, glass, solid
waste, or any other material of an unsanitary nature that is susceptible to blowing or bouncing from a
moving vehicle shall be driven or moved on any highway unless the load is covered with a sufficient
cover to prevent the load or any part of the load from spilling onto the highway.
(R.C. § 4513.31)
(C) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
Equipment and Loads 195
§ 74.57 TOWING REQUIREMENTS; EXCEPTION TO SIZE AND WEIGHT
RESTRICTIONS.
(A) (1) When one vehicle is towing another vehicle, the drawbar or other connection shall be of
sufficient strength to pull all the weight towed thereby, and the drawbar or other connection shall not
exceed 15 feet from one vehicle to the other, except the connection between any two vehicles
transporting poles, pipe, machinery or other objects of structural nature which cannot readily be
dismembered.
(2) When one vehicle is towing another and the connection consists only of a chain, rope or
cable, there shall be displayed upon such connection a white flag or cloth not less than 12 inches square.
(3) In addition to such drawbar or other connection, each trailer and each semitrailer which is
not connected to a commercial tractor by means of a fifth wheel shall be coupled with stay chains or
cables to the vehicle by which it is being drawn. These chains or cables shall be of sufficient size and
strength to prevent the towed vehicle’s parting from the drawing vehicle in case the drawbar or other
connection should break or become disengaged. In case of a loaded pole trailer, the connecting pole to
the drawing vehicle shall be coupled to the drawing vehicle with stay chains or cables of sufficient size
and strength to prevent the towed vehicle’s parting from the drawing vehicle.
(4) Every trailer or semitrailer, except pole and cable trailers and pole and cable dollies
operated by a public utility as defined in R.C. § 5727.01, shall be equipped with a coupling device which
shall be so designed and constructed that the trailer will follow substantially in the path of the vehicle
drawing it, without whipping or swerving from side to side. Vehicles used to transport agricultural
produce or agricultural production materials between a local place of storage and supply and the farm,
when drawn or towed on a street or highway at a speed of 25 mph or less, and vehicles designed and
used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage and a marina, or in and around a marina,
when drawn or towed on a street or highway for a distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of
25 mph or less, shall have a drawbar or other connection, including the hitch mounted on the towing
vehicle, which shall be of sufficient strength to pull all the weight towed thereby. Only one such vehicle
used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural production materials as provided in this section may
be towed or drawn at one time except as follows:
(a) An agricultural tractor may tow or draw more than one such vehicle; and
(b) A pickup truck or straight truck designed by the manufacturer to carry a load of not
less than one-half ton and not more than two tons may tow or draw not more than two such vehicles that
are being used to transport agricultural produce from the farm to a local place of storage. No vehicle
being so towed by such a pickup truck or straight truck shall be considered to be a motor vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.32)
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
196 Madeira - Traffic Code
(C) Exception to size and weight restrictions.
(1) The size and weight provisions of this chapter and R.C. Chapter 5577 do not apply to a
person who is engaged in the initial towing or removal or a wrecked or disabled motor vehicle from the
site of an emergency on a public highway where the vehicle became wrecked or disabled to the nearest
site where the vehicle can be brought into conformance with the requirements of this chapter and R.C.
Chapter 5577 or to the nearest qualified repair facility.
(2) Any subsequent towing of a wrecked or disabled vehicle shall comply with the size and
weight provisions of this chapter and R.C. Chapter 5577.
(3) No court shall impose any penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, or the civil liability established in R.C. § 5577.12 upon a person towing
or removing a vehicle in the manner described in division (C)(1) of this section.
(R.C. § 5577.15)
(1985 Code, § 74.39)
§ 74.58 LOAD LIMITS.
(A) Weight of load; width of tire. No person, firm or corporation shall transport over the improved
public streets, alleys, intercounty highways, state highways, bridges or culverts in this municipality, in
any vehicle propelled by muscular, motor or other power, any burden, including weight of vehicle and
load, greater than the following:
(1) (a) In vehicles having metal tires three inches or less in width, a load of 500 pounds for
each inch of the total width of the tire on all wheels; and
(b) When the tires on such vehicles exceed three inches in width, an additional load of 800
pounds shall be permitted for each inch by which the total width of the tires on all wheels exceeds 12
inches.
(2) In vehicles having tires of rubber or other similar substance, for each inch of the total width
of tires on all wheels, as follows:
Tire Width (in inches) Load Limit (in pounds)
3 450
3.5 450
4 500
5 600
6 and over 650
Equipment and Loads 197
(3) The total width of tires on all wheels shall be, in the case of solid tires of rubber or other
similar substance, the actual width in inches of all such tires between the flanges at the base of the tires,
but in no event shall that portion of tire coming in contact with the road surface be less than two-thirds
the width so measured between the flanges;
(4) In the case of pneumatic tires, of rubber or other similar substance, the total width of tires
on all wheels shall be the actual width of all such tires, measured at the widest portion thereof when
inflated and not bearing a load; and
(5) In no event shall the load, including the proportionate weight of vehicle that can be
concentrated on any wheel, exceed 650 pounds to each inch in width of the tread as defined in this
division (A) for solid tires, or each inch in the actual diameter of pneumatic tires measured when inflated
and not bearing a load.
(R.C. § 5577.03)
(B) Vehicles with pneumatic tires, load limits.
(1) The maximum wheel load of any one wheel of any vehicle, load, object or structure
operated or moved upon improved public highways, streets, bridges or culverts shall not exceed 650
pounds per inch width of pneumatic tire, measured as prescribed by division (A) of this section.
(2) The weight of the vehicle and load imposed upon a road surface that is part of the interstate
system by vehicles with pneumatic tires shall not exceed any of the following weight limitations:
(a) On any one axle, 20,000 pounds;
(b) On any tandem axle, 34,000 pounds; and
(c) On any two or more consecutive axles, the maximum weight as determined by
application of the formula provided in division (B)(3) of this section.
(3) (a) For purposes of division (B)(2)(c) of this section, the maximum gross weight on any
two or more consecutive axles shall be determined by application of the following formula: W =
500[(LN/–1) + 12N + 36]
(b) In this formula, W equals the overall gross weight on any group of two or more
consecutive axles to the nearest 500 pounds, L equals the distance in rounded whole feet between the
extreme of any group of two or more consecutive axles, and N equals the number of axles in the group
under consideration. However, two consecutive sets of tandem axles may carry a gross load of 34,000
pounds each, provided the overall distance between the first and last axles of such consecutive sets of
tandem axles is 36 feet or more.
(4) Except as provided in division (B)(9) of this section, the weight of vehicle and load imposed
upon a road surface that is not part of the interstate system by vehicles with pneumatic tires shall not
exceed any of the following weight limitations:
198 Madeira - Traffic Code
(a) On any one axle, 20,000 pounds;
(b) On any two successive axles:
1. Spaced four feet or less apart, and weighed simultaneously, 24,000 pounds; or
2. Spaced more than four feet apart, and weighed simultaneously, 34,000 pounds,
plus 1,000 pounds per foot or fraction thereof, over four feet, not to exceed 40,000 pounds.
(c) On any three successive load-bearing axles designed to equalize the load between such
axles and spaced so that each such axle of the three-axle group is more than four feet from the next axle
in the three-axle group and so that the spacing between the first axle and the third axle in the three-axle
group is no more than nine feet, and with such load-bearing three-axle group weighed simultaneously
as a unit:
1. A weight of 48,000 pounds, with the total weight of the vehicle and load not
exceeding 38,000 pounds plus an additional 900 pounds for each foot of spacing between the front axle
and the rearmost axle of the vehicle; or
2. As an alternative to division (B)(4)(c)1. of this section, 42,500 pounds, if part of
a six-axle vehicle combination with at least 20 feet of spacing between the front axle and rearmost axle,
with the total weight of the vehicle and load not exceeding 54,000 pounds plus an additional 600 pounds
per each foot of spacing between the front axle and the rearmost axle of the vehicle.
(d) The total weight of the vehicle and load utilizing any combination of axles, other than
as provided for three-axle groups in division (B)(4) of this section, shall not exceed 38,000 pounds plus
an additional 900 pounds for each foot of spacing between the front axle and the rearmost axle of the
vehicle.
(5) Notwithstanding divisions (B)(2) and (B)(4) of this section, the maximum overall gross
weight of a vehicle and load imposed upon the road surface shall not exceed 80,000 pounds.
(6) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, when a vehicle is towing another vehicle, such
drawbar or other connection shall be of a length such as will limit the spacing between nearest axles of
the respective vehicles to a distance not in excess of 12.5 feet.
(7) As used in division (B)(2) of this section, TANDEM AXLE means two or more consecutive
axles whose centers may be included between parallel transverse vertical planes spaced more than 40
inches but not more than 96 inches apart, extending across the full width of the vehicle.
(8) This division (B) does not apply to passenger bus type vehicles operated by a regional
transit authority pursuant to R.C. §§ 306.30 through 306.54.
Equipment and Loads 199
(9) Either division (B)(2) or (B)(4) of this section applies to the weight of a vehicle and its load
imposed upon any road surface that is not a part of the interstate system by vehicles with pneumatic tires.
As between divisions (B)(2) and (B)(4) of this section, only the division that yields the highest total gross
vehicle weight limit shall be applied to any such vehicle. Once that division has been determined, only
the limits contained in the subdivisions of that division shall apply to that vehicle.
(R.C. § 5577.04)
(C) Axle and wheel load, gross weights and towing connection length for solid rubber tires.
(1) No vehicle, load, object or structure having a maximum axle load greater than 16,000
pounds when such vehicle is equipped with solid rubber tires shall be operated or moved upon the
improved public highways, streets, bridges or culverts. The maximum wheel load of any one wheel of
such vehicle shall not exceed 650 pounds per inch width of tire, measured as prescribed by division (A)
of this section, nor shall any solid tire or rubber or other resilient material, on any wheel of any such
vehicle, be less than one inch thick when measure from the top of the flanges of the tire channel.
(2) The weight of vehicle and load imposed upon the road surface by any two successive axles,
spaces four feet or less apart, shall not exceed 19,000 pounds for solid tires; or by any two successive
axles spaced more than four feet but less than eight feet apart, shall not exceed 24,000 pounds for solid
tires; or by any two successive axles, spaced eight feet or more apart, shall not exceed 28,000 pounds
for solid tires; nor shall the total weight of vehicle and load exceed, for solid rubber tires, 28,000 pounds
plus an additional 600 pounds for each foot or fraction thereof of spacing between the front axle and the
rear-most axle of the vehicle; nor shall the weight of the vehicle and load imposed upon the road surface
by any vehicle equipped with solid rubber tires exceed 80% of the permissible weight of vehicle and load
as provided for pneumatic tires.
(3) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, when a vehicle is towing another vehicle, such
drawbar or other connection shall be of a length such as will limit the spacing between the nearest axles
of the respective vehicles to a distance not in excess of 12.5 feet. If the provisions of this division (C)
are held to exceed the weight limitations or other provisions set forth in the Federal-Aid Highway Act
of 1958, 72 Stat. 902, 23 U.S.C. § 127, this division (C) shall become null and void to the extent of such
inconsistency.
(R.C. § 5577.041)
(D) Penalties.
(1) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a first offense; on a
second or subsequent offense, such person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 5577.99(C))
(2) Whoever violates the weight provisions of this section shall be punished as set forth in
§ 74.61(B).
200 Madeira - Traffic Code
(E) Modification of load limits. The load limits established in this section may be modified or
waived upon special permission granted as provided in R.C. § 4513.34 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
§ 74.59 PERMIT REQUIRED TO EXCEED LOAD LIMITS.
(A) (1) The municipality, with respect to highways under their jurisdiction, upon application in
writing, shall issue a special regional heavy hauling permit authorizing the applicant to operate or move
a vehicle or combination of vehicles as follows:
(a) At a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the maximum specified in R.C.
§§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or otherwise not in conformity with R.C. §§ 4513.01 to 4513.37;
(b) Upon any highway under the jurisdiction of municipality except those highways with
a condition insufficient to bear the weight of the vehicle or combination of vehicles as stated in the
application;
(c) For regional trips at distances of 150 miles or less from a facility stated on the
application as the applicant’s point of origin; and
(d) Issuance of a special regional heavy hauling permit is subject to the payment of a fee
established by the municipality in accordance with this section.
(2) In circumstances where a person is not eligible to receive a permit under division (A)(1)
of this section, the municipality, with respect to highways under its jurisdiction, upon application in
writing and for good cause shown, may issue a special permit in writing authorizing the applicant to
operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding
the maximum specified in R.C. §§ 5577.01 through 5577.09, or otherwise not in conformity with R.C.
§§ 4513.01 through 4513.37, upon any highway under its jurisdiction.
(B) Notwithstanding R.C. §§ 715.22 and 723.01, the holder of a permit issued by the Director of
Transportation under R.C. § 4513.34 may move the vehicle or combination of vehicles described in the
permit on any highway that is a part of the state highway system when the movement is partly within and
partly without the corporate limits of the municipality. No local authority shall require any other permit
or license or charge any license fee or other charge against the holder of a permit for the movement of
a vehicle or combination of vehicles on any highway which is a part of the state highway system. The
Ohio Director of Transportation shall not require the holder of a permit issued by the municipality to
obtain a special permit for the movement of vehicles or combination of vehicles on highways within the
jurisdiction of the municipality. Permits may be issued for any period of time not to exceed one year,
as the local authority in its discretion determines advisable or for the duration of any public construction
project.
Equipment and Loads 201
(C) (1) The application for a permit issued under this section shall be in the form that the
municipality prescribes. The municipality may prescribe a permit fee to be imposed and collected when
any permit described in this section is issued. The permit fee may be in an amount sufficient to reimburse
the municipality for the administrative costs incurred in issuing the permit, and also to cover the cost of
normal and expected damage caused to the roadway or a street or highway structure as the result of the
operation of the nonconforming vehicle or combination of vehicles.
(2) For the purposes of this section and of rules adopted by the Director under R.C. § 4513.34,
milk transported in bulk by vehicle is deemed a nondivisible load.
(3) For purposes of this section and of rules adopted by the Director under R.C. § 4513.34,
three or fewer aluminum coils, transported by a vehicle, are deemed a nondivisible load. The Director
shall adopt rules establishing requirements for an aluminum coil permit that are substantially similar to
the requirements for a steel coil permit under O.A.C. Chapter 5501:2-1.
(D) The municipality shall issue a special regional heavy hauling permit under division (A)(1) of
this section upon application and payment of the applicable fee. However, the municipality may issue
or withhold a special permit specified in division (A)(2) of this section. If a permit is to be issued, the
municipality may limit or prescribe conditions of operation for the vehicle and may require the posting
of a bond or other security conditioned upon the sufficiency of the permit fee to compensate for damage
caused to the roadway or a street or highway structure. In addition, the municipality, as a condition of
issuance of an overweight permit, may require the applicant to develop and enter into a mutual agreement
with the municipality to compensate for or to repair excess damage caused to the roadway by travel
under the permit.
(E) Every permit issued under this section shall be carried in the vehicle or combination of vehicles
to which it refers and shall be open to inspection by any police officer or authorized agent of any
authority granting the permit. No person shall violate any of the terms of a permit.
(F) The Director of Transportation may debar an applicant from applying for a special permit under
this section upon a finding based on a reasonable belief that the applicant has done any of the actions
specified in R.C. § 4513.34(F).
(G) Notice and procedures for debarment shall be as provided in R.C. § 4513.34(G).
(H) (1) No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued under this section that relate to gross
load limits.
(2) No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued under this section that relate to axle
load by more than 2,000 pounds per axle or group of axles.
(3) No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued under this section that relate to an
approved route except upon order of a law enforcement officer or authorized agent of the issuing
authority.
202 Madeira - Traffic Code
(I) A permit issued by the municipality under this section for the operation of a vehicle or
combination of vehicles is valid for the purposes of the vehicle operation in accordance with the
conditions and limitations specified on the permit. Such a permit is voidable by law enforcement only
for operation of a vehicle or combination of vehicles in violation of the weight, dimension, or route
provisions of the permit. However, a permit is not voidable for operation in violation of a route
provision of a permit if the operation is upon the order of a law enforcement officer.
(R.C. § 4513.34)
(J) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 74.60 WEIGHING OF VEHICLE; REMOVAL OF EXCESS LOAD.
(A) Any police officer having reason to believe that the weight of a vehicle and its load is unlawful
may require the driver of the vehicle to stop and submit to a weighing of it by means of a compact,
self-contained, portable, sealed scale specially adapted to determining the wheel loads of vehicles on
highways; a sealed scale permanently installed in a fixed location, having a load-receiving element
specially adapted to determining the wheel loads of highway vehicles; a sealed scale, permanently
installed in a fixed location, having a load-receiving element specially adapted to determining the
combined load of all wheels on a single axle or on successive axles of a highway vehicle; or a sealed
scale adapted to weighing highway vehicles, loaded or unloaded.
(B) The driver of the vehicle shall, if necessary, be directed to proceed to the nearest available
sealed scales to accomplish the weighing, provided the scales are within three miles of the point where
the vehicle is stopped.
(C) Any vehicle stopped in accordance with this section may be held by the police officer for a
reasonable time only to accomplish the weighing as prescribed by this section.
(D) All scales used in determining the lawful weight of a vehicle and its load shall be annually
compared by a municipal, county or state sealer with the state standards or standards approved by the
state, and the scales shall not be sealed if they do not conform to the state standards or standards
approved by the state.
(E) At each end of a permanently installed scale, there shall be a straight approach in the same plane
as the platform, of sufficient length and width to insure the level positioning of vehicles during weight
determinations. During determination of weight by compact, self-contained, portable, sealed scales,
specially adapted to determining the wheel loads of vehicles on highways, they shall always be used on
a level terrain of sufficient length and width to accommodate the entire vehicle being weighed. Such
terrain shall be level, or if not level, it shall be of such elevation that the difference in elevation between
the wheels on any one axle does not exceed two inches and the difference in elevation between axles
being weighed does not exceed one-quarter inch per foot of the distance between such axles.
Equipment and Loads 203
(F) In all determinations of all weights, except gross weight, by compact, self-contained, portable,
sealed scales, specially adapted to determining the wheel loads of vehicles on highways, all successive
axles, 12 feet or less apart, shall be weighed simultaneously by placing one such scale under the outside
wheel of each such axle. In determinations of gross weight by the use of compact, self-contained,
portable, sealed scales, specially adapted to determining the wheel loads of vehicles on highways, all
axles shall be weighed simultaneously by placing one such scale under the outside wheel of each axle.
(G) Whenever an officer, upon weighing a vehicle and load, determines that the weight is unlawful,
he or she may require the driver to stop the vehicle in a suitable place and remain standing until such
portion of the load is removed as is necessary to reduce the weight of the vehicle to the limit permitted
under R.C. §§ 5577.01 through 5577.14 and this chapter.
(R.C. § 4513.33)
§ 74.61 OPERATION OF VEHICLE EXCEEDING WEIGHT LIMITS PROHIBITED.
(A) No traction engine, steam roller or other vehicle, load, object or structure, whether propelled
by muscular or motor power, not including vehicles run upon stationary rails or tracks, fire engines, fire
trucks or other vehicles or apparatus belonging to or used by any municipal or volunteer Fire Department
in the discharge of its functions, shall be operated or moved over or upon the improved public streets,
highways, bridges or culverts in this municipality upon wheels, rollers or otherwise, weighing in excess
of the weights prescribed in this subchapter or R.C. §§ 5577.01 et seq., including the weight of the
vehicle, object, structure or contrivance and load, except upon special permission granted as provided
by R.C. § 4513.34 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(R.C. § 5577.02)
(B) Whoever violates the weight provisions of this section shall be fined $80 for the first 2,000
pounds, or fraction thereof, of overload; for overloads in excess of 2,000 pounds, but not in excess of
5,000 pounds, such person shall be fined $100, and in addition thereto $1 per 100 pounds of overload;
for overloads in excess of 5,000 pounds but not in excess of 10,000 pounds, such person shall be fined
$130, and in addition thereto $2 per 100 pounds of overload, or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or
both. For all overloads in excess of 10,000 pounds, such person shall be fined $160, and in addition
thereto $3 per 100 pounds of overload, or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. Whoever violates
the weight provisions of vehicle and load relating to gross load limits shall be fined not less than $100.
No penalty prescribed in this division (B)(2) shall be imposed on any vehicle combination if the overload
on any one axle does not exceed 1,000 pounds, and if the immediately preceding or following axle,
excepting the front axle of the vehicle combination, is underloaded by the same or greater amount. For
purposes of this division (B)(2), two axles on one vehicle less than eight feet apart shall be considered
as one axle.
(R.C. § 5577.99(A))
204 Madeira - Traffic Code
§ 74.62 MAXIMUM WIDTH, HEIGHT AND LENGTH.
(A) No vehicle shall be operated upon the public highways, streets, bridges and culverts within this
municipality whose dimensions exceed those specified in this section.
(B) No such vehicle shall have a width:
(1) In excess of 104 inches for passenger bus type vehicles operated exclusively within the
municipality;
(2) In excess of 102 inches, excluding such safety devices as are required by law, for passenger
bus type vehicles operated over freeways, and such other state roads with minimum pavement widths
of 22 feet, except those roads or portions of roads over which operation of 102-inch buses is prohibited
by order of the Director of Transportation;
(3) In excess of 132 inches for traction engines;
(4) In excess of 102 inches for recreational vehicles, excluding safety devices and retracted
awnings and other appurtenances of six inches or less in width and except that the Director may prohibit
the operation of 102-inch recreational vehicles on designated state highways or portions of highways;
and
(5) In excess of 102 inches, including load, for all other vehicles, except that the Director may
prohibit the operation of 102-inch vehicles on such state highways or portions of state highways as the
Director designates.
(C) No such vehicle shall have a length:
(1) In excess of 66 feet for passenger bus type vehicles and articulated passenger bus type
vehicles operated by a regional transit authority pursuant to R.C. §§ 306.30 through 306.54;
(2) In excess of 45 feet for all other passenger bus type vehicles;
(3) In excess of 53 feet for any semitrailer when operated in a commercial tractor-semitrailer
combination, with or without load, except that the Director may prohibit the operation of any such
commercial tractor-semitrailer combination on such state highways or portions of state highways as the
Director designates;
(4) In excess of 28.5 feet for any semitrailer or trailer when operated in a commercial
tractor-semitrailer-trailer or commercial tractor-semitrailer-semitrailer combination, except that the
Director may prohibit the operation of any such commercial tractor-semitrailer-trailer or commercial
tractor-semitrailer-semitrailer combination on such state highways or portions of state highways as the
Director designates;
Equipment and Loads 205
(5) (a) In excess of 97 feet for drive-away saddlemount vehicle transporter combinations and
drive-away saddlemount with fullmount vehicle transporter combinations when operated on any
interstate, United States route, or state route, including reasonable access travel on all other roadways
for a distance not to exceed one road mile from any interstate, United States route, or state route, not
to exceed three saddlemounted vehicles, but which may include one fullmount; and
(b) In excess of 75 feet for drive-away saddlemount vehicle transporter combinations and
drive-away saddlemount with fullmount vehicle transporter combinations when operated on any roadway
not designated as an interstate, United States route, or state route, not to exceed three saddlemounted
vehicles, but which may include one fullmount.
(6) In excess of 65 feet for any other combination of vehicles coupled together, with or without
load, except as provided in division (C)(3) and (C)(4), and in division (E) below;
(7) In excess of 45 feet for recreational vehicles; and
(8) In excess of 50 feet for all other vehicles, except trailers and semitrailers, with or without
load.
(D) No such vehicle shall have a height in excess of 13.5 feet, with or without load.
(E) An automobile transporter or boat transporter shall be allowed a length of 65 feet, and a
stinger-steered automobile transporter or stinger-steered boat transporter shall be allowed a length of 75
feet, except that the load thereon may extend no more than four feet beyond the rear of such vehicles and
may extend no more than three feet beyond the front of such vehicles, and except further that the
Director may prohibit the operation of a stinger-steered automobile transporter, stinger-steered boat
transporter or a B-train assembly on any state highway or portion of any state highway that the Director
designates.
(F) (1) The widths prescribed in division (B) of this section shall not include side mirrors, turn
signal lamps, marker lamps, handholds for cab entry and egress, flexible fender extensions, mud flaps,
splash and spray suppressant devices, and load-induced tire bulge.
(2) The widths prescribed in division (B)(5) of this section shall not include automatic covering
devices, tarp and tarp hardware, and tiedown assemblies, provided these safety devices do not extend
more than three inches from either side of the vehicle.
(3) The lengths prescribed in divisions (C)(2) through (C)(7) shall not include safety devices,
bumpers attached to the front or rear of such bus or combination, non-property carrying devices or
components that do not extend more than 24 inches beyond the rear of the vehicle and are needed for
loading or unloading, B-train assembly used between the first and second semitrailer of a commercial
tractor-semitrailer-semitrailer combination, energy conservation devices as provided in any regulations
adopted by the Secretary of the United States Department of Transportation, or any noncargo-carrying
206 Madeira - Traffic Code
refrigerator equipment attached to the front of trailers and semitrailers. In special cases, vehicles that
dimensions exceed those prescribed by this section may operate in accordance with rules adopted by the
Director.
(G) (1) This section does not apply to fire engines, fire trucks, or other vehicles or apparatus
belonging to the municipality or to the volunteer fire department thereof or used by such department in
the discharge of its functions. This section does not apply to vehicles and pole trailers used in the
transportation of wooden and metal poles, nor to the transportation of pipes or well-drilling equipment,
nor to farm machinery and equipment.
(2) The owner or operator of any vehicle, machinery, or equipment not specifically enumerated
in this section but the dimensions of which exceed the dimensions provided by this section, when
operating the same on the highways and streets of the municipality, shall comply with the rules of the
Director governing such movement. Any person adversely affected shall have the same right of appeal
as provided in R.C. Chapter 119.
(3) This section does not require the municipality or any railroad or other private corporation
to provide sufficient vertical clearance to permit the operation of such vehicle, or to make any changes
in or about existing structures now crossing streets, roads, and other public thoroughfares.
(H) As used in this section, RECREATIONAL VEHICLE has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 4501.01.
(R.C. § 5577.05)
(I) No person shall violate any rule or regulation promulgated by the Director of Transportation
in accordance with R.C. § 5577.05.
(R.C. § 5577.06)
(J) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second
or subsequent offense, such person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 5577.99(C))
§ 74.63 STATEMENT OF GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT.
(A) No person shall issue or aid in issuing any bill of lading or other document of like nature in lieu
thereof, which bill or document is to accompany a shipment of goods or property by truck, trailer,
semitrailer, commercial tractor or any other commercial vehicle used for the transportation of property,
the gross weight of which, with load, exceeds three tons, with intent to defraud by misrepresentation
thereon the weight of such goods of property to be so transported.
(B) Any driver or operator of a commercial car, trailer or semitrailer may obtain from any person,
firm, partnership, corporation or association, including the owner, lessee or operator of such commercial
car, trailer or semitrailer, owning and operating sealed scales in this state, a written “statement of gross
Equipment and Loads 207
vehicle weight” showing the gross weight of the vehicle including the cargo on the vehicle, the name and
address of the person issuing the statement, and the date and place where the vehicle and its cargo were
weighed. The driver or operator of the commercial car, trailer or semitrailer shall retain such statement
of gross vehicle weight on his or her person, and any law enforcement officer may request that such
driver or operator exhibit it to him or her. If, upon examining the statement of gross vehicle weight, the
law enforcement officer has reason to believe that the information contained therein is correct in every
respect, he or she shall indorse it with his or her name and the date and place where it was exhibited to
him or her. The law enforcement officer may then permit such driver or operator to proceed without
weighing by a law enforcement officer. No person shall willfully issue a written statement of gross
vehicle weight and knowingly give any false information in such statement.
(R.C. § 5577.10)
(C) Whoever violates division (A) of this section shall be fined not more than $5,000 or imprisoned
for not less than 30 days nor more than six months, or both.
(R.C. § 5577.99(D))
§ 74.64 WHEEL PROTECTORS REQUIRED ON HEAVY COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.
(A) No person shall drive or operate, or cause to be driven or operated, any commercial car, trailer
or semitrailer, used for the transportation of goods or property, the gross weight of which, with load,
exceeds three tons, upon the public highways, streets, bridges and culverts within the municipality,
unless such vehicle is equipped with suitable metal protectors or substantial flexible flaps on the rearmost
wheels of such vehicle or combination of vehicles to prevent, as far as practicable, the wheels from
throwing dirt, water or other materials on the windshields of following vehicles. Such protectors or flaps
shall have a ground clearance of not more than one-third of the distance from the center of the rearmost
axle to the center of the flaps under any conditions of loading of the vehicle, and they shall be at least
as wide as the tires they are protecting. If the vehicle is so designed and constructed that such
requirements are accomplished by means of fenders, body construction or other means of enclosure, then
no such protectors or flaps are required. Rear wheels not covered at the top by fenders, bodies or other
parts of the vehicle shall be covered at the top by protective means extending at least to the centerline
of the rearmost axle.
(R.C. § 5577.11)
(B) Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than $25.
(R.C. § 5577.99(E))
§ 74.65 LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES; PROSECUTION; APPLICATION OF MONIES.
Any person violating any law relating to or regulating the use of the improved public roads shall be
liable for all damage resulting to any such street, highway, bridge or culvert by reason of such violation.
In case of any injury to such street, highway, bridge or culvert, such damages shall be collected by civil
208 Madeira - Traffic Code
action for recovery of such damages brought by the proper authorities of the municipality. All damages
collected under this section shall be paid into the treasury of the municipality and credited to any fund
for the repairs of streets, highways, roads, bridges or culverts.
(R.C. § 5577.12)
§ 74.66 WEIGHT EXCEPTIONS FOR CERTAIN VEHICLES.
(A) As used in this section:
COAL TRUCK. Means a truck transporting coal from the site where it is mined when the truck
is operated in accordance with this section.
FARM COMMODITIES. Includes livestock, bulk milk, corn, soybeans, tobacco and wheat.
FARM MACHINERY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
FARM TRUCK. Means a truck used in the transportation from a farm of farm commodities
when the truck is operated in accordance with this section.
LOG TRUCK. Means a truck used in the transportation of timber from the site of its cutting
when the truck is operated in accordance with this section.
SOLID WASTE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3743.01.
SOLID WASTE HAUL VEHICLE. Means a vehicle hauling solid waste for which a bill of
lading has not been issued.
(B) (1) Notwithstanding R.C. §§ 5577.02 and 5577.04, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the following vehicles under the described conditions may exceed by no more than 7.5% the
weight provisions of R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
and no penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, shall
be imposed:
(a) A coal truck transporting coal, from the place of production to the first point of
delivery where title to the coal is transferred;
(b) A farm truck or farm machinery transporting farm commodities, from the place of
production to the first point of delivery where the commodities are weighed and title to the commodities
is transferred;
(c) A log truck transporting timber, from the site of its cutting to the first point of delivery
where the timber is transferred; or
Equipment and Loads 209
(d) A solid waste haul vehicle hauling solid waste, from the place of production to the first
point of delivery where the solid waste is disposed of or title to the solid waste is transferred.
(2) In addition, if any of the vehicles listed in division (B)(1) of this section and operated under
the conditions described in that division does not exceed by more than 7.5% the gross vehicle weight
provisions of R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and does
not exceed the wheel or axle-load limits of those sections by more than 7.5%, no penalty prescribed in
R.C. § 5577.99, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, for a wheel or axle overload shall
be imposed.
(C) If any of the vehicles listed in division (B)(1) of this section and operated under the conditions
described in that division exceeds the weight provisions of R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, by more than the percentage allowance of either divisions
(B)(1) or (B)(2) of this section, both of the following apply without regard to the allowance provided by
this division (B) of this section:
(1) The applicable penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance; and
(2) The civil liability imposed by R.C. § 5577.12, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
(D) (1) Division (B) of this section does not apply to the operation of a farm truck, log truck or
farm machinery transporting farm commodities during the months of February and March.
(2) Regardless of when the operation occurs, division (B) of this section does not apply to the
operation of a vehicle on either of the following:
(a) A highway that is part of the interstate system;
(b) A highway, road, or bridge that is subject to reduced maximum weights under R.C.
§ 4513.33, 5577.07, 5577.071, 5577.08, 5577.09, or 5591.42, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
(R.C. § 5577.042)
(E) Notwithstanding R.C. §§ 5577.02 and 5577.04, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the following vehicles under the described conditions may exceed by no more than 7.5% the
weight provisions of R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
and no penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, shall
be imposed:
(1) A surface mining truck transporting minerals from the place where the minerals are loaded
to any of the following:
210 Madeira - Traffic Code
(a) The construction site where the minerals are discharged;
(b) The place where title to the minerals is transferred; or
(c) The place of processing.
(2) A vehicle transporting hot mix asphalt material from the place where the material is first
mixed to the paving site where the material is discharged;
(3) A vehicle transporting concrete from the place where the material is first mixed to the site
where the material is discharged;
(4) A vehicle transporting manure, turf, sod or silage from the site where the material is first
produced to the first place of delivery; and
(5) A vehicle transporting chips, sawdust, mulch, bark, pulpwood, biomass or firewood from
the site where the product is first produced or harvested to first point where the product is transferred.
(F) In addition, if any of the vehicles listed in division (E) of this section and operated under the
conditions described in that division do not exceed by more than 7.5% the gross vehicle weight
provisions of R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and do
not exceed the wheel or axle-load limits of those sections by more than 7.5%, no penalty prescribed in
R.C. § 5577.99, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, for a wheel or axle overload shall
be imposed.
(G) If any of the vehicles listed in division (E) of this section and operated under the conditions
described in that division exceed the weight provisions of R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, by more than the percentage allowance of either divisions
(E) or (F) of this section, both of the following apply without regard to the allowance provided by
division (E) or (F) of this section:
(1) The applicable penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance; and
(2) The civil liability imposed by R.C. § 5577.12, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
(H) Divisions (E) and (F) of this section do not apply to the operation of a vehicle listed in division
(E) of this section on either of the following:
(1) A highway that is part of the interstate system;
Equipment and Loads 211
(2) A highway, road, or bridge that is subject to reduced maximum weights under R.C.
§ 4513.33, 5577.07, 5577.071, 5577.08, 5577.09 or 5591.42, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
(R.C. § 5577.043)
(I) Notwithstanding R.C. §§ 5577.02 and 5577.04, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, a vehicle fueled solely by compressed natural gas may exceed by not more than 2,000 pounds
the gross vehicle weight provisions of R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, or the axle load limits of those sections.
(J) If a vehicle described in division (I) of this section exceeds the weight provisions of R.C.
§§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, by more than the allowance
provided for in division (I) of this section, both of the following apply:
(1) The applicable penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance; and
(2) The civil liability imposed by R.C. § 5577.12, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
(K) Division (I) of this section does not apply to the operation of a vehicle on either of the
following:
(1) A highway that is part of the interstate system; and
(2) A highway, road, or bridge that is subject to reduced maximum weights under R.C.
§ 4513.33, 5577.07, 5577.071, 5577.08, 5577.09 or 5591.42, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
(R.C. § 5577.044)
212 Madeira - Traffic Code
CHAPTER 75: BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES, SNOWMOBILES AND
ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLES
Section
General Provisions
75.01 Bicycles; application of Title VII
75.02 Operation of motorized bicycle
75.03 Rules for bicycles, motorcycles and snowmobiles
75.04 Prohibition against attaching bicycles and sleds to vehicles
75.05 Riding bicycles; motorcycles abreast
75.06 Equipment of bicycles
75.07 Helmets required
Snowmobiles, Off-Highway Motorcycles and All-Purpose Vehicles
75.20 Definitions
75.21 Equipment
75.22 Code application; prohibited operation
75.23 Permitted operation
75.24 Licensing requirements of operator
75.25 Maintenance of vehicles for hire
75.26 Accident reports
75.27 Impounding of vehicle
75.28 Local control within police power
75.29 Registration of vehicles
75.30 Certificate of title; prohibitions
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 75.01 BICYCLES; APPLICATION OF TITLE VII.
(A) The provisions of this title that are applicable to bicycles apply whenever a bicycle is operated
upon any highway or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
213
214 Madeira - Traffic Code
(B) Except as provided in division (D) of this section, a bicycle operator who violates any
provisions of this title described in division (A) of this section that is applicable to bicycles may be issued
a ticket, citation or summons by a law enforcement officer for the violation in the same manner as the
operator of a motor vehicle would be cited for the same violation. A person who commits any such
violation while operating a bicycle shall not have any points assessed against the person’s driver’s
license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit or probationary license under R.C.
§ 4510.036.
(C) Except as provided in division (D) of this section, in the case of a violation of any provision of
this title described in division (A) of this section by a bicycle operator or by a motor vehicle operator
when the trier of fact finds that the violation by the motor vehicle operator endangered the lives of
bicycle riders at the time of the violation, the court, notwithstanding any provision of the Ohio Revised
Code to the contrary, may require the bicycle operator or motor vehicle operator to take and successfully
complete a bicycling skills course approved by the court in addition to or in lieu of any penalty otherwise
prescribed by this Traffic Code or the Ohio Revised Code for that violation.
(D) Divisions (B) and (C) of this section do not apply to violations of R.C. § 4511.19, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(R.C. § 4511.52) (1985 Code, § 75.01)
§ 75.02 OPERATION OF MOTORIZED BICYCLE.
(A) No person shall operate a motorized bicycle upon a highway or any public or private property
used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking, unless all of the following conditions are
met:
(1) The person is 14 or 15 years of age and holds a valid probationary motorized bicycle
license issued after the person has passed the test provided for in this section, or the person is 16 years
of age or older and holds either a valid commercial driver’s license issued under R.C. Chapter 4506 or
a driver’s license issued under R.C. Chapter 4507 or a valid motorized bicycle license issued after the
person has passed the test provided for in this section, except that if a person is 16 years of age, has a
valid probationary motorized bicycle license and desires a motorized bicycle license, the person is not
required to comply with the testing requirements provided for in this section;
(2) The motorized bicycle is equipped in accordance with the rules adopted under division (B)
of this section and is in proper working order;
(3) The person, if under 18 years of age, is wearing a protective helmet on the person’s head
with the chin strap properly fastened and the motorized bicycle is equipped with a rearview mirror; and
(4) The person operates the motorized bicycle when practicable within three feet of the right
edge of the roadway obeying all traffic rules applicable to vehicles.
Bicycles, Motorcycles, Snowmobiles and All Purpose Vehicles 215
(B) The Director of Public Safety, subject to R.C. Chapter 119, shall adopt and promulgate rules
concerning protective helmets, the equipment of motorized bicycles and the testing and qualifications of
persons who do not hold a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license. The test shall be as near as
practicable to the examination required for a motorcycle operator’s endorsement under R.C. § 4507.11.
The test shall also require the operator to give an actual demonstration of the operator’s ability to operate
and control a motorized bicycle by driving one under the supervision of an examining officer.
(C) Every motorized bicycle license expires on the birthday of the applicant in the fourth year after
the date it is issued, but in no event shall any motorized bicycle license be issued for a period longer than
four years.
(D) No person operating a motorized bicycle shall carry another person upon the motorized bicycle.
(E) The protective helmet and rearview mirror required by division (A)(3) of this section shall, on
and after January 1, 1985, conform with rules adopted by the Director under division (B) of this section.
(F) Each probationary motorized bicycle license or motorized bicycle license shall be laminated with
a transparent plastic material.
(G) Whoever violates division (A), (D) or (E) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.521) (1985 Code, § 75.02)
Statutory reference:
Suspension of probationary motorized bicycle license by the state, see R.C. § 4510.34
§ 75.03 RULES FOR BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES AND SNOWMOBILES.
(A) As used in this section, SNOWMOBILE has the same meaning as given that term in R.C.
§ 4519.01.
(B) (1) No person operating a bicycle shall ride other than upon or astride the permanent and
regular seat attached thereto or carry any other person upon such bicycle other than upon a firmly
attached and regular seat thereon, and no person shall ride upon a bicycle other than upon such a firmly
attached and regular seat.
(2) No person operating a motorcycle shall ride other than upon or astride the permanent and
regular seat or saddle attached thereto, or carry any other person upon such motorcycle other than upon
a firmly attached and regular seat or saddle thereon, and no person shall ride upon a motorcycle other
than upon such a firmly attached and regular seat or saddle.
(3) No person shall ride upon a motorcycle that is equipped with a saddle other than while
sitting astride the saddle, facing forward, with one leg on each side of the motorcycle.
216 Madeira - Traffic Code
(4) No person shall ride upon a motorcycle that is equipped with a seat other than while sitting
upon the seat.
(5) No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article that prevents the
driver from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars.
(6) No bicycle or motorcycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number
for which it is designed and equipped. No motorcycle shall be operated on a highway when the
handlebars rise higher than the shoulders of the operator when the operator is seated in the operator’s
seat or saddle.
(C) (1) Except as provided in division (C)(2) of this section, no person shall operate or be a
passenger on a snowmobile or motorcycle without using safety glasses or other protective eye device.
Except as provided in division (C)(2) of this section, no person who is under the age of 18 years, or who
holds a motorcycle operator’s endorsement or license bearing a “novice” designation that is currently
in effect as provided in R.C. § 4507.13, shall operate a motorcycle on a highway, or be a passenger on
a motorcycle, unless wearing a United States Department of Transportation-approved protective helmet
on the person’s head, and no other person shall be a passenger on a motorcycle operated by such a
person unless similarly wearing a protective helmet. The helmet, safety glasses, or other protective eye
device shall conform with rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety. The provisions of this
paragraph or a violation thereof shall not be used in the trial of any civil action.
(2) Division (C)(1) of this section does not apply to a person operating a cab-enclosed
motorcycle when the occupant compartment top is in place enclosing the occupants.
(3) (a) No person shall operate a motorcycle with a valid temporary instruction permit and
temporary instruction permit identification card issued by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles pursuant to
R.C. § 4507.05 unless the person, at the time of such operation, is wearing on the person’s head a
protective helmet that has been approved by the United States Department of Transportation that
conforms with rules adopted by the Director.
(b) No person shall operate a motorcycle with a valid temporary instruction permit and
temporary instruction permit identification card issued by the Registrar pursuant to R.C. § 4507.05 in
any of the following circumstances:
1. At any time when lighted lights are required by R.C. § 4513.03(A)(1);
2. While carrying a passenger; or
3. On any limited access highway or heavily congested roadway.
(D) Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the carrying of a child in a seat or
trailer that is designed for carrying children and is firmly attached to the bicycle.
Bicycles, Motorcycles, Snowmobiles and All Purpose Vehicles 217
(E) Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates division (B) or (C)(1) or (C)(3)
of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense,
whoever violates division (B) or (C)(1) or (C)(3) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates division (B) or (C)(1) or (C)(3) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.53) (1985 Code, § 75.03)
§ 75.04 PROHIBITION AGAINST ATTACHING BICYCLES AND SLEDS TO VEHICLES.
(A) (1) No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle shall attach
the same or self to any vehicle upon a roadway.
(2) No operator shall knowingly permit any person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller
skates, sled or toy vehicle to attach the same or self to any vehicle while it is moving upon a roadway.
(3) This section does not apply to towing a disabled vehicle.
(B) Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.54) (1985 Code, § 75.04) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977)
§ 75.05 RIDING BICYCLES; MOTORCYCLES ABREAST.
(A) Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right side of the
roadway as practicable obeying all traffic rules applicable to vehicles and exercising due care when
passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
(B) Persons riding bicycles or motorcycles upon a roadway shall ride not more than two abreast in
a single lane, except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles or
motorcycles.
(C) This section does not require a person operating a bicycle to ride at the edge of the roadway
when it is unreasonable or unsafe to do so. Conditions that may require riding away from the edge of
the roadway include when necessary to avoid fixed or moving objects, parked or moving vehicles,
surface hazards, or if it otherwise is unsafe or impracticable to do so, including if the lane is too narrow
for the bicycle and an overtaking vehicle to travel safely side by side within the lane.
218 Madeira - Traffic Code
(D) Except as otherwise provided in this division (D), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.55) (1985 Code, § 75.05)
§ 75.06 EQUIPMENT OF BICYCLES.
(A) Every bicycle when in use at the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance shall be equipped with the following:
(1) A lamp mounted on the front of either the bicycle or the operator that shall emit a white
light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front and 300 feet to the sides. A
generator-powered lamp that emits light only when the bicycle is moving may be used to meet this
requirement;
(2) A red reflector on the rear that shall be visible from all distances from 100 feet to 600 feet
to the rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle; and
(3) A lamp emitting either flashing or steady red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the
rear shall be used in addition to the red reflector. If the red lamp performs as a reflector in that it is
visible as specified in division (A)(2) of this section, the red lamp may serve as the reflector and a
separate reflector is not required.
(B) Additional lamps and reflectors may be used in addition to those required under division (A)
of this section, except that red lamps and red reflectors shall not be used on the front of the bicycle and
white lamps and white reflectors shall not be used on the rear of the bicycle.
(C) A bicycle may be equipped with a device capable of giving an audible signal, except that a
bicycle shall not be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a bicycle any siren or whistle.
(D) Every bicycle shall be equipped with an adequate brake when used on a street or highway.
(E) Except as otherwise provided in this division (E), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.56) (1985 Code, § 75.06) (Ord. 88-39, passed 10-3-1988)
Bicycles, Motorcycles, Snowmobiles and All Purpose Vehicles 219
§ 75.07 HELMETS REQUIRED.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any parent, or any person in loco parentis to allow a child 16 years of
age or younger to operate a bicycle, skate boards, roller skates or blades, scooters or similarly wheeled
device within the city unless such person is wearing a protective helmet on his or her head, with the chin
strap fastened under the chin. Such helmet shall be appropriately fitted to the size of the operator and
shall meet or exceed the standards set by ANSI (American National Standards Institute) or SNELL (Snell
Memorial Foundation).
(B) It shall be unlawful for any parent or person in loco parentis to allow a child 16 years of age
or younger to be a passenger on a bicycle within the city unless such child is wearing a protective helmet
on his or her head, with the chin strap fastened under the chin. Such helmet shall be appropriately fitted
to the size of the operator, and shall meet or exceed the standards set by ANSI or SNELL. This
requirement shall also apply to a child who rides upon a bicycle while in a restraining seat which is
attached to the bicycle, or in a trailer towed by the bicycle.
(C) This section shall not be applicable to the operation of a bicycle, skate boards, roller blades,
scooters or similarly wheeled device on private residential property but shall be applicable to all public
rights-of-way and public areas. For purposes of this section, PUBLIC AREAS shall mean those which
are open to the public, including parking areas and sidewalks on retail and office property and all areas
owned by a political subdivision, including parks. However, this regulation shall not be construed to
permit the operation of a bicycle, skate boards, roller blades, scooters or similarly wheeled device in any
area in which it is otherwise prohibited or regulated.
(D) Penalties:
(1) First offense. A written warning shall be served upon the violator and the parent or person
in loco parentis, with applicable information attached advising of the dangers of failure to wear protective
helmet. The warning will be signed by the parent or person in loco parentis of the minor, and a copy
filed at the Police Department. Such person shall be informed that an approved helmet must be obtained
for the child and worn by the child whenever he or she is riding a bicycle.
(2) Second offense. A citation shall be issued to the parent, or person in loco parentis, for any
offense which occurs subsequent to a written warning. This violation shall be punishable by a fine,
including all costs, of not more than $25. However, the case may be dismissed upon the parent or person
in loco parentis and the child demonstrating evidence of the ownership and possession of an approved
helmet.
(3) Third and subsequent offenses. A citation shall be issued to the parent or person in loco
parentis of the violator, with a fine not to exceed $75. However, the fine shall be reduced to $25 if the
parent or person in loco parentis and the child demonstrate evidence of the ownership and possession of
an approved helmet and proof of attending a bicycle safety course approved by the Madeira Police
Department.
(1985 Code, § 75.07) (Ord. 02-17, passed 5-29-2002)
220 Madeira - Traffic Code
SNOWMOBILES, OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLES AND ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLES
§ 75.20 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLE. Any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for cross-country travel
on land and water, or on more than one type of terrain, and steered by wheels or caterpillar treads, or
any combination thereof, including vehicles that operate on a cushion of air, vehicles commonly known
as all-terrain vehicles, all season vehicles, mini-bikes and trail bikes. The term does not include a utility
vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4501.01 or any vehicle principally used in playing golf, any motor vehicle
or aircraft required to be registered under R.C. Chapter 4503 or R.C. Chapter 4561, and any vehicle
excepted from definition as a motor vehicle by R.C. § 4501.01(B).
DEALER. Any person or firm engaged in the business of manufacturing or selling snowmobiles,
off-highway motorcycles or all-purpose vehicles at wholesale or retail, or who rents, leases or otherwise
furnishes snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, or all-purpose vehicles for hire.
ELECTRONIC. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
ELECTRONIC DEALER. A dealer whom the Registrar of Motor Vehicles designates under R.C.
§ 4519.511.
ELECTRONIC RECORD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
HIGHWAY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
INTERSTATE HIGHWAY. Any part of the interstate system of highways as defined in subsection
(e), 90 Stat. 431 (1976), 23 U.S.C. § 103, as amended.
LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAY OR FREEWAY. Have the same meanings as in R.C. § 5511.02.
MINI-TRUCK. A vehicle that has four wheels, is propelled by an electric motor with a rated power
of 7,500 watts or less or an internal combustion engine with a piston displacement capacity of 660 cubic
centimeters or less, has a total dry weight of 900 to 2,200 pounds, contains an enclosed cabin and a seat
for the vehicle operator, resembles a pickup truck or van with a cargo area or bed located at the rear of
the vehicle, and was not originally manufactured to meet federal motor vehicle safety standards.
OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLE. Every motorcycle, as defined in R.C. § 4511.01, that is
designed to be operated primarily on lands other than a street or highway.
Bicycles, Motorcycles, Snowmobiles and All Purpose Vehicles 221
OPERATOR. Any person who operates or is in actual physical control of a snowmobile,
off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle.
OWNER. Any person or firm, other than a lienholder or dealer, having title to a snowmobile,
off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle, or other right to the possession thereof.
SNOWMOBILE. Any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for use on snow or ice, and steered
by skis, runners or caterpillar treads.
STREET. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
(R.C. § 4519.01)
§ 75.21 EQUIPMENT.
(A) In addition to any rules or regulations promulgated by the Ohio Director of Public Safety
pursuant to R.C. § 4519.20 and R.C. Chapter 119, equipment of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles
and all-purpose vehicles shall include but not necessarily be limited to requirements for the following
items of equipment:
(1) At least one headlight having a minimum candlepower of sufficient intensity to reveal
persons and objects at a distance of at least 100 feet ahead under normal atmospheric conditions during
hours of darkness;
(2) At least one red tail light having a minimum candlepower of sufficient intensity to be plainly
visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear under normal atmospheric conditions during hours of
darkness;
(3) Every snowmobile, while traveling on packed snow, shall be capable of carrying a driver
who weighs 175 pounds or more, and, while carrying such driver, be capable of stopping in no more
than 40 feet from an initial steady speed of 20 mph, or locking its traction belt; and
(4) A muffler system capable of precluding the emission of excessive smoke or exhaust fumes,
and of limiting the engine noise of vehicles. On snowmobiles manufactured after January 1, 1973, such
requirement shall include sound dampening equipment such that noise does not exceed 82 decibels on
the “A” scale at 50 feet as measured according to SAE J192 (September 1970).
(B) No person shall operate any snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle in
violation of this section, except that equipment specified in division (A)(1) and (A)(2) of this section shall
not be required on snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles or all-purpose vehicles operated during the
daylight hours.
(R.C. § 4519.20(A), (B))
222 Madeira - Traffic Code
(C) No person shall sell, offer for sale, lease, rent or otherwise furnish for hire in this municipality
any new snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle that fails to comply with any rule
adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety under R.C. § 4519.20 after the effective date of the rule.
(R.C. § 4519.22(A))
(D) (1) Except as otherwise provided in this division (D), whoever violates division (B) of this
section shall be fined not more than $50. If the offender within the preceding year previously has
committed a violation of division (B) of this section or of R.C. § 4519.20(B), whoever violates division
(B) of this section shall be fined not less than $15 nor more than $100, imprisoned not more than three
days, or both.
(R.C. § 4519.20(C))
(2) Except as otherwise provided in this division (D), whoever violates division (C) of this
section shall be fined not more than $50. If the offender within the preceding year previously has
committed a violation of division (C) of this section or of R.C. § 4519.22(A), whoever violates this
section shall be fined not less than $15 nor more than $100, imprisoned not more than three days, or
both.
(R.C. § 4519.22(B))
§ 75.22 CODE APPLICATION; PROHIBITED OPERATION.
(A) The applicable provisions of this Traffic Code shall be applied to the operation of snowmobiles,
off-highway motorcycles and all-purpose vehicles, except that no snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle
or all-purpose vehicle shall be operated as follows:
(1) On any street, highway, limited access highway or freeway or the right-of-way thereof,
except for emergency travel only during such time and in such manner as the Ohio Director of Public
Safety or local authority having jurisdiction shall designate, and except as provided in § 75.28;
(2) On any private property, or in any nursery or planting area, without the permission of the
owner or other person having the right to possession of the property;
(3) On any land or waters controlled by the state, except at those locations where a sign has
been posted permitting such operation;
(4) On the tracks or right-of-way of any operating railroad;
(5) While transporting any firearm, bow or other implement for hunting that is not unloaded
and securely encased;
(6) For the purpose of chasing, pursuing, capturing or killing any animal or wild fowl; or
Bicycles, Motorcycles, Snowmobiles and All Purpose Vehicles 223
(7) During the time from sunset to sunrise, unless displaying lighted lights as required by R.C.
§ 4519.20 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(B) Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $500, imprisoned
not less than three nor more than 30 days, or both.
(R.C. § 4519.40)
§ 75.23 PERMITTED OPERATION.
Snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles and all-purpose vehicles may be operated as follows:
(A) To make a crossing of a highway, other than a highway as designated in R.C. § 4519.40(A)(1)
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, whenever the crossing can be made in safety and will
not interfere with the movement of vehicular traffic approaching from any direction on the highway, and
provided that the operator yields the right-of-way to any approaching traffic that presents an immediate
hazard;
(B) On highways in the county or township road systems whenever the local authority having
jurisdiction over such highways so permits;
(C) Off and alongside street or highway for limited distances from the point of unloading from a
conveyance to the point at which the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle is
intended and authorized to be operated;
(D) On the berm or shoulder of a highway, other than a highway as designated in R.C.
§ 4519.40(A)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, when the terrain permits such
operation to be undertaken safely and without the necessity of entering any traffic lane; and
(E) On the berm or shoulder or a county or township road, while traveling from one area of
operation of the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle to another such area.
(R.C. § 4519.41)
§ 75.24 LICENSING REQUIREMENTS OF OPERATOR.
(A) No person who does not hold a valid, current motor vehicle driver’s or commercial driver’s
license, motorcycle operator’s endorsement or probationary license, issued under R.C. Chapter 4506 or
R.C. Chapter 4507 or a valid, current driver’s license issued by another jurisdiction, shall operate a
snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle on any street or highway in this
municipality, on any portion of the right-of-way thereof, or on any public land or waters.
(B) No person who is less than 16 years of age shall operate a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle
or all-purpose vehicle on any land or waters other than private property or waters owned by or leased
to the person’s parent or guardian, unless accompanied by another person who is 18 years of age or
224 Madeira - Traffic Code
older, and who holds a license as provided in division (A) of this section, except that the Ohio
Department of Natural Resources may permit such operation on state controlled land under its
jurisdiction when such person is less than 16 years of age and is accompanied by a parent or guardian
who is a licensed driver 18 years of age or older.
(C) Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $500, imprisoned
not less than 3 nor more than 30 days, or both.
(R.C. § 4519.44)
§ 75.25 MAINTENANCE OF VEHICLES FOR HIRE.
(A) Any dealer who rents, leases or otherwise furnishes a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or
all-purpose vehicle for hire shall maintain the vehicle in safe operating condition. No dealer, or agent
or employee of a dealer, shall rent, lease or otherwise furnish a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle
or all-purpose vehicle for hire to any person who does not hold a license as required by R.C.
§ 4519.44(A) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or to any person whom the dealer or an
agent or employee of the dealer has reasonable cause to believe is incompetent to operate the vehicle in
a safe and lawful manner.
(B) Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $500.
(R.C. § 4519.45)
§ 75.26 ACCIDENT REPORTS.
(A) The operator of a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle involved in any
accident resulting in bodily injury to or death of any person or damage to the property of any person in
excess of $100 shall report the accident within 48 hours to the Chief of Police, and within 30 days shall
forward a written report of the accident to the Ohio Registrar of Motor Vehicles on a form prescribed
by the Registrar. If the operator is physically incapable of making the reports and there is another
participant in the accident not so incapacitated, the participant shall make the reports. In the event there
is no other participant, and the operator is other than the owner, the owner, within the prescribed periods
of time, shall make the reports.
(B) Any law enforcement officer or other person authorized by R.C. §§ 4519.42 and 4519.43 who
investigates or receives information of an accident involving a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or
all-purpose vehicle shall forward to the Registrar a written report of the accident within 48 hours.
(R.C. § 4519.46)
§ 75.27 IMPOUNDING OF VEHICLE.
(A) Whenever a person is found guilty of operating a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or
all-purpose vehicle in violation of any rule authorized to be adopted under R.C. § 4519.21 or 4519.42,
Bicycles, Motorcycles, Snowmobiles and All Purpose Vehicles 225
the trial judge of any court of record, in addition to or independent of any other penalties provided by
law, may impound for not less than 60 days the certificate of registration and license plate, if applicable,
of that snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle. The court shall send the impounded
certificate of registration and license plate, if applicable, to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, who shall
retain the certificate of registration and license plate, if applicable, until the expiration of the period of
impoundment.
(B) If a court impounds the certificate of registration and license plate of an all-purpose vehicle
pursuant to R.C. § 2911.21, the court shall send the impounded certificate of registration and license
plate to the Registrar, who shall retain them until the expiration of the period of impoundment.
(R.C. § 4519.47)
§ 75.28 LOCAL CONTROL WITHIN POLICE POWER.
Nothing contained in this subchapter shall prevent the municipality from regulating the operation
of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycle and all-purpose vehicles on streets and highways and other
public property under municipal jurisdiction, and within the reasonable exercise of the police power,
except that no registration or licensing of any snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle required to be registered or titled under R.C. Chapter 4519 shall be required.
(R.C. § 4519.48)
§ 75.29 REGISTRATION OF VEHICLES.
(A) (1) Except as provided in division (B), (C) and (D) of this section, no person shall operate any
snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle within this municipality unless the
snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle is registered and numbered in accordance
with R.C. §§ 4519.03 and 4519.04.
(2) Except as provided in R.C. § 4511.215 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
no registration is required for a mini-truck that is operated within this state. A mini-truck may be
operated only in accordance with R.C. § 4511.215 and R.C. § 4519.401, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance. This division (A)(2) shall take effect on January 1, 2017.
(B) (1) No registration is required for a snowmobile or off-highway motorcycle that is operated
exclusively upon lands owned by the owner of the snowmobile or off-highway motorcycle, or on lands
to which the owner of the snowmobile or off-highway motorcycle has a contractual right.
(2) No registration is required for an all-purpose vehicle that is used primarily for agricultural
purposes when the owner qualifies for the current agricultural use valuation tax credit, unless it is to be
used on any public land, trail or right-of-way.
226 Madeira - Traffic Code
(3) Any all-purpose vehicle exempted from registration under division (B)(2) of this section
and operated for agricultural purposes may use public roads and rights-of-way when traveling from one
farm field to another, when such use does not violate R.C. § 4519.41.
(C) No registration is required for a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle
owned and used in this state by a resident of another state whenever that state has in effect a registration
law similar to R.C. Chapter 4519 and the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle
is properly registered under that state’s law. Any snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose
vehicle owned and used in this state by a resident of a state not having a registration law similar to R.C.
Chapter 4519 shall comply with R.C. § 4519.09.
(D) No registration is required for a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle
owned and used in this municipality by the United States, another state or a political subdivision thereof,
but the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle shall display the name of the owner
thereon.
(E) The owner or operator of any all-purpose vehicle operated or used upon the waters in this
municipality shall comply with R.C. Chapter 1547 and R.C. Chapter 1548 relative to the operation of
watercraft.
(F) Whoever violates division (A) of this section shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than
$100.
(R.C. § 4519.02)
Statutory reference:
Destruction or disposal of vehicle; transfer of ownership; change of address; loss of certificate, see
 R.C. § 4519.05
Registration of emergency vehicles, see R.C. § 4519.08
Registration procedure, see R.C. § 4519.03
Temporary license placards and fees, see R.C. § 4519.10
Temporary operating permit for certain nonresidents, see R.C. § 4519.09
§ 75.30 CERTIFICATE OF TITLE; PROHIBITIONS.
(A) No person shall do any of the following:
(1) Operate in this state an off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle without having a
certificate of title for the off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle if such a certificate is required
by R.C. Chapter 4519 to be issued for the off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle, or, if a
physical certificate of title has not been issued for it, operate an off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle knowing that the ownership information related to the motorcycle or vehicle has not been entered
into the automated title processing system by a Clerk of a court of common pleas;
Bicycles, Motorcycles, Snowmobiles and All Purpose Vehicles 227
(2) Operate in this municipality an off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle is a certificate
of title to the off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle has been issued and then has been canceled;
(3) Fail to surrender any certificate of title upon cancellation of it by the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles and notice of the cancellation as prescribed in R.C. Chapter 4519;
(4) Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a Clerk of a court of common pleas as provided
in R.C. Chapter 4519, in case of the destruction or dismantling of, or change in, the off-highway
motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle described in the certificate of title;
(5) Violate any provision of R.C. §§ 4519.51 through 4519.70 for which no penalty is
otherwise provided or any lawful rules adopted pursuant to those sections; or
(6) Operate in this state an off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle knowing that the
certificate of title to or ownership of the motorcycle or vehicle as otherwise reflected in the automated
title processing system has been canceled.
(B) Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than $200, imprisoned not more than 90
days, or both.
(R.C. § 4519.66)
Statutory reference:
Certificate of title: rules and procedures, see R.C. §§ 4519.51 et seq.
Stolen vehicles and restrictions on sale or transfer, felony provisions, see R.C. § 4519.67
228 Madeira - Traffic Code
CHAPTER 76: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
76.01 Prohibition against parking on highways
76.02 Condition when motor vehicle left unattended
76.03 Police may remove illegally parked vehicle
76.04 Parking prohibitions
76.05 Parking near curb; privileges for persons with disabilities
76.06 Truck parking and traffic
76.07 Prohibition against parking or leaving an inoperative vehicle
76.08 Prohibition against parking in fire lanes on private property devoted to public use
76.09 Snow emergency
76.10 Parking on private property in violation of posted prohibition
76.11 Selling, washing or repairing vehicle upon roadway
76.12 Truck loading zones
76.13 Bus stops and taxicab stands
76.14 Parking in alleys and narrow streets; exceptions
76.15 Registered owner prima facie liable for unlawful parking
76.16 Waiver
§ 76.01 PROHIBITION AGAINST PARKING ON HIGHWAYS.
(A) (1) Upon any highway, no person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether
attended or unattended, upon the paved or main traveled part of the highway if it is practicable to stop,
park, or so leave such vehicle off the paved or main traveled part of the highway. In every event a clear
and unobstructed portion of the highway opposite such standing vehicle shall be left for the free passage
of other vehicles, and a clear view of such stopped vehicle shall be available from a distance of 200 feet
in each direction upon such highway.
(2) This section does not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is disabled while on the paved
or improved or main traveled portion of a highway in such manner and to such extent that it is
impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving the disabled vehicle in such position.
(B) Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
229
230 Madeira - Traffic Code
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.66) (1985 Code, § 76.01) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977)
(C) No person shall repair or maintain a motor vehicle within the limits of a public street or
freeway, unless for the purpose of changing tires. Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle under
repair or maintenance upon a public street or freeway such officer may request removal from the public
way to a garage or other place of safety or may allow repair if the officer feels in his judgment the repair
or maintenance is of a nature as may quickly be completed.
(D) Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. 89-12, passed 8-7-1989)
§ 76.02 CONDITION WHEN MOTOR VEHICLE LEFT UNATTENDED.
(A) (1) No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended
without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition, removing the key from the ignition, effectively
setting the parking brake, and, when the motor vehicle is standing upon any grade, turning the front
wheels to the curb or side of the highway.
(2) The requirements of this section relating to the stopping of the engine, locking of the
ignition and removing the key from the ignition of a motor vehicle shall not apply to an emergency
vehicle or a public safety vehicle.
(B) Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.661) (1985 Code, § 76.02)
§ 76.03 POLICE MAY REMOVE ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLE.
(A) Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a highway in violation of R.C.
§ 4511.66 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, such officer may move such vehicle, or
require the driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to move the same, to a position off the paved
or improved or main traveled part of such highway.
(B) Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any highway, bridge or causeway,
or in any tunnel, where such vehicles constitutes an obstruction to traffic, such officer may provide for
the removal of such vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety.
(R.C. § 4511.67) (1985 Code, § 76.03) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977)
Parking Regulations 231
§ 76.04 PARKING PROHIBITIONS.
(A) No person shall stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other
traffic or to comply with the provisions of this title, or while obeying the directions of a police officer
or a traffic-control device, in any of the following places:
(1) On a sidewalk, except a bicycle;
(2) In front of a public or private driveway;
(3) Within an intersection;
(4) Within ten feet of a fire hydrant;
(5) On a crosswalk;
(6) Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
(7) Within 30 feet of, and upon the approach to, any flashing beacon, stop sign or
traffic-control device;
(8) Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of points on the curb
immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a different length is indicated by a traffic-control
device;
(9) Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
(10) Within 20 feet of a driveway entrance to any fire station and, on the side of the street
opposite the entrance to any fire station, within 75 feet of the entrance when it is properly posted with
signs;
(11) Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such standing or parking
would obstruct traffic;
(12) Alongside any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street;
(13) Upon any bridge or elevated structure upon a highway, or within a highway tunnel;
(14) At any place where signs prohibit stopping;
(15) Within one foot of another parked vehicle;
232 Madeira - Traffic Code
(16) On the roadway portion of a freeway, expressway or thruway;
(R.C. § 4511.68(A))
(17) On a bicycle path; or
(18) On a bridle path.
(B) Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.68(B)) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977)
(1985 Code, § 76.04)
§ 76.05 PARKING NEAR CURB; PRIVILEGES FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES.
(A) Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there is an adjacent curb shall be
stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle parallel with and not more than 12 inches
from the right-hand curb, unless it is impossible to approach so close to the curb; in such case the stop
shall be made as close to the curb as possible and only for the time necessary to discharge and receive
passengers or to load or unload merchandise. Local authorities by ordinance may permit angle parking
on any roadway under their jurisdiction, except that angle parking shall not be permitted on a state route
within the municipality unless an unoccupied roadway width of not less than 25 feet is available for
free-moving traffic.
(B) Local authorities by ordinance may permit parking of vehicles with the left-hand wheels adjacent
to and within 12 inches of the left-hand curb of a one-way roadway.
(C) (1) (a) Except as provided in division (C)(1)(b) of this section, no vehicle shall be stopped or
parked on a road or highway with the vehicle facing in a direction other than the direction of travel on
that side of the road or highway.
(b) The operator of a motorcycle may back the motorcycle into an angled parking space
so that when the motorcycle is parked it is facing in a direction other than the direction of travel on the
side of the road or highway.
(2) The operator of a motorcycle may back the motorcycle into a parking space that is located
on the side of, and parallel to, a road or highway. The motorcycle may face any direction when so
parked. Not more than two motorcycles at a time shall be parked in a parking space as described in
division (C)(2) of this section irrespective of whether or not the space is metered.
Parking Regulations 233
(D) Notwithstanding any statute or any rule, regulation, resolution or ordinance, air compressors,
tractors, trucks and other equipment, while being used in the construction, reconstruction, installation,
repair or removal of facilities near, on, over or under a street or highway, may stop, stand or park where
necessary in order to perform such work, provided a flagperson is on duty or warning signs or lights are
displayed as may be prescribed by the Director of Transportation.
(E) Special parking locations and privileges for persons with disabilities that limit or impair the
ability to walk, also known as handicapped parking spaces or disability parking spaces, shall be provided
and designated by all political subdivisions and by the state and all agencies and instrumentalities thereof
at all offices and facilities where parking is provided, whether owned, rented, or leased, and at all
publicly owned parking garages. The locations shall be designated through the posting of an elevated
sign, whether permanently affixed or movable, imprinted with the international symbol of access and
shall be reasonably close to exits, entrances, elevators, and ramps. All elevated signs posted in
accordance with this division and R.C. § 3781.111(C) shall be mounted on a fixed or movable post, and
the distance from the ground to the bottom edge of the sign shall measure not less than five feet. If a new
sign or a replacement sign designating a special parking location is posted on or after October 14, 1999,
there also shall be affixed upon the surface of that sign or affixed next to the designating sign a notice
that states the fine applicable for the offense of parking a motor vehicle in the special designated parking
location if the motor vehicle is not legally entitled to be parked in that location.
(F) (1) No person shall stop, stand, or park any motor vehicle at special parking locations provided
under division (E) of this section, or at special clearly marked parking locations provided in or on
privately owned parking lots, parking garages, or other parking areas and designated in accordance with
that division, unless one of the following applies:
(a) The motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of a person with a disability
that limits or impairs the ability to walk and is displaying a valid removable windshield placard or special
license plates; or
(b) The motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of a handicapped person
and is displaying a parking card or special handicapped license plates.
(2) Any motor vehicle that is parked in a special marked parking location in violation of
division (F)(1)(a) or (F)(1)(b) of this section may be towed or otherwise removed from the parking
location by the law enforcement agency of the municipality. A motor vehicle that is so towed or removed
shall not be released to its owner until the owner presents proof of ownership of the motor vehicle and
pays all towing and storage fees normally imposed by the municipality for towing and storing motor
vehicles. If the motor vehicle is a leased vehicle, it shall not be released to the lessee until the lessee
presents proof that that person is the lessee of the motor vehicle and pays all towing and storage fees
normally imposed by the municipality for towing and storing motor vehicles.
(3) If a person is charged with a violation of division (F)(1)(a) or (F)(1)(b) of this section, it
is an affirmative defense to the charge that the person suffered an injury not more than 72 hours prior
to the time the person was issued the ticket or citation and that, because of the injury, the person meets
at least one of the criteria contained in R.C. § 4503.44(A)(1).
234 Madeira - Traffic Code
(G) When a motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of a person with a disability that
limits or impairs the ability to walk and is displaying a removable windshield placard or a temporary
removable windshield placard or special license plates, or when a motor vehicle is being operated by or
for the transport of a handicapped person, and is displaying a parking card or special handicapped license
plates, the motor vehicle is permitted to park for a period of two hours in excess of the legal parking
period permitted by local authorities, except where local ordinances or police rules provide otherwise
or where the vehicle is parked in such a manner as to be clearly a traffic hazard.
(H) No owner of an office, facility or parking garage where special parking locations are required
to be designated in accordance with division (E) of this section shall fail to properly mark the special
parking locations in accordance with that division or fail to maintain the markings of the special
locations, including the erection and maintenance of the fixed or movable signs.
(I) Nothing in this section shall be construed to require a person or organization to apply for a
removable windshield placard or special license plates if the parking card or special license plates issued
to the person or organization under prior law have not expired or been surrendered or revoked.
(J) As used in this section:
HANDICAPPED PERSON. Means any person who has lost the use of one or both legs or one
or both arms, who is blind, deaf, or so severely handicapped as to be unable to move without the aid of
crutches or a wheelchair, or whose mobility is restricted by a permanent cardiovascular, pulmonary, or
other handicapping condition.
PERSON WITH A DISABILITY THAT LIMITS OR IMPAIRS THE ABILITY TO WALK.
Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4503.44.
SPECIAL LICENSE PLATES and REMOVABLE WINDSHIELD PLACARD. Mean any
license plates or removable windshield placard or temporary removable windshield placard issued under
R.C. § 4503.41 or 4503.44, and also mean any substantially equivalent license plates or removable
windshield placard or temporary removable windshield placard issued by a state, district, country or
sovereignty.
(K) Penalty.
(1) Whoever violates division (A) or (C) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(2) (a) Whoever violates division (F)(1)(a) or (F)(1)(b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in division (K)(2)(a) and (K)(2)(b) of this section. Except
as otherwise provided in division (K)(2)(a) of this section, an offender who violates division (F)(1)(a)
or (F)(1)(b) of this section shall be fined not less than $250 nor more than $500. An offender who
violates division (F)(1)(a) or (F)(1)(b) of this section shall be fined not more than $100 if the offender,
prior to sentencing, proves either of the following to the satisfaction of the court:
Parking Regulations 235
1. At the time of the violation of division (F)(1)(a) of this section, the offender or the
person for whose transport the motor vehicle was being operated had been issued a removable windshield
placard that then was valid or special license plates that then were valid but the offender or the person
neglected to display the placard or license plates as described in division (F)(1)(a) of this section.
2. At the time of the violation of division (F)(1)(b) of this section, the offender or the
person for whose transport the motor vehicle was being operated had been issued a parking card that then
was valid or special handicapped license plates that then were valid but the offender or the person
neglected to display the card or license plates as described in division (F)(1)(b) of this section.
(b) In no case shall an offender who violates division (F)(1)(a) or (F)(1)(b) be sentenced
to any term of imprisonment.
(c) An arrest or conviction for a violation of division (F)(1)(a) or (F)(1)(b) of this section
does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the person so arrested or convicted in
response to any inquiries contained in any application for employment, license, or other right or
privilege, or made in connection with the person’s appearance as a witness.
(d) The clerk of the court shall pay every fine collected under division (K)(2) of this
section to the municipality. Except as provided in division (K)(2) of this section, the municipality shall
use the fine moneys it receives under division (K)(2) of this section to pay the expenses it incurs in
complying with the signage and notice requirements contained in division (E) of this section. The
municipality may use up to 50% of each fine it receives under division (K)(2) of this section to pay the
costs of educational, advocacy, support, and assistive technology programs for persons with disabilities,
and for public improvements within the municipality that benefit or assist persons with disabilities, if
governmental agencies or nonprofit organizations offer the programs.
(3) Whoever violates division (H) of this section shall be punished as follows:
(a) Except as otherwise provided in division (K)(3) of this section, the offender shall be
issued a warning.
(b) If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of
division (H) of this section or of a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to that division,
the offender shall not be issued a warning but shall be fined not more than $25 for each parking location
that is not properly marked or whose markings are not properly maintained.
(R.C. § 4511.69) (1985 Code, § 76.05)
Cross-reference:
Unlawful furnishing of prescription to enable persons to be issued handicapped parking placards
 or license plates, see § 138.16
Statutory reference:
Buildings, access for disabled persons, see R.C. § 3781.111
236 Madeira - Traffic Code
§ 76.06 TRUCK PARKING AND TRAFFIC.
(A) Except where necessary in a pickup at, a delivery to or a service call at premises abutting a
street other than Miami Avenue, Camargo Road, Euclid Avenue, Shawnee Run Road or Dawson Road,
or where necessary in traveling to and from business and industrial zones, it shall be unlawful for the
driver of any commercial vehicle to operate the same upon such portion of any such other street in the
city as lies within any residence district.
(B) The parking of a commercial vehicle on any street within a residential zoning district shall be
prohibited between the hours of 5:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m. or at any time during any national holiday or
any Sunday. This regulation shall not be interpreted to apply to commercial vehicles used for conveying
the necessary tools and materials to premises where labor, using such tools and materials, is to be
performed during the time of parking such vehicles, or to commercial vehicles in the process of
temporarily loading or unloading deliverable goods.
(C) This section shall not apply to any vehicle while in use by the city, public utility, cable company
or any other governmental entity.
(D) COMMERCIAL VEHICLE means:
(1) Any vehicle, no matter what its gross vehicle weight, used or designed to be used for
business or commercial purposes and which, in addition, negatively infringes upon the residential
character of a residential district. These vehicles include but are not limited to a bus, cement truck, panel
truck, semi-tractor, semi-trailer or any other non-recreational trailer used for commercial purposes, stake
bed truck, step van, tank truck, tar truck, dump truck; or
(2) Any vehicle that is designed or rated by the manufacturer for more than 8,800 pounds of
gross vehicle weight and is licensed by the State Bureau of Motor Vehicles as either a truck or a
commercial vehicle.
(1985 Code, § 76.06) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977; Ord. 03-26, passed 4-10-2004)
§ 76.07 PROHIBITION AGAINST PARKING OR LEAVING AN INOPERATIVE VEHICLE.
No person shall in any event park an inoperative vehicle or leave any such vehicle standing on any
street continuously for more than 24 hours.
(1985 Code, § 76.07) (Ord. 1313, passed 10-17-1977)
§ 76.08 PROHIBITION AGAINST PARKING IN FIRE LANES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
DEVOTED TO PUBLIC USE.
(A) On private property devoted to public use, when parking of motor vehicles may interfere with
the ingress or egress of Fire or Police Department emergency equipment for the protection and safety
of persons and property, the City Manager has the authority to designate fire lanes on private property
Parking Regulations 237
devoted to public use for the purpose of providing access for Police and Fire Department emergency
equipment, and shall cause to be erected signs stating:
NO PARKING
FIRE LANE
(B) Parking or standing of motor vehicles within the designated fire lanes is prohibited at all times,
provided further that when a police officer finds a vehicle parked within the fire lane, thereby
constituting a possible threat to the safety and protection of persons or property, he or she may cause the
removal of the vehicle. The owner of the vehicle shall pay any cost involved with respect to the removal
of the vehicle and any storage charges.
(C) Whoever violates this section shall be subject to a fine of not more than $25, and a sum equal
to the cost of the removal and storage of the vehicle, as set forth in division (B) above.
(1985 Code, § 76.08) (Ord. 1325, passed 1-23-1978)
§ 76.09 SNOW EMERGENCY.
(A) SNOW EMERGENCY means a period of time declared by the City Manager, or designee,
when the United States Weather Bureau forecasts three inches or more of snow in any given storm and
there is the prospect of additional snow, or when ice and/or snow has accumulated to the extent that it
is impairing the safe movement of vehicular traffic within the city. Special parking restrictions become
effective when these weather conditions exist and a snow emergency is declared. The snow emergency
shall exist from the time it is formally announced until the time it is formally canceled.
(B) Whenever a snow emergency is declared, the City Manager, or designee, shall request the local
news media to announce the snow emergency and the time of the declaration, and/or notice of declaration
shall be provided through the city’s emergency notification network. Owners and operators of motor
vehicles shall be deemed to have notice of the snow emergency two hours after the official announcement
and are then subject to the prohibitions of this section. Cancellation shall be effected in the same manner.
A snow emergency is automatically declared whenever the City of Cincinnati issues a snow emergency.
(C) (1) Whenever a snow emergency is in effect, no person shall park, abandon or leave unattended
any motor vehicle on a public street in the city.
(2) Any motor vehicle found stopped in a prohibited area during a snow emergency may be
removed by order of the police.
(D) The owner or operator of a motor vehicle found in violation of the prohibitions of this section
shall be deemed to have committed a minor misdemeanor parking infraction, and in addition to any fine
238 Madeira - Traffic Code
which may be imposed, the owner or operator of a motor vehicle found in violation of this section shall
be responsible for all towing and storage costs for such vehicle during the snow emergency.
(E) The City Manager shall have the authority to waive these regulations for good cause. GOOD
CAUSE shall include but not be limited to lack of driveway, needed emergency repairs that prevent the
relocation of the vehicle, or owner of vehicle is out of town during the snow event. The City Manager
shall make the final determination regarding the waiver on a case-by-case basis. However, nothing herein
shall require the City Manager to waive these regulations.
(1985 Code, § 76.09) (Ord. 05-04, passed 12-12-2005)
§ 76.10 PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY IN VIOLATION OF POSTED
PROHIBITION.
(A) If an owner of private property posts on the property in a conspicuous manner a prohibition
against parking on the property or conditions and regulations under which parking is permitted, no
person shall do either of the following:
(1) Park a vehicle on the property without the owner’s consent; or
(2) Park a vehicle on the property in violation of any condition or regulation posted by the
owner.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.681)
§ 76.11 SELLING, WASHING OR REPAIRING VEHICLE UPON ROADWAY.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of:
(A) Displaying such vehicle for sale; or
(B) Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency.
§ 76.12 TRUCK LOADING ZONES.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time, other than for the
expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials, in any place marked as a truck
loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall
the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes.
Parking Regulations 239
§ 76.13 BUS STOPS AND TAXICAB STANDS.
(A) No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop, or other than a
taxicab in a taxicab stand, when any such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately
posted, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of, and
while actually engaged in, loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with
any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone, and then only for a period not to exceed
three minutes, if such stopping is not prohibited therein by posted signs.
(B) No operator of a bus shall stop, stand or park such vehicle upon any street or other public way
at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their baggage other than at a bus stop
so designated and posted as such, except in case of an emergency.
(C) No operator of a bus shall fail to enter a bus stop on a street or other public way in such a
manner that the bus when stopped to load or unload passengers or baggage is in a position with the right
front wheel of such vehicle not further than 18 inches from the curb and the bus approximately parallel
to the curb so as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular traffic.
(D) No operator of a taxicab shall stand or park such vehicle upon any street or other public way
at any place other than in a taxicab stand so designated and posted as such. This provision shall not
prevent the operator of a taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking
provisions at any place for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in, the expeditious loading or
unloading of passengers.
§ 76.14 PARKING IN ALLEYS AND NARROW STREETS; EXCEPTIONS.
(A) No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such a
manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for
free movement of vehicular traffic, except that a driver may stop temporarily during the actual loading
or unloading of passengers or when directed to by a police officer or traffic-control signal.
(B) Except as otherwise provided by law, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an
alley except while actually loading and unloading, and then only for a period not to exceed 30 minutes.
§ 76.15 REGISTERED OWNER PRIMA FACIE LIABLE FOR UNLAWFUL PARKING.
In any hearing on a charge of illegally parking a motor vehicle, testimony that a vehicle bearing a
certain license plate was found unlawfully parked as prohibited by the provisions of this Traffic Code,
and further testimony that the record of the Ohio Registrar of Motor Vehicles shows that the license plate
was issued to the defendant, shall be prima facie evidence that the vehicle which was unlawfully parked,
was so parked by the defendant. A certified registration copy, showing such fact, from the Registrar shall
be proof of such ownership.
240 Madeira - Traffic Code
§ 76.16 WAIVER.
Any person charged with a violation of any provision of this chapter for which payment of a
prescribed fine may be made, may pay such sum in the manner prescribed on the issued traffic ticket.
Such payment shall be deemed a plea of guilty, waiver of court appearance and acknowledgment of
conviction of the alleged offense and may be accepted in full satisfaction of the prescribed penalty for
such alleged violation. Payment of the prescribed fine need not be accepted when laws prescribe that a
certain number of such offenses shall require court appearance.

TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
Chapter
90. ANIMALS
91. FIRE PREVENTION CODE
92. JUNK; RUBBISH; LITTERING; WEEDS
93. STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
94. CITY PARKS
95. TREES
96. WATERS AND WATERCOURSES
97. INCOME TAX
1
2 Madeira - General Regulations
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
90.01 Running at large prohibited
90.02 Prohibiting dogs from running at large
90.03 Animals or fowl damaging gardens and lawns
90.04 Peace disturbances
90.05 Reporting escape of certain animals required
90.06 Dangerous dogs and animal control
90.99 Penalty
§ 90.01 RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
No person owning, keeping or harboring any domestic animal of any kind, shall permit the same
to run at large or be unattended off the premises of the person in the city at any time, whether or not the
running at large or being unattended is the result of escape from confinement.
(1985 Code, § 90.01) (Ord. 1599, passed 8-30-1982) Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.02 PROHIBITING DOGS FROM RUNNING AT LARGE.
(A) No owner, keeper or harborer of any dog shall permit such dog to go beyond the premises of
such owner, keeper or harborer unless such dog is properly on a leash or under the control of the owner,
keeper or harborer.
(B) It shall be prima facie evidence that a dog is not under the required control if such dog chases,
injures or kills any person or domestic animal, or damages or commits any nuisance, including
defecation, upon property other than that of its owner, keeper or harborer.
(C) For the purpose of this section CONTROL means that the dog is within sight and hearing, and
will respond instantly to a call or order; or that the dog is in a conveyance for travel, such as an
automobile or train, or is confined to a travel crate or carrying case.
(1985 Code, § 90.02) (Ord. 1599, passed 8-30-1982) Penalty, see § 90.99
3
4 Madeira - General Regulations
§ 90.03 ANIMALS OR FOWL DAMAGING GARDENS AND LAWNS.
No person owning or harboring one or more cats, dogs, other animals or fowl shall permit such cats,
dogs, other animals or fowl to run at large so as to do damage to gardens, lawns, shrubbery or other
public or private property.
(1985 Code, § 90.03) (Ord. 1599, passed 8-30-1982; Ord. 10-15, passed 8-23-2010) Penalty, see
§ 90.99
§ 90.04 PEACE DISTURBANCES.
(A) No owner, keeper or harborer of any animal shall negligently permit or allow such animal to
disturb unreasonably, the peace and quiet of the neighborhood in which the animal is kept by frequent
or continuing barking, howling, yelping or making any other animal noise.
(B) As used in this section, NEGLIGENTLY has the same meaning as defined in § 130.08(D) of
the code of ordinances.
(1985 Code, § 90.04) (Ord. 1599, passed 8-30-1982; Ord. 95-65, passed 9-18-1995) Penalty, see
§ 90.99
§ 90.05 REPORTING ESCAPE OF CERTAIN ANIMALS REQUIRED.
(A) If a dangerous wild animal or restricted snake escapes, the person that possesses the animal or
snake immediately shall notify both of the following:
(1) The Sheriff of the county and the chief law enforcement officer of the township or
municipal corporation where the escape occurred;
(2) The division of animal health in the department of agriculture by means of the 24-hour
telephone number that is maintained by the division.
(B) (1) A law enforcement officer or natural resources law enforcement officer may destroy a
dangerous wild animal or restricted snake that has escaped and that poses a threat to public safety.
(2) A law enforcement officer or natural resources law enforcement officer that destroys an
escaped dangerous wild animal or restricted snake pursuant to division (B)(1) of this section is not liable
for damages in a civil action for any injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly arises
from the destruction of the animal or snake.
(C) The person that possesses a dangerous wild animal or restricted snake that escapes is responsible
for all reasonable costs associated with the capture or destruction of the animal or snake. The person
shall reimburse the political subdivision that employs the law enforcement officer who captured or
destroyed the dangerous wild animal or restricted snake for the costs incurred in capturing or destroying
Animals 5
the animal or snake. However, if the law enforcement officer is a state highway patrol trooper or if a
natural resources law enforcement officer captured or destroyed the dangerous wild animal or restricted
snake, the person shall reimburse the state highway patrol or department of natural resources, as
applicable, for those costs.
(D) (1) Except as provided in division (D)(2) of this section, money collected under division (C)
of this section shall be credited to a special fund, which is hereby created in the applicable political
subdivision. Money in the special fund shall be used exclusively for the administration and enforcement
of this chapter and rules.
(2) Money collected under division (C) of this section for costs incurred by a state highway
patrol trooper or a natural resources law enforcement officer under this section shall be deposited in the
state treasury to the credit of the dangerous and restricted animal fund created in R.C. § 935.25.
(3) If law enforcement officers from more than one jurisdiction assist in the capture or
destruction of a dangerous wild animal or restricted snake, the money collected shall be proportionally
distributed to each political subdivision’s special fund and the dangerous and restricted animal fund, if
applicable.
(R.C. § 935.16) (1985 Code, § 90.05)
§ 90.06 DANGEROUS DOGS AND ANIMAL CONTROL.
(A) Purpose.
(1) It is the purpose of this regulation to reduce the potential harm to persons and property that
may be caused by dogs and other animals. It is the intent of this regulation to identify dogs that are not
properly trained to respect persons and property or which exhibit inappropriately aggressive behaviors.
Such dogs, once identified, must be controlled in a way that reasonably protects persons and properties.
(2) It is the further purpose of this regulation to provide sufficient penalties for persons who
fail to control their animals as required, and additional penalties if any animal causes property damage
or personal injury without reasonable justification.
(3) Finally, it is desired that all animals be kept and treated in a humane manner, but the
destruction of property or to cause injury to persons by any animal that is not engaged in law
enforcement or protection of its owner or home shall not be permitted.
(B) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
CITY MANAGER. The person appointed by the City Council in accordance with the City
Charter. For purposes of this chapter, it is the person who is to review the correctness of the DCS’s
determination that a dog should be designated as potentially dangerous.
6 Madeira - General Regulations
DANGEROUS DOG. Any dog that has been found to have been engaged in any of the
behaviors specified in division (C)(2) of this section.
DOG. Includes both domestic breeds of dogs and wolf-dog hybrids. A wolf-hybrid shall be
deemed to be a DOG for all purposes of this section.
DOG AT LARGE. Any dog:
(a) On private property without the permission of the owner or person entitled to
possession and not in a kennel or restrained by a physical control device and under the control of a
capable person; or
(b) On public property and not in a kennel or restrained by a physical control device which
is under the control of a capable person.
DOG CONTROL SPECIALIST (DCS). A person appointed by the City Manger to act under
this section.
EUTHANIZED. Put to death in a humane manner by a licensed veterinarian or certified
euthanasia technician.
KENNEL. An enclosure of sound structural strength in good repair capable of containing the
dog enclosed and preventing the entrance of other animals.
OWNER. Any person having a possessory property right in a dog or who harbors, cares for,
exercises control over or knowingly permits a dog to remain on premises occupied by that person.
PERSON. Any natural person, association, partnership, firm or corporation.
PHYSICAL CONTROL DEVICE. A sufficiently strong collar connected to a leash or tether
made of chain links, or other material that is suitably strong, so as to prevent the escape of a dog by the
breaking of the device.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG. Any dog that the DCS has determined to be so
designated after the DCS has considered its behavior based on factors set forth in division (C)(1) of this
section.
SERIOUS INJURY. Any physical injury that results in a broken bone or which requires
stitches or which causes a disfiguring laceration or cosmetic surgery.
(C) Classification of levels of dangerousness. The DCS shall make the determination of whether
a dog should be designated as a potentially dangerous dog.
(1) A dog shall be classified as potentially dangerous based upon specific behaviors exhibited
by the dog, including but not limited to the following:
Animals 7
(a) It is at large and menaces, chases, aggressively bites, causes physical injury, displays
threatening or aggressive behavior or otherwise threatens or endangers safety of any person or domestic
animal;
(b) While off the property of the owner, and on a physical control device, it menaces,
chases, aggressively bites, causes physical injury, displays threatening or aggressive behavior or
otherwise threatens or endangers the safety of any person or domestic animal;
(c) While in or on a motor vehicle and not physically restrained or otherwise physically
prevented from reaching any area outside the perimeter of the vehicle, it menaces, aggressively bites,
causes physical injury, displays threatening or aggressive behavior or otherwise threatens or endangers
the safety of any person or domestic animals;
(d) When the dog is outside but on its own property, it barks in an aggressive fashion at
most persons on nearby property or in the right-of-way;
(e) The dog is aggressive toward most other dogs that are not kept in the same household;
(f) The dog exhibits stalking behaviors;
(g) The dog and owner have not attended dog obedience classes and has not been certified
that it exhibits acceptable social behavior;
(h) The dog has gone off-premises to attack another dog or some other domestic animal,
or a person without provocation. The DCS need not actually witness this behavior, but may consider
reports by victims or witnesses; and
(i) The dog does not cease its aggressive behavior upon voice command of its owner.
(2) Subject to division (C)(3)(c) of this section, a dog shall be classified as a dangerous dog if:
(a) It causes the serious injury or death of any person;
(b) It is at large and kills any domestic animal;
(c) It is off the property of the owner but on a physical control device and kills any
domestic animal; or
(d) It has previously been classified as a potentially dangerous dog because it aggressively
bit or caused physical injury to any person, the owner has received notice of such classification and the
dog again aggressively bites or causes physical injury to any person.
(3) The DCS shall have the authority to refrain from classifying a dog as a dangerous dog or
potentially dangerous dog, even if the dog has engaged in the behaviors specified in divisions (C)(2)(a)
8 Madeira - General Regulations
through (C)(2)(c) of this section, if the DCS determines that the behavior was caused by abuse or torment
of the dog or other provocation, including but not limited to the following factors or aggressive
behaviors:
(a) The dog or animal was protecting or defending a person within the immediate vicinity
of the dog or animal from an attack or assault;
(b) At the time the person was committing a crime or offense upon the property of the
owner or custodian of the dog;
(c) The person attacked by the dog was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog
or animal, or in the recent past has teased, tormented, abused or assaulted the dog or animal;
(d) The dog or animal was attacked or menaced by an animal, or the domestic animal was
on the property of the owner or custodian of the dog;
(e) The dog was responding to pain or injury, or protecting itself, its owner’s property or
its offspring; or
(f) The person or animal was disturbing the dog or animal’s natural function such as
sleeping or eating.
(4) The breed of the dog, by itself, shall not be a reason to classify a dog as dangerous or
potentially dangerous.
(5) No dog shall be found to be dangerous or potentially dangerous if it is a dog trained for law
enforcement purposes and is on duty under the control of a law enforcement officer at the time it exhibits
behavior under divisions (C)(2)(a) through (C)(2)(c) of this section.
(D) Identification and determination; administrative review of dog behavior.
(1) Persons who observe a dog behaving in an aggressive manner, which occurs without
provocation and under circumstances that could lead to property damage or personal injury caused by
that dog, may report the matter to the city administration or Police Department. Upon receiving such
report, the Dog Control Specialist shall be notified and shall investigate the matter.
(2) The DCS shall attempt to either view the property where the dog is kept or contact the
owner to make an appointment to evaluate the dog’s behavior. The DCS may request the evaluation to
take place at a neutral site other than the home in order to reduce the natural tendency of a dog to protect
the home and owners. If there is reasonable cause to believe that a dog is a threat to persons or property,
but, after reasonable efforts, the DCS is unable to get the owner’s cooperation to evaluate the dog, the
DCS may seek an administrative search warrant.
Animals 9
(3) The DCS shall have authority to determine whether any dog has engaged in the behaviors
specified in divisions (C)(2)(a) through (C)(2)(c) of this section. The determination shall be based upon
an investigation that includes observation of the dog’s behavior by DCS or by other witnesses who
personally observed the behavior, and who sign a written statement attesting to the observed behavior
and agree to provide testimony regarding the dog’s behavior if called upon to do so.
(E) Notice; appeal of findings. The DCS shall give the dog’s owner written notice by regular mail
or personal service. The notice shall include the behavior of the dog on which the DCS relies in making
the determination of the dog’s classification as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog and of the
additional restrictions applicable to that dog by reason of its classification. If the owner denies that the
behavior in question occurred, the owner may appeal the DCS’s decision to the City Manager by filing
with the City Manager, within ten business days of the date the notice was mailed to the owner by
regular mail or the owner was personally served, a written request for a hearing.
(F) Hearing. The City Manager shall hold a hearing within a reasonable period of time (not later
than 30 days) on any appeal from the DCS’s decision to classify a dog as dangerous or potentially
dangerous. The owner, the DCS and any other person having relevant evidence concerning the dog’s
behavior as specified in this section shall be allowed to present testimony. The City Manager shall
determine whether behavior specified in this section was exhibited by the dog in question. The City
Manager shall issue an order containing his or her determination, which shall be final.
(G) Notice; compliance required. Once the owner has received notice of the dog’s classification
pursuant to this section, the owner shall comply with the restrictions specified in the notice until such
time as the DCS’s decision is reversed on appeal. Failure to comply with the specified restrictions
pending the completion of all appeals shall be a violation of this section for which a fine can be imposed.
(H) Impoundment. If the Director finds that a dog is a dangerous dog, the dog shall be impounded
pending the completion of all appeals. If there is no appeal, or if the DCS’s decision is upheld on appeal,
the dog’s owner shall be liable for the cost of the dog’s impoundment.
(I) Regulation of potentially dangerous dogs. The DCS, upon determining the dog is a potentially
dangerous dog, shall order that the owner comply with those requirements to reduce the risk of future
harm. The DCS shall identify those requirements that are appropriate from the following list:
(1) Physically restrain the dog to prevent it from interfering with the public’s legal access to
the owner’s property or from reaching any public sidewalk or road or adjoining property;
(2) Fasten to a collar and keep on the dog at all times a suitable distinctive tag issued by the
DCS identifying the dog as a potentially dangerous dog;
(3) Pay an annual fee of $25 at the time the DCS issues the tag described in division (I)(2) of
this section and a like fee each year thereafter, so long as the dog is alive. This fee shall be in addition
to any other required license fee;
10 Madeira - General Regulations
(4) Notify the DCS by mail of any change of ownership or where the new location of the dog
is within ten days of the change;
(5) The requirements of this section shall apply to any person who is transferred ownership or
who keeps a potentially dangerous dog within the city;
(6) Outdoors and unattended, the dog or animal must be kept within a locked, physically (not
electronic, underground or invisible) fenced area, from which it cannot escape, completely within the
back yard of the property;
(7) When outdoors the dog or animal must be attended and kept within a physically (not
electronic, underground or invisible) fenced area, from which it cannot escape, completely within the
back yard of the property;
(8) When outdoors, the dog or animal must be attended and kept on a leash no longer than six
feet and under the control of a person 18 years of age or older;
(9) When outdoors the dog or animal must be attended and muzzled. Such muzzle shall not
cause injury to the dog or animal or interfere with its vision or respiration but shall prevent it from biting
any person or animal;
(10) Outdoors and unattended, the dog or animal must be confined to an enclosed, escape-proof
kennel of the following description:
(a) Such kennel shall allow the dog or animal to stand normally and without restriction,
and shall be at least three times the length of the dog or animal, and shall protect the dog or animal from
the elements;
(b) Fencing materials shall not have openings with a diameter of more than two inches,
and in the case of wooden fences, the gaps shall not be more than two inches;
(c) Any gates within such kennel shall be lockable and of such design as to prevent the
entry of children or the escape of the animal, and when the dog or animal is confined to such kennel and
unattended, such lock shall be kept locked; and
(d) The kennel may be required to have double exterior walls to prevent the insertion of
fingers, hands or other objects.
(11) Placement of a sign or signs in places directed by the judge advising the public of the
presence and tendencies of stipulated animal;
(12) Attendance by the dog or animal and its owner/custodian at training sessions conducted by
a certified applied animal behaviorist, board certified veterinary behaviorist or other recognized expert
Animals 11
in the field and completion of training or any other treatment as deemed appropriate by such expert. The
owners of the dog or animal shall be responsible for all costs associated with the evaluation and training
ordered under this section;
(13) Procurement of liability insurance in an amount to be determined by the judge, but in no
case in an amount of less than $100,000, covering the medical and/or veterinary costs resulting from
future actions of the dog or animal;
(14) Neutering or spaying of the dog or animal at the owner’s expense unless medically
contradicted;
(15) If further incident of attack occurs under such circumstance that the dog or animal, after
a hearing as described above, is determined to be a dangerous dog or animal, the DCS may impose or
re-impose any applicable directives listed above; additionally, humane destruction of the dog or animal
may be ordered; and
(16) Remove the dog or animal in question from cohabiting with other dogs or animals in the
same household.
(J) Rehabilitation and withdrawal of determination. An owner of a potentially dangerous dog may
request the DCS to re-evaluate the dog if the owner and the dog have attended obedience training classes
and believes that the dog’s aggressive behaviors have been sufficiently modified. If, after evaluation, the
DCS determines that the dog need not be designated as a dangerous dog, the DCS shall notify the owner
and withdraw the dog’s designation as potentially dangerous.
(K) Euthanization. Any dog that has been found to be a dangerous dog should be euthanized. If
such dog is euthanized by a licensed veterinarian, the dog owner shall have delivered to the Director a
certification by the veterinarian that the dog has been euthanized.
(L) Liabilities. An owner of a dog shall be liable for violations of this section if:
(1) The dog engages in any of the behaviors of a dangerous dog specified in division (C)(2)
of this section;
(2) The owner fails to comply with the requirements applicable to a potentially dangerous dog;
and
(3) The dog bites or causes other physical injuries to a person off the owner’s premises.
However, it shall be an affirmative defense if one or more of the factors described in division (C)(3) of
this section existed at the time or immediately prior to the dog’s biting or causing the physical injuries.
(M) Other animals; control. No person shall own or harbor any animal, other than a dog, and
permit it to leave the premises where it is harbored unless it is caged, leashed or is ridden by a person
12 Madeira - General Regulations
who is capable of controlling the animal. A violation of this division (M) shall be presumed if such an
animal causes damage to property or injury to persons while it is off the premises where it is harbored.
(1985 Code, § 90.06) (Ord. 03-24, passed 3-22-2004; Ord. 10-15, passed 8-23-2010) Penalty, see
§ 90.99
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
(A) Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no penalty is otherwise provided, shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $50 for each
offense.
(1985 Code, § 90.99)
(B) Violation of § 90.04 is punishable by a fine of up to $100 for each day during which the offense
is proven to have occurred.
(1985 Code, § 90.04)
(C) (1) Any person convicted of violation of § 90.06 shall be subject to a fine of not more than
$500, except that any owner of a dangerous dog shall be subject to a fine of not less than $200 and not
more than $500. Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
(2) A person convicted of a violation of § 90.06(M) shall be subject to a fine of up to $150 for
each violation.
(1985 Code, § 90.06)
(Ord. 1599, passed 8-30-1982; Ord. 95-65, passed 9-18-1995; Ord. 03-24, passed 3-22-2004)
CHAPTER 91: FIRE PREVENTION
Section
Fire Prevention Code
91.01 Unified Fire Code of Hamilton County adopted
91.02 City Bureau of Fire Prevention established
91.03 Interpretation of certain terms in Code
91.04 Storage of flammable or combustible liquids
91.05 Conflict with zoning laws or other ordinances
91.06 Modifications of Fire Prevention Code
91.07 New materials and processes; permits
Burning Regulations
91.20 Definitions
91.21 Relations to other prohibitions
91.22 Open burning in the municipality
Miscellaneous
91.35 Smoking in bed prohibited; discarding cigarettes
91.99 Penalty
Cross-reference:
Fire hydrant requirements in subdivisions, see § 151.089
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
§ 91.01 UNIFIED FIRE CODE OF HAMILTON COUNTY ADOPTED.
The Unified Fire Code of Hamilton County, as it may be amended from time to time, is hereby
incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein and fully and completely established as the Fire
Prevention Code of the city.
(1985 Code, § 91.01) (Ord. 1526, passed 6-15-1981; Ord. 88-34, passed 6-6-1988) Penalty, see
§ 91.99
13
14 Madeira - General Regulations
§ 91.02 CITY BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION ESTABLISHED.
(A) (1) The Fire Prevention Code shall be enforced by the City Bureau of Fire Prevention, which
Bureau is established and shall be operated under the supervision of the City Manager.
(2) The City Manager shall be the Chief of the Bureau.
(B) During such periods as the Madeira and Indian Hill Joint Fire District is in operation and is
under contract with the city to provide fire protection services to the city, the City Manager shall
delegate enforcement of the code to the Joint Fire District, acting by and through the Chief, employees
and appointees of the Joint Fire District, and such persons shall serve as Inspectors of the Bureau.
(C) During such periods as the Joint Fire District is not in operation, the City Manager may detail
members of the staff of the City Building Inspection Department to serve as Inspectors of the Bureau as
he or she may see fit, and as shall from time to time be necessary.
(1985 Code, § 91.02) (Ord. 1417, passed 10-1-1979; Ord. 88-34, passed 6-6-1988) Penalty, see
§ 91.99
Cross-reference:
City Manager, see § 31.03
Specific contracts with Madeira/Indian Hill Joint Fire District, see TSO IV
§ 91.03 INTERPRETATION OF CERTAIN TERMS IN CODE.
Wherever the terms CHIEF OF THE FIRE DEPARTMENT or CORPORATION COUNSEL are
used in the Code, they shall be held to mean the Chief of the Bureau and the Law Director of the city,
respectively.
(1985 Code, § 91.03) (Ord. 1417, passed 10-1-1979)
§ 91.04 STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE OR COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS.
(A) Storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks, of explosives and of blasting agents
is prohibited, and the bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted for the protection of all areas
within the city.
(B) New bulk plants for flammable or combustible liquids are prohibited within the city.
(1985 Code, § 91.04) (Ord. 1417, passed 10-1-1979) Penalty, see § 91.99
Fire Prevention 15
§ 91.05 CONFLICT WITH ZONING LAWS OR OTHER ORDINANCES.
Provisions of the Fire Prevention Code relating to uses prohibited by the zoning laws or other
ordinances of the city shall not be construed as permitting such uses.
(1985 Code, § 91.05) (Ord. 1417, passed 10-1-1979) Penalty, see § 91.99
Cross-reference:
Zoning Code, see Ch. 150
§ 91.06 MODIFICATIONS OF FIRE PREVENTION CODE.
The Chief of the Bureau shall have the power to modify any of the provisions of the Fire Prevention
Code upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his or her duly authorized agent, when there
are substantial practical difficulties in carrying out the strict letter of the Code. However, the intent of
the Code shall be preserved, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of a
modification, when granted or allowed, shall be entered upon the records of the Bureau, and a signed
copy furnished the applicant. There shall be no administrative appeal from the decision of the Chief.
(1985 Code, § 91.06) (Ord. 1417, passed 10-1-1979) Penalty, see § 91.99
§ 91.07 NEW MATERIALS AND PROCESSES; PERMITS.
The Chief of the Bureau shall determine and specify, after hearing, any new materials, processes
or occupancies that shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in the Fire Prevention
Code. The Chief shall post a list of such new materials, processes and occupancies in a conspicuous place
in his or her office.
(1985 Code, § 91.07) (Ord. 1417, passed 10-1-1979) Penalty, see § 91.99
BURNING REGULATIONS
§ 91.20 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
OHIO EPA. The Ohio Environmental Protection Agency Director or agencies delegated authority
by the Director of the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to R.C. § 3704.03 or the chief
of any Ohio Environmental Protection Agency district office.
OPEN BURNING. The burning of any materials wherein air contaminants resulting from
combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air without passing through a stack or chimney. OPEN
16 Madeira - General Regulations
BURNING includes the burning of any refuse or salvageable material in any device not subject to or
designed specifically to comply with the requirements of O.A.C. Rule 3745-17-09 or 3745-17-10.
(1985 Code, § 91.30) (Ord. 93-65, passed 2-7-1994)
§ 91.21 RELATIONS TO OTHER PROHIBITIONS.
(A) Notwithstanding any provision in the code of ordinances, no open burning shall be conducted
in an area where an air alert, warning or emergency under O.A.C. Chapter 3745-25 is in effect.
(B) Consistent with O.A.C. § 3745-19-02(B), no provisions of the Ohio Administrative Code which
otherwise permits open burning, and no permission to open burn granted by the Ohio EPA shall exempt
any person from compliance with the regulations of the city dealing with open burning.
(1985 Code, § 91.31) (Ord. 93-65, passed 2-7-1994) Penalty, see § 91.99
§ 91.22 OPEN BURNING IN THE MUNICIPALITY.
(A) No person or property owner shall cause or allow open burning in this municipality except as
provided in divisions (B) to (E) of this section or in R.C. § 3704.11.
(B) Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes without notification to or permission
from the City Manager:
(1) Cooking for human consumption, (e.g., outdoor grills);
(2) Heating tar, welding, acetylene torches, highway safety flares, heating for warmth of
outdoor workers and strikers, smudge pots and similar occupational needs. Fires allowed by divisions
(B)(1) and (B)(2) of this section shall not be used for waste or trash disposal purposes and shall be of
minimum size sufficient for its intended purpose; the fuel shall be chosen to minimize the generation and
emission of air contaminants; and
(3) Recreational fires which are contained in an outdoor fireplace of factory design for safety
and size limit, burning clean-sawn or cut wood, that is continuously attended by competent persons and
maintained in such a manner as to avoid ignition of nearby combustible materials or cause injury to
attendees. The term OUTDOOR FIREPLACE, as used herein, is intended to describe a factory-made
container, round, square or rectangular, of less than nine square feet, made of clay, ceramic or metal
material, sometimes with a chimney and held off the ground on a stable base, and designed to safely
contain a recreational or cooking fire.
(C) Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes with prior notification to the Ohio
EPA and the Madeira/Indian Hill Fire Department if the following conditions are met:
Fire Prevention 17
(1) Prevention or control of disease or pests, with written or verbal verification to the Ohio
EPA from the local health department, cooperative extension service, Ohio Department of Agriculture,
or United States Department of Agriculture, that open burning is the only appropriate disposal method;
and
(2) Ceremonial fires provided the following conditions are met:
(a) The ceremonial fires shall be less than five feet by five feet in dimension and shall burn
no longer than three hours;
(b) The ceremonial fires shall not be used for waste disposal purposes; and
(c) The fuel shall be chosen so as to minimize the generation and emission of air
contaminants.
(D) Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes upon receipt of written permission
from the Ohio EPA and the Madeira/Indian Hill Fire Department provided that any conditions specified
in the permission are followed:
(1) Disposal of ignitable or explosive materials where the Ohio EPA and the Madeira/Indian
Hill Fire Department determine that there is no practical alternate method of disposal;
(2) Instruction in methods of firefighting or for research in the control of fires;
(3) In emergency or other extraordinary circumstances for any purpose determined to be
necessary by the Ohio EPA and the Madeira/Indian Hill Fire Department;
(4) Recognized horticultural, silvicultural, range or wildlife management practices; and
(5) Prevention or control of disease or pests, with written verification from the local health
department, county agricultural extension agency, Ohio Department of Agriculture or United States
Department of Agriculture, that open burning is the only appropriate disposal method.
(E) (1) Open burning shall be allowed by contractors engaged in the construction of buildings for
the purpose of providing a warming fire if the contractor obtains a permit from the City Manager which
provides that the following conditions must be followed:
(a) The warming fire may only occur on the construction site, lot or recorded plat referred
to in the permit application;
(b) Such burning shall be supervised by an employee of the contractor at all times;
(c) A warming fire shall not be used to burn construction debris;
18 Madeira - General Regulations
(d) A warming fire may only be used when the outside temperature is below 40°F; and
(e) Any additional conditional conditions imposed by the City Manager, based on unique
situations of the site, such as close proximity of occupied structures, wind velocity or unusually dry
conditions.
(2) The City Manager shall revoke the permit if any provision of this section is violated.
(F) Annually, in accordance with a schedule specified by the Director of Environmental Protection,
the City Manager shall cause a report to be made to the Director regarding the number of permits issued,
renewed, and revoked for the preceding calendar year.
(1985 Code, § 91.32) (Ord. 93-65, passed 2-7-1994; Ord. 03-25, passed 12-8-2003) Penalty, see
§ 91.99
MISCELLANEOUS
§ 91.35 SMOKING IN BED PROHIBITED; DISCARDING CIGARETTES.
No person shall smoke, or ignite a lighter or match, while sitting or lying upon any bed. No person
shall deposit or leave a lighted cigar, cigarette or pipe, or discard a lighted cigar or cigarette so that it
comes to rest, or may be blown by the wind, upon, or within one foot of, any combustible material or
substance, except in a noncombustible container or tray, or on a noncombustible surface shielded from
adjacent combustible material or substance.
(1985 Code, § 91.50) Penalty, see § 91.99
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
(A) Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other penalty is provided, shall
be subject to the penalty provisions of § 10.99.
(B) Any person who violates any of the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code, as adopted and
enacted into law by §§ 91.01 through 91.07, or fails to comply therewith, or who violates or fails to
comply with any order made thereunder, or who builds a fire in violation of or noncompliance with any
detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or
permit issued thereunder and from which no appeal has been taken, or who fails to comply with any
order that is affirmed, or any order as modified, upon appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction, within
the time fixed in the order, as extended by any appeal taken within such time, shall severally for each
and every violation or noncompliance be fined not less than $100 nor more than $150. When not
otherwise expressly provided, each ten days that violations, noncompliances or prohibited conditions
continue, whether before or after the imposition of a penalty therefor under §§ 91.01 through 91.07,
Fire Prevention 19
shall constitute a separate offense. The imposition of a penalty under those sections shall not be held to
prevent the forced removal or elimination of prohibited conditions.
(C) Any person convicted of violating the provisions of §§ 91.20 through 91.22 shall, for each
conviction, be fined not more than $150.
(D) Any person convicted of violating the provisions of § 91.35 shall be fined not more than $150
for each occurrence.
(1985 Code, § 91.99) (Ord. 1417, passed 10-1-1979; Ord. 93-65, passed 2-7-1994; Ord. 04-21, passed
8-23-2004)
20 Madeira - General Regulations
CHAPTER 92: JUNK; RUBBISH; LITTERING; WEEDS
Section
Junk and Rubbish
92.01 Storing inoperative motor vehicles, refuse or rubbish
92.02 Storing building materials
92.03 Acceptable hours of private trash pickup
Littering
92.15 Definitions
92.16 Litter in public places
92.17 Placement of litter in receptacles to prevent scattering
92.18 Upsetting public or private receptacles
92.19 Sweeping litter into gutters prohibited
92.20 Duty to keep sidewalks free of litter
92.21 Litter thrown by persons in vehicles
92.22 Truck and vehicle loads causing litter
92.23 Tracking mud, dirt or other substances on streets
92.24 Litter in parks
92.25 Litter in lakes and fountains
92.26 Throwing or distributing handbills in public places
92.27 Placing handbills on vehicles
92.28 Depositing handbills on uninhabited or vacant premises
92.29 Prohibiting distribution of handbills where posted
92.30 Distributing handbills at inhabited private premises
92.31 Posting notices prohibited
92.32 Litter on occupied private property
92.33 Owner to maintain premises free of litter
92.34 Litter on vacant lots
Weeds
92.45 Weeds and grasses; nuisance
92.46 Removal required
92.47 Notice
21
22 Madeira - General Regulations
92.48 Failure to comply with notice; action by city; assessment
92.49 Compost regulations
92.99 Penalty
JUNK AND RUBBISH
§ 92.01 STORING INOPERATIVE MOTOR VEHICLES, REFUSE OR RUBBISH.
(A) For the purpose of this section the term INOPERATIVE MOTOR VEHICLES shall be deemed
to mean motor-driven vehicles that cannot, both physically and lawfully, under their own power, and
without repair or replacement of parts, be operated on the public highways of this city and have remained
in such inoperative condition for 30 or more consecutive days.
(B) No person or corporation shall store or place any used building materials, inoperative motor
vehicles, motor vehicles parts, scrap metal, refuse or rubbish on any property, or allow such materials,
vehicles, parts or substances to remain on any property, except to the extent that materials, vehicles,
parts or substances so stored, placed or allowed are not visible from any point on any other property,
including any point on any structure on any other property, public or private. This section, however,
shall not prohibit the accumulation of materials in a manner designed for the composting of materials,
provided the materials contained therein are comprised primarily of yard waste and other materials
recognized as acceptable for composting. All such materials must be kept and maintained in accordance
with § 92.49 of this code.
(1985 Code, § 92.01) (Ord. 94-43, passed 9-19-1994) Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.02 STORING BUILDING MATERIALS.
It shall not be unlawful for any person or corporation to store or place used building materials on
any property when the materials are to be used by the owner of the property in construction on the
property or on any other property owned by him or her. However, the materials shall not be allowed to
remain unused on the property for more than 30 days prior to the commencement of construction of the
building in the construction of which they are to be used, or for more than six months in any event.
(1985 Code, § 92.02)
§ 92.03 ACCEPTABLE HOURS OF PRIVATE TRASH PICKUP.
No person shall collect, pickup, remove or empty receptacles of junk, trash, garbage refuse or
rubbish from any property, public or private, except between the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. All
operations shall be conducted in conformity with § 112.15.
(1985 Code, § 92.03) (Ord. 89-36, passed 7-17-1989) Penalty, see § 92.99
Junk; Rubbish; Littering; Weeds 23
LITTERING
§ 92.15 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL. Any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger,
circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies
of any matter of literature:
(1) Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing;
(2) Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishments, or
other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; or
(3) Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or
event of any kind, for which an admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit.
GARBAGE. Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation,
cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER, GARBAGE, REFUSE and RUBBISH. As defined herein, and all other waste material
which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to the public health, safety
and welfare.
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL. Printed or written matter, any sample, or device, dodger,
circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet or any printed or otherwise reproduced
original or copies of any matter of literature not included in the definition of a COMMERCIAL
HANDBILL.
PARK. A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any other public area in the
city, owned or used by the city, and devoted to active or passive recreation.
PRIVATE PROPERTY or PRIVATE PLACE. All property not included in the definition of
PUBLIC PROPERTY, including but not limited to vacant land or any land, building or other structure
designed or used for residential, commercial, business, industrial, institutional or religious purposes,
together with any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, fence, porch, steps, vestibule, mailbox and other
structure appurtenant thereto.
24 Madeira - General Regulations
PUBLIC PROPERTY or PUBLIC PLACE. All property owned, operated or controlled by any
governmental agency, including but not limited to streets, sidewalks, tree lawns, parks, playgrounds,
parking lots, schools, libraries, post offices, municipal transit facilities and other public lands and
buildings.
REFUSE. All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, except body wastes, including garbage,
rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial
wastes.
RUBBISH. Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes,
such as paper, wrappings, dirt, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass,
bedding, crockery and similar materials.
VEHICLE. Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported
or drawn upon a highway.
(1985 Code, § 92.20)
§ 92.16 LITTER IN PUBLIC PLACES.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any streets, sidewalk or other public place within
the city, except in public receptacles or in authorized receptacles for collection.
(1985 Code, § 92.21) Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.17 PLACEMENT OF LITTER IN RECEPTACLES TO PREVENT SCATTERING.
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in private receptacles shall do so in a manner to
prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements on any street, sidewalk or other public place,
or on private property.
(1985 Code, § 92.22) Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.18 UPSETTING PUBLIC OR PRIVATE RECEPTACLES.
No person shall upset a public or private receptacle designated or used for the deposit of litter, or
cause or permit its contents to be deposited or strewn in or on public or private property.
(1985 Code, § 92.23) Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.19 SWEEPING LITTER INTO GUTTERS PROHIBITED.
No person shall throw, deposit or sweep into any gutter, sidewalk, street or other public place within
the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot, or from any public or private sidewalk or
Junk; Rubbish; Littering; Weeds 25
driveway. Persons owning, controlling or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their
premises free of litter.
(1985 Code, § 92.24) Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.20 DUTY TO KEEP SIDEWALKS FREE OF LITTER.
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street
or other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any
public or private sidewalk or driveway. Any person, being the owner, agent, lessee, occupant or person
otherwise in charge or control of any premises abutting a city street shall, after notification by a police
officer, remove, with reasonable promptness, from the sidewalk area along the premises all debris,
rubbish, litter and other matter which may at any time accumulate or be deposited thereon from any
cause whatsoever.
(1985 Code, § 92.25) Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.21 LITTER THROWN BY PERSONS IN VEHICLES.
No person, while a driver or a passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon any street
or any public place within the city, or upon private property.
(1985 Code, § 92.26) Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.22 TRUCK AND VEHICLE LOADS CAUSING LITTER.
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the city unless the vehicle is
constructed and loaded to prevent any load, contents or litter from being thrown or deposited upon any
street, alley or other public place. No person, being the owner, driver or other person in charge of a
vehicle hauling excavated material, coal, coke, construction or building materials, or other materials
within the city shall permit any part of the material to fall, drop or be blown therefrom on a city street,
alley or other public place. When a vehicle carries trash, sawdust, ashes or cinders, sand, earth, lime,
manure or other substance liable to be blown away, the owner, driver or other person in charge shall,
before driving or operating it on any street, alley or public place, cause the substance, or substances to
be completely covered with a canvas, tarp or other substantial covering in such manner that the same
cannot fall or be blown from a vehicle.
(1985 Code, § 92.27) Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.23 TRACKING MUD, DIRT OR OTHER SUBSTANCES ON STREETS.
(A) No person shall operate on any street, alley or other public place a vehicle with mud, dirt, sticky
substances, litter or foreign matter on its wheels or other parts if such operation results in the depositing
26 Madeira - General Regulations
or tracking of the mud, dirt, substances, litter or foreign matter on any street, alley or other public place.
No person, being the owner of real property or a prime contractor in charge of a construction site, shall
maintain the property or construction site so that vehicles upon the property or construction site pick up
mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter on the wheels or other parts, and deposit or track
mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter onto any street, alley or other public place.
(B) Where mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter has been tracked or deposited on
any street, alley or other public place in violation of § 92.21, the City Manager is authorized to cause
the mud, dirt, substances, litter or foreign matter to be cleaned from the street, and to charge the cost
thereof to the person responsible. The cost of cleaning shall be collected by civil suit. The term
RESPONSIBLE PERSON as used in this section, shall mean the driver of the vehicle which deposited
or tracked the mud, dirt, substance, litter or foreign matter on the street, or his or her employer, or the
owner of the real property or prime contractor in charge of a construction site from where the deposited
or tracked mud, dirt, substance, litter or foreign matter on the street, alley or other public place
originated.
(1985 Code, § 92.28) Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.24 LITTER IN PARKS.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the city except in public receptacles, and
in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon
any part of the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are not provided,
all litter shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence, and properly
disposed of elsewhere as provided herein.
(1985 Code, § 92.29) Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.25 LITTER IN LAKES AND FOUNTAINS.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or any other body
of water in a park or elsewhere within the city.
(1985 Code, § 92.30) Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.26 THROWING OR DISTRIBUTING HANDBILLS IN PUBLIC PLACES.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any
sidewalk, street or other public place within the city. No person shall hand out, distribute or sell any
commercial handbill in any public place. However, it shall not be unlawful on any sidewalk, street or
other public place within the city for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver
Junk; Rubbish; Littering; Weeds 27
thereof, any noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it, except within or around the city
hall building.
(1985 Code, § 92.31) Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.27 PLACING HANDBILLS ON VEHICLES.
(A) No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any
vehicle.
(B) However, it shall not be unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute,
without charge, a noncommercial handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to accept it.
(1985 Code, § 92.32) Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.28 DEPOSITING HANDBILLS ON UNINHABITED OR VACANT PREMISES.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any private
premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant.
(1985 Code, § 92.33) Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.29 PROHIBITING DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS WHERE POSTED.
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill upon any
private premises if requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on the premises in a
conspicuous position near the entrance thereof, a sign bearing the words: “No Trespassing,” “No
Peddlers or Agents,” “No Advertisement” or any similar notice, indicating in any manner that the
occupants of the premises do not desire to be molested or have their right of privacy disturbed, or have
any handbills left upon the premises.
(1985 Code, § 92.34) Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.30 DISTRIBUTING HANDBILLS AT INHABITED PRIVATE PREMISES.
(A) (1) No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill in
or upon the private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any handbill directly
to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or upon the private premises.
(2) In the case of inhabited private premises which are not posted as provided in this
subchapter, the person, unless requested by anyone upon the premises not to do so, may place or deposit
any handbill in or upon the inhabited private premises, if the handbill is placed or deposited to secure
or prevent the handbill from being blown or drifted about the premises or sidewalks, streets or other
28 Madeira - General Regulations
public places, except that mailboxes may not be used when prohibited by federal postal law or
regulations.
(B) The provisions of this section shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States,
nor to newspapers, except that newspapers shall be placed on private property in a manner to prevent
their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place, or upon
private property.
(1985 Code, § 92.35) Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.31 POSTING NOTICES PROHIBITED.
No person shall post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or device, calculated to attract the
attention of the public, to any lamppost, public utility pole or shade trees, or upon any public structure
or building, except as may be authorized or required by law.
(1985 Code, § 92.36) Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.32 LITTER ON OCCUPIED PRIVATE PROPERTY.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property within the city, whether
owned by the person or not, except that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain
authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being
carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place, or upon any private
property.
(1985 Code, § 92.37) Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.33 OWNER TO MAINTAIN PREMISES FREE OF LITTER.
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises free
of litter. However, this section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles
for collection.
(1985 Code, § 92.38) Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.34 LITTER ON VACANT LOTS.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private property within the city,
whether owned by the person or not.
(1985 Code, § 92.39) Penalty, see § 92.99
Junk; Rubbish; Littering; Weeds 29
WEEDS
§ 92.45 WEEDS AND GRASSES; NUISANCE.
Council hereby finds and determines that the growth of grass to a height in excess of ten inches and
any growth of rank vegetation, and noxious weeds, including but not limited to thistles, wild lettuce, wild
mustard, ragweeds, milkweeds, poison ivy and any other weed or wild pollen or seeds spread or about
to be spread by it, which by reason of the density of its growth, or by reason of its unsightliness, or
dense growth, injuriously affects the public health, safety and welfare and the same, and any land
covered thereby, are hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
(1985 Code, § 92.50) (Ord. 1256, passed 7-12-1976; Ord. 90-64, passed 9-17-1990) Penalty, see
§ 92.99
§ 92.46 REMOVAL REQUIRED.
Any person owning or having charge of land within the city shall keep the grass thereon cut to a
height not in excess of ten inches and shall keep the same free and clear from all noxious weeds and rank
vegetation and shall cut or cause to be cut all such weeds and vegetation on lots owned or controlled by
him or her as required to prevent such growth and/or the maturing or spreading of seeds or pollen
therefrom.
(1985 Code, § 92.51) (Ord. 1256, passed 7-12-1976; Ord. 90-64, passed 9-17-1990) Penalty, see
§ 92.99
§ 92.47 NOTICE.
Upon information that a nuisance exists as described in § 92.45, including grasses in excess of ten
inches in height, or noxious weeds growing on the lands in the city or that such vegetation is about to
spread or mature seeds and/or pollen, the City Manager shall cause notice to be served on the owners
or persons having charge of such lands that such grass, weeds and/or vegetation shall be cut and
destroyed within ten days after the date of such notice. Such notice may be served personally or by
certified mail to the owner or person in charge of such land. If the City Manager determines that there
is reason to believe that the owner or person in charge of the land cannot be so served with the notice,
then such notice shall be given by publication in the newspaper of general circulation within the city and
shall be sufficient if such owners and persons in charge are named therein.
(1985 Code, § 92.52) (Ord. 1256, passed 7-12-1976; Ord. 90-64, passed 9-17-1990) Penalty, see
§ 92.99
§ 92.48 FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH NOTICE; ACTION BY CITY; ASSESSMENT.
Should the owner or person having charge of any such land fail to comply with such notice provided
by § 92.47 the City Manager shall cause such grass, weeds and/or vegetation to be cut and/or destroyed
30 Madeira - General Regulations
and removed and all costs or expense thereof shall, when approved by Council, be assessed against such
lands and certified and collected as provided by law in the case of other assessments levied by Council.
The expense so to be assessed shall include the cost of any publication or publications, pursuant to this
chapter, the cost and expense of calculating, levying and collecting such assessments and all other
necessary expenses, as well as the cost of cutting and removing.
(1985 Code, § 92.53) (Ord. 90-64, passed 9-17-1990)
§ 92.49 COMPOST REGULATIONS.
(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
COMPOST. The product of the composting process. COMPOST is characterized as chemically
and biologically altered organic material which has become chemically and biologically stable, and is
free from offensive odors.
COMPOST PILE. A place where composting occurs.
COMPOSTING. The controlled decomposition of organic solid wastes under aerobic conditions
to produce relatively stable, inert material that may be incorporated into the soil without producing any
adverse impact to the soil or the public health.
RESIDENTIAL COMPOSTING. Any composting activity conducted by the resident on his
or her property.
SOIL INCORPORATION. The immediate plowing, disking or chiseling of organic residue into
the soil.
YARD WASTE or GREEN WASTE. The residue generated from lawns, shrubs, gardens and
other such vegetation. YARD WASTE may include grass clippings, shrub trimmings, brush, garden
waste and tree wastes. YARD WASTE does not include materials, such as but not limited to meat, fish,
dairy products, bones, pastas, cheeses, salad dressings.
(B) Exemptions. This section does not apply to any person who is disposing of yard waste through
soil incorporation.
(C) Location of residential compost piles. Residential compost piles shall be located:
(1) In a rear yard or side yard;
(2) In a location where it can be properly maintained;
(3) A minimum of 50 feet from a private water supply system;
Junk; Rubbish; Littering; Weeds 31
(4) A minimum of ten feet from any private sewage disposal system; and
(5) A minimum of 50 feet from any natural watercourse.
(D) Prohibition against creating a public health nuisance.
(1) No person shall create or maintain a residential compost pile in such a manner that it
becomes a rodent or insect harborage.
(2) No person shall create or maintain a residential compost pile in such a manner that it
produces offensive and noxious off-site odors.
(3) No person shall create or maintain a residential compost pile in such a manner that it causes
any form of surface or groundwater pollution.
(E) Construction of a residential compost pile. The compost pile shall:
(1) Be constructed and maintained to prevent off-site odor;
(2) Not be allowed to become a nuisance, or to attract vectors (such as rodents, insects and the
like) or to become a health or safety hazard; and
(3) Have adequate drainage, such that any natural liquids generated by the decomposing yard
wastes shall be absorbed into the soil.
(F) Maintenance of residential compost piles.
(1) Residential compost piles shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary manner.
(2) Residential household compost piles that are producing off-site odors shall be immediately
remedied or removed.
(1985 Code, § 92.54) (Ord. 94-43, passed 9-19-1994) Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
(A) Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other penalty is provided, shall
be subject to the penalty provisions of § 10.99.
(B) Whoever violates any of the provisions of §§ 92.01 or 92.02 shall be fined not more than $150,
and a separate offense occurs or continues. In the event of any violation by a corporation, the violation
shall be deemed equally committed by the president of the corporation, who shall in such event be
32 Madeira - General Regulations
deemed personally amenable to the provision of those sections, and subject to fine hereunder by reason
of the violation.
(C) Whoever violates any of the provisions of § 92.03 shall be fined not more than $150, and each
violation at each location or address shall be a separate offense and each day continuation shall be a
separate offense.
(D) Any person violating any of the provisions of §§ 92.16 through 92.34 shall be deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $150. Each day the
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense, and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
(E) Every person who violates or fails to comply with the provisions of §§ 92.45 through 92.47
shall be deemed guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(F) Whoever violates any provisions § 92.49 shall be deemed guilty of a minor misdemeanor. Each
day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense, and shall be prosecuted and punished
accordingly.
(1985 Code, § 92.54)
(1985 Code, § 92.99) (Ord. 1401, passed 5-21-1979; Ord. 1405, passed 5-21-1979; Ord. 89-36, passed
7-17-1989; Ord. 94-43, passed 9-19-1994; Ord. 04-21, passed 8-23-2004)
CHAPTER 93: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
Cutting Open Streets and Sidewalks
93.01 Permit required; fee; bond
93.02 Specifications for opening and restoring streets
93.03 Backfilling after tapping sewers or utilities
93.04 Maintenance of surface for 12 months
93.05 Notice to abutting owners to install water or sewer pipes
93.06 Contractors working for the city
93.07 Emergency opening or cut in streets
Pavement of Roadways
93.20 Permit required
93.21 City Manager to set specifications in permit
93.22 Violators to remove and reconstruct pavements
Sidewalk Construction
93.35 Definitions
93.36 Approval by City Manager
93.37 Orders to contractor
93.38 Lines and grades
93.39 Adjustment of stop-boxes
93.40 Protection of electrical conduits and cables
93.41 Inspection
93.42 Guarantee
93.43 Cleaning up
93.44 Estoppel
93.45 Responsibility
93.46 Grading
93.47 Trees
93.48 Cement concrete walks
93.49 Construction
93.50 Curing
93.51 Cold weather
93.52 Finishing up
33
34 Madeira - General Regulations
93.53 Reinforced walks
93.54 Condemnation of cracked or defective sidewalks
93.55 Abutting owner responsible for sidewalks
Debris and Snow
93.70 Sidewalk to be in repair and free from debris or snow
93.71 Notice to clean or repair sidewalk
93.72 Repair of sidewalk by city
Railroad Crossings
93.85 Blocking street for more than ten minutes
93.99 Penalty
CUTTING OPEN STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§ 93.01 PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE; BOND.
(A) No person shall cut open the surface of any public street, sidewalk or other improved area
within the public right-of-way, or cut any public curb, or construct a driveway across any public
sidewalk or other improved area within the public right-of-way without a permit issued by the City
Manager. No person shall perform any work in connection with any opening, cut or driveway, except
in accordance with the specifications governing the same pursuant to this subchapter, to the extent that
specifications exist and apply to such work. The foregoing shall apply to each person performing any
part of the actual work involved in any violation of the foregoing, and any part of any following
construction, installation, repair, restoration or other work related to the work involved in the violation,
as well as to the person directing any part of the work, and the person at whose direction any work is
done. Applications for permits shall be made in such form as may be prescribed by the City Manager,
and shall be accompanied by plans and specifications as he or she may require. The fee for each permit
shall be $3, and a separate permit shall be required for each opening, cut or driveway.
(B) In addition, the applicant for any permit shall deposit with the city, prior to issuance of his or
her permit, such sum as may be necessary, in the judgment of the Manager, to cover the costs of
inspection by the city of the work to be performed under the permit, and to cover the costs of restoration
of the affected public improvements, in accordance with the specifications governing the same pursuant
hereto, in the event that the restoration, including re-restoration, in accordance with such specifications
and with the directions of the Manager is not accomplished by the applicant, or that the Manager
determines that the work of the restoration or re-restoration, or any part thereof, shall be done by the
Streets and Sidewalks 35
city with its own forces. If the amount so deposited by the applicant receiving the permit is insufficient
to cover all such costs, and the costs of any other work done by the city in default of his or her
compliance with such specifications or with this chapter, he or she shall pay to the city, promptly upon
receipt of invoice thereof, the full amount of any additional cost. If the total of the costs is in any given
case less than the amount of his or her deposit, the excess amount shall be refunded to him or her upon
determination by the Manager that no further costs will be chargeable hereunder against the deposit, and
in no event later than 12 months from the date of completion of the work for which his or her permit was
issued. Any work not timely done in compliance with such specifications or with this chapter may be
done or caused to be done by the city.
(1985 Code, § 93.01) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.02 SPECIFICATIONS FOR OPENING AND RESTORING STREETS.
The Manager may establish specifications governing the types of materials to be used; the manner
in which all openings and cuts are to be made; the manner in which all driveways within the public
right-of-way are to be constructed; the manner in which all work is to be protected during the course
thereof; and the manner in which all affected public improvements are to be restored upon the
completion of the work, including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the procedures to
be followed during construction operations for the purpose of preventing conditions prejudicial to the
effectiveness of the restoration work executed in accordance with the specifications pertaining thereto.
The specifications shall include provisions determining the time of commencement and the time of
completion for the various operations and work covered, and the acts required, by the specifications, the
nature or importance of which is such in the judgment of the City Manager as to justify regulating the
time of performance thereof.
(1985 Code, § 93.02) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.03 BACKFILLING AFTER TAPPING SEWERS OR UTILITIES.
No backfilling shall be done in any opening made for the purpose or tapping sewers or other utilities
owned by the city unless the openings are inspected by the city immediately prior to backfilling.
(1985 Code, § 93.03) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.04 MAINTENANCE OF SURFACE FOR 12 MONTHS.
(A) Each person to whom any permit is issued hereunder for the purpose of any opening or cut shall
maintain for 12 months the surface restored by him or her, or caused by him or her to be restored, at
the site of the opening or cut. If at any time during that period the restored surface settles to a point more
than one-half inch below the level of the nearest uncut or unopened paved surface, he or she shall
immediately, with or without notice from the Manager or the city, remove such portion of the backfill
in his or her excavation at the site, or such portion of the restored surface, and shall immediately refill
36 Madeira - General Regulations
the excavation and resurface the opening or cut, as the Manager may direct. All of the foregoing shall
also apply with regard to settling within such period of re-restored surfaces.
(B) Each person shall be primarily liable and responsible for any personal injuries sustained by any
and all third persons or their property and caused by the occurrence, within the maintenance period, of
any settling of any surface which he or she restored or re-restored or caused to be restored or
re-restored.
(C) If the work of any restoration or re-restoration, or any part thereof, is in any particular case
done by the city with its own forces, the person to whom the permit is issued shall have no responsibility
for maintenance, or liability in connection with settling, after the restoration or re-restoration, or part
thereof, is completed by the city.
(1985 Code, § 93.04) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.05 NOTICE TO ABUTTING OWNERS TO INSTALL WATER OR SEWER PIPES.
Prior to paving or resurfacing any public street, the City Manager shall cause notices to be sent to
all abutting property owners requiring them to install any needed water or sewer service branches, or
any other needed utility service branches for which permission for installation in a public street may be
given by the city, or be thereafter barred from making any installation within the street pursuant to the
provisions of this section. Notice shall also at that time be sent to all affected public utility companies,
privately or publicly owned, to install all necessary mains, conduits, service branches and related
subsurface structures, or be similarly thereafter barred from making such installations. Each property
owner and public utility company wishing to make any installation shall notify the City Manager in
writing within ten days after his, her or its receipt of the notice, and shall then be allowed such time as
may be necessary for the making of an installation before the paving or resurfacing is done. No permit
for making any opening in new or resurfaced pavement shall be issued for a period of three years,
commencing with the date of the final completion of new or resurfaced pavement, except for, reasons
of public necessity, or of countervailing public benefit, or of undue private hardship, and then only, as
to any asserted hardship, in cases in which the circumstances that it is asserted will create hardship if the
permit is denied are due to causes over which the applicant has and has had no control. Lack of foresight
shall not be considered a cause over which an applicant has had no control.
(1985 Code, § 93.05) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.06 CONTRACTORS WORKING FOR THE CITY.
Sections 93.05 through 93.07 shall apply to contractors working under contract with a bond to the
city, but no contractor so engaged shall, in connection with such work for the city, be required to pay
the costs of inspection, or make the deposit that would otherwise be required of him or her under those
sections.
(1985 Code, § 93.06) Penalty, see § 93.99
Streets and Sidewalks 37
§ 93.07 EMERGENCY OPENING OR CUT IN STREETS.
In any case in which any emergency opening or cut is necessary, the person requiring the same shall
notify the police of the existence of the emergency as soon as possible after the emergency arises. The
person shall apply for a permit for the opening or cut, retroactively, on the first day after the emergency
on which the office of the Manager is open for regular business, and shall thereafter, in connection with
an application for the permit, and in all other respects relative to the opening or cut, comply with all of
the provisions of §§ 93.01 through 93.07, except to such extent as the application of such provisions may
be waived by the Manager. The Manager shall in such cases also have the right to direct all emergency
work, the manner in which it is done and protected, and, whether or not the work is done under his or
her direction, to order that the work be redone as soon thereafter as it is possible to redo the work under
normal conditions. All emergency work not done and protected at and in accordance with the directions
of the Manager shall, insofar as the city and all third persons are concerned, be at the sole risk, liability
and responsibility of the person doing the work or ordering the same to be done.
(1985 Code, § 93.07) Penalty, see § 93.99
PAVEMENT OF ROADWAYS
§ 93.20 PERMIT REQUIRED.
No person or corporation shall pave or otherwise improve or cause to be paved or improved any part
of the area within any public right-of-way for the accommodation of vehicles, whether for public or
private purposes or use, without written permit issued by the City Manager, or unless ordered by public
authority. Sections 93.20 through 93.22 shall not apply, however, to the construction of any private
driveway, provided that the driveway is not intended for use as a means of ingress or egress to or from
more than one permitted structure.
(1985 Code, § 93.10) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.21 CITY MANAGER TO SET SPECIFICATIONS IN PERMIT.
The City Manager shall set forth in each permit, or refer therein to, the plans and specifications in
accordance with which all work done under the permit shall be performed. Plans and specifications shall
be prepared, prescribed or approved by the City Manager, and the requirements shown on and stated
in the plans and specifications shall be such as will produce a pavement or improvement matching in
design, kind and quality the main existing public roadway pavement located adjacent or nearest to the
proposed private construction in the same right-of-way, and connecting to the main pavement, if the City
Manager deems a connection desirable, in such manner as the City Manager may deem appropriate in
the interests of public traffic. No person or corporation in whose name any permit is issued shall, in
38 Madeira - General Regulations
performing work or causing work to be performed under the permit, deviate or suffer deviation from
the plans and specifications prescribed in the permit.
(1985 Code, § 93.11) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.22 VIOLATORS TO REMOVE AND RECONSTRUCT PAVEMENTS.
(A) A person or corporation convicted of a violation of §§ 93.20 or 93.21 shall, at his, her or its
own expense, and within ten days after conviction:
(1) Remove or cause to be removed the pavement or improvement, the construction of which
or causing the construction of which constituted the violation, and restore or cause to be restored the
public right-of-way over which the pavement or improvement was constructed to the condition in which
the right-of-way existed immediately prior to construction; or
(2) Reconstruct the pavement or improvement, or cause the same to be reconstructed, as
necessary to correct all deviations constituting the violation, as the case may be, if the removal and
restoration, or the correction, has not earlier been accomplished.
(B) Each day that the pavement or improvement remains unremoved, and the right-of-way remains
unrestored or the deviations remain uncorrected, after the expiration of the ten-day period, shall
constitute a separate violation of those sections by such person or corporation. Each person or
corporation convicted of a violation of §§ 93.20 or 93.21 with respect to the construction of the same
pavement or improvement shall bear the full obligation of effecting the removal and restoration or the
correction, separately and independently of any other person or corporation convicted of a violation with
respect to the construction. He or she shall be subject to the penalties herein prescribed for failure to
effect the removal and restoration or the correction, whether or not any other person or corporation is
likewise and concurrently subject to such penalties for failure to effect the removal and restoration or
the correction, and whether or not the period within which the removal and restoration or the correction
must be effected by one person or corporation differs from that within which it must be effected by any
other person or corporation.
(1985 Code, § 93.12) Penalty, see § 93.99
SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION
§ 93.35 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
DIRECTED, REQUIRED, PERMITTED, ORDERED, DESIGNATED, PRESCRIBED OR
WORDS OF LIKE IMPORT. Wherever in §§ 93.35 through 93.55 these words are used, the directions,
Streets and Sidewalks 39
requirements, permission, order, designation or prescription of the City Manager is intended, and,
similarly, the words APPROVED, ACCEPTABLE, SATISFACTORY OR WORDS OF LIKE IMPORT
shall mean approved by, or acceptable or satisfactory to, the City Manager, unless otherwise expressly
stated.
(1985 Code, § 93.20)
§ 93.36 APPROVAL BY CITY MANAGER.
All sidewalk work within any public right-of-way within the city shall be done to the satisfaction of
the City Manager, who shall in all cases determine the quality, acceptability and fitness of the kinds of
work and materials used or to be used.
(1985 Code, § 93.21) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.37 ORDERS TO CONTRACTOR.
Every contractor performing any part of any work shall have on the work site at all times a
foreperson, superintendents or other competent representative to whom orders and instructions may be
given. Such orders shall have the same force and effect as if given directly to the contractor.
(1985 Code, § 93.22) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.38 LINES AND GRADES.
All work must be in accordance with the lines and grades directed or staked out by the City
Manager. The general contractor for the work shall be responsible for the protection of all stakes until
he or she is permitted to remove them.
(1985 Code, § 93.23) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.39 ADJUSTMENT OF STOP-BOXES.
No sidewalk shall be constructed, reconstructed or repaired with a grade or surface other than flush
with the top of each of any and all gas and water stop-boxes located therein. If the work calls for a
different grade, the general contractor shall request the City Manager to make or cause to be made such
adjustments in the elevations of the boxes as will permit the establishment of the desired grade. The
making of any request, and any failure, neglect or refusal of the City Manager to comply therewith,
within any given period, shall not, however, excuse any violation of the provisions of the first sentence
of this section.
(1985 Code, § 93.24) Penalty, see § 93.99
40 Madeira - General Regulations
§ 93.40 PROTECTION OF ELECTRICAL CONDUITS AND CABLES.
The general contractor shall protect all affected electrical cable and conduit, and notify Duke Energy
at least 48 hours before pouring the concrete for any sidewalk.
(1985 Code, § 93.25) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.41 INSPECTION.
The general contractor shall furnish all labor necessary in handling materials for inspection. All
materials rejected shall be immediately hauled from the vicinity of the work. This section and supervision
by the City Manager shall not operate to release any contractor from any of his or her contract
obligations. Defects of materials or workmanship shall be immediately remedied by the contractor
regardless of previous inspection. If the contractor fails to comply promptly with these requirements, the
City Manager may revoke the permit.
(1985 Code, § 93.26) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.42 GUARANTEE.
The general contractor shall keep all work done by him or her in good condition and repair for one
year from the date of final inspection and approval by the City Manager, and any portion of the work
that becomes defective, through settlement, cracking, breaking of surface or otherwise, shall be removed
and replaced with new work by the contractor at his or her own expense.
(1985 Code, § 93.27) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.43 CLEANING UP.
As fast as any sidewalk is laid, all rubbish and surplus material that has accumulated during the
progress of the work shall be removed from the public right-of-way by the contractor, and the completed
portion of the work left clean and in good condition.
(1985 Code, § 93.28) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.44 ESTOPPEL.
The city shall not be precluded or estopped by any return or certificate made or given by it from
showing at any time, before or after the final completion and acceptance of the work and payment
therefor pursuant to any return or certificate, the true and correct amount and character of the work done
and materials furnished by any contractor or other person, or that any return or certificate is untrue and
incorrect or improperly made in any particular, or that the work and materials, or any part thereof, do
not in fact conform to the requirements of §§ 93.35 through 93.55. The city shall not be precluded or
Streets and Sidewalks 41
estopped, notwithstanding any return or certificate or payment in accordance therewith, from demanding
and recovering from any contractor such damages as it may sustain by reason of his or her failure to
comply with the requirements.
(1985 Code, § 93.29) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.45 RESPONSIBILITY.
During the progress of the work, the general contractor shall assume the risk of, and be responsible
for, any and all damages to persons or property caused by or in any way resulting from performance of
the work or the work itself.
(1985 Code, § 93.30) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.46 GRADING.
(A) If a sidewalk is to be constructed in any part upon fill, the contractor shall place the fill in
four-inch layers, and thoroughly roll or tamp each layer.
(B) The width of each layer shall be as directed.
(C) After a walk is laid, the areas on each side thereof shall be filled or excavated, as the case may
be, and shall be finish-graded to the width as directed.
(1985 Code, § 93.31) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.47 TREES.
Any trees which interfere with the construction of sidewalks shall be carefully taken down by the
general contractor to avoid damage of any kind, and the stump shall be grubbed out by the contractor
one foot below grade.
(1985 Code, § 93.32) Penalty, see § 93.99
Cross-reference:
Trees, see Ch. 95
§ 93.48 CEMENT CONCRETE WALKS.
All sidewalks shall be constructed of portland cement class “D” concrete, and shall be five inches
thick and of single-course construction laid directly on prepared subgrade.
(1985 Code, § 93.33) Penalty, see § 93.99
42 Madeira - General Regulations
§ 93.49 CONSTRUCTION.
(A) Excavation for a sidewalk shall be made to a depth of five inches below the proposed finished
grade and to a width of three inches more on each side than the width of the proposed walk. All tree
roots exposed by excavation shall be cut off at least three inches outside the lines of the proposed walk
and three inches below the subgrade. The subgrade shall be evenly fine-graded and thoroughly
compacted with a five-ton roller. Where the use of a roller is impracticable, the subgrade shall be
compacted by heavy tamping. If springs are encountered, drains shall be laid as directed.
(B) Forms shall be either steel or sound two-inch plank and shall be straight, true and clean. Forms
shall be set true to line and grade and firmly staked down. Where curved walks are to be constructed,
thin strips or forms that will produce a smooth, regular curve shall be used. The alignment, elevation
and slope of all walks shall be subject to special directions from the City Manager. Sidewalk adjoining
a curb shall be one-fourth inch higher than the top of the curbing at the line of the junction. The slope
of a full width walk shall be five-sixteenth inch per foot up from the curb to the building line. Any
proposed variation from the foregoing shall be shown on the plans and approved by the City Manager,
or shall be directed by the City Manager.
(C) The concrete shall be of plastic consistency, and placed on the prepared subgrade in one
operation. It shall be struck off and truly straightened, then neatly hand-floated until all coarse aggregate
is entirely covered. Before the concrete sets, the surface of the walk shall be cut into blocks with a
jointer, and the edges tooled until they are firm and smooth. The blocks shall be cut to straight lines
generally rectangular, measuring usually not less than two nor more than five feet on the side. The
design of the blocking shall be subject to the special direction of the City Manager. After the walk has
been blocked out, the concrete shall be carefully floated to a smooth and uniform surface. The margin
of each block shall then be tooled with the edger or jointer to a smooth, dense finish. The final edger or
jointer marks shall not be floated out.
(D) Around street sign and stop sign posts, the walk shall be blocked out in one-foot squares.
(E) Expansion joints shall be provided at such intervals, not exceeding 30 feet, as may be directed.
The joints shall be made of preformed material one-half inch thick and five inches wide.
(F) Joints shall also be constructed at all joints between new sidewalk and adjoining curb, between
new sidewalk and all new entrance walks and drives, and between curb and all new entrance walks, and
the same preformed material, one-fourth inch thick and five inches wide, shall also be installed around
all poles, fire hydrants, cellar holes, inlets and other street items. Where cement walks are laid along
steel plate curbs, the joints shall be aligned with the joints in the curbs. The breaking or displacement
of curbs or the buckling of walks due to lack of proper joints shall be made good by the contractor at
his or her own expense.
(G) All work shall connect with adjoining work in a reasonable and satisfactory manner.
(1985 Code, § 93.34) Penalty, see § 93.99
Streets and Sidewalks 43
§ 93.50 CURING.
(A) As soon as the concrete has taken its initial set, all exposed surfaces shall be sealed by spraying
thereon, in a fine mist, a uniform application of waterproof white membrane curing compound in a
manner to provide a continuous, uniform, water-impermeable film without marring the surfaces.
(B) The containers of the compound shall be agitated thoroughly prior to and during the spraying
operation as may be necessary to assure that all ingredients of the compound are in solution or in
well-dispersed suspension when applied. The compound shall be considered to be sufficiently agitated
when no gummy deposit adheres to the end of a rod scraped across the bottom of the container. The
compound shall be applied by approved pressure-spraying equipment at a rate not exceeding 200 square
feet per gallon. De Vilbiss Type NU 503 Spray Gun with a No. 54 Air Cap and FF Fluid Tip, together
with a ten-gallon De Vilbiss QM 5664 Pressure Feed Paint Tank, or equal, shall be acceptable if in first
class condition. The orifice of the jet or jets of the equipment shall not be held less than eight inches nor
more than 15 inches from the surface of the concrete during the spraying operation. The compound shall
be applied in one or more separate coats, as necessary to avoid any runoff or sagging of the membrane.
If the film is broken or damaged at any time during the specified curing period, the area or areas affected
shall be given a complete duplicate application of the compound.
(C) As soon as the forms have been removed and all honeycomb corrected, the edges of the walks
shall be sealed with the compound.
(D) Unless satisfactory precautions are taken to protect the surface of the membrane, all persons,
materials, and equipment shall be kept off the membrane during the curing period, which shall be 72
hours.
(E) When the surface temperature of the concrete is in excess of 110°F, satisfactory protection
against exposure to the direct rays of the sun shall be provided for at least three days following
application of the compound.
(1985 Code, § 93.35) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.51 COLD WEATHER.
(A) When the temperature is below 40°F or predicted to go below 36°F in the next 24 hours, or
predicted to go below 32°F in the next 72 hours, no concrete shall be poured unless expressly permitted.
Any permission shall be for a single day and a specific location only.
(B) When permission is granted:
(1) No concrete shall be poured until adequate covering material is on the site, and a sufficient
number of workers are present to keep the finishing and covering immediately behind the spreading; and
44 Madeira - General Regulations
(2) All forms shall be cleaned of all frost. In no case shall concrete be poured on frozen
ground, or on subgrade on which there is frost.
(1985 Code, § 93.36) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.52 FINISHING UP.
The contractor shall, after removing the strips used in screening the walk, fill the spaces left by the
removal with fine earth well compacted. Any lawn space between curb and walk shall be neatly dressed
to conform to the grade of the walk and curb.
(1985 Code, § 93.37) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.53 REINFORCED WALKS.
Reinforced concrete walks shall be constructed only according to approved plans. Walks shall be
designed to carry a live load of 250 pounds per square foot or an 8,000-pound concentrated load,
whichever produces greater stress. The concrete shall be proportioned, mixed and laid as specified for
one-course walks. Reinforced walks shall not be cut into blocks.
(1985 Code, § 93.38) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.54 CONDEMNATION OF CRACKED OR DEFECTIVE SIDEWALKS.
The following sidewalks, or parts of walks, now or thereafter existing, shall be condemned:
(A) Any block or segment having a crack in it more than five-eighths inch wide at the surface;
(B) Adjoining blocks or portions thereof whose adjacent edges differ in vertical elevation by more
than five eighths inch;
(C) Blocks that have holes in them five-eighths inch or more in diameter, or that are broken so that
substantial fragments are missing or loose;
(D) Blocks having depressions such as to impound mud or water;
(E) Blocks having a slope away from the street in excess of three-fourths inch vertical per one foot
horizontal;
(F) Blocks that cause an abrupt change in the longitudinal grade of a sidewalk; and
(G) Blocks that are very rough, with the coarse aggregate protruding, by reason of raveling or
spalling.
(1985 Code, § 93.39) Penalty, see § 93.99
Streets and Sidewalks 45
§ 93.55 ABUTTING OWNER RESPONSIBLE FOR SIDEWALKS.
(A) On and after January 6, 1973, the city will no longer be responsible for the construction, repair
and maintenance of any and all sidewalks in the city.
(B) The construction, repair and maintenance of sidewalks in the city shall be the responsibility of
the owner of the property on which the sidewalk abuts.
(1985 Code, § 93.40) Penalty, see § 93.99
DEBRIS AND SNOW
§ 93.70 SIDEWALK TO BE IN REPAIR AND FREE FROM DEBRIS OR SNOW.
The occupant, or, if unoccupied, the owner, of each lot, parcel or tract of land abutting a public
sidewalk within the city shall at all times keep the portion of the sidewalk which abuts his or her lot,
parcel or tract in repair, free from snow or any nuisance, and clear and clean of weeds, grass, dirt or
any objectionable substance. Where the occupants or owners, as the case may be, of any lot, parcel or
tract are more than one, they shall be jointly and severally responsible for compliance herewith.
(1985 Code, § 93.50) Penalty, see § 93.99
Cross-reference:
Littering, see §§ 92.15 through 92.34
Littering public ways, see § 139.05
Sidewalks to be kept free of rubbish, see § 139.09
§ 93.71 NOTICE TO CLEAN OR REPAIR SIDEWALK.
(A) Whenever the City Manager notifies any responsible party by registered or certified mail or by
written notice otherwise delivered to the party’s residence that the sidewalk on which his or her property
abuts is in need of any repair, clearing or cleaning, the party shall comply with the notice, and cause the
repairs described in the notice to be made, and shall cause the sidewalk to be cleared and cleaned as
required by the notice. All clearing and cleaning shall be completed within 48 hours, and all repairs shall
be completed within five days after receipt of the notice. The notice shall specifically and particularly
describe the work to be done, and the portion of sidewalk in need thereof.
(B) Property whose occupants are absent at the time the notice is sought to be delivered and who
are not expected to return within three days shall be deemed unoccupied.
(C) All repair shall be done in accordance with the specifications of this chapter. The notice need
not set forth the specifications, but they shall be available for examination by the recipient of any notice.
(1985 Code, § 93.51) Penalty, see § 93.99
46 Madeira - General Regulations
§ 93.72 REPAIR OF SIDEWALK BY CITY.
(A) The City Manager shall have the right to inspect all sidewalks, or parts of walks, and to
condemn the following sidewalks, or parts of walks:
(1) Any block or segment having a crack in it more than five-eighths-inch wide at the surface;
(2) Adjoining blocks or portions thereof whose adjacent edges differ in vertical elevation by
more than five-eighths inch;
(3) Blocks that have holes in them five-eighths inch or more in diameter, or that are broken
so that substantial fragments are missing or loose;
(4) Blocks having depressions such as to impound mud or water;
(5) Blocks having a slope away from the street in excess of three-fourths inch vertical per one
foot horizontal;
(6) Blocks that cause an abrupt change in the longitudinal grade of a sidewalk; and
(7) Blocks that are very rough, with the coarse aggregate protruding by reason of raveling or
spalling.
(B) (1) (a) After the City Manager has condemned a sidewalk, or a part thereof, the owner of the
property which abuts the condemned sidewalk shall be sent a letter notifying him or her of the action
taken by the City Manager.
(b) The notice shall be sent by certified mail.
(2) This letter of notice shall inform the property owner that:
(a) He or she shall, within 30 days of the date of the letter, apply for a permit from the
Building Inspector to do the work ordered by the City Manager, and have the required work completed
within 60 days of the date of the letter; and
(b) If he or she fails to apply for a permit within the three days or fails to have the work
completed within 60 days, the city shall proceed to have the necessary work performed, and charge and
collect from the property owner the cost of the work, plus administrative charges incident thereto.
(C) All work ordered or performed under the provisions of this chapter shall be in conformity with
the provisions and requirements of §§ 93.35 through 93.55.
(1985 Code, § 93.52) Penalty, see § 93.99
Streets and Sidewalks 47
RAILROAD CROSSINGS
§ 93.85 BLOCKING STREET FOR MORE THAN TEN MINUTES.
It shall be unlawful for any railroad company to operate its locomotives, cars or trains of cars in a
manner to block a street crossing for more than ten minutes.
(1985 Code, § 93.60) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
(A) Whoever violates any of the provisions of §§ 93.01 through 93.07 shall be fined not more than
$150, and each person failing to take any action required of him or her by or pursuant to those sections
shall be deemed to commit a separate offense hereunder each day on which he or she fails or continues
to fail to take such action.
(B) Whoever violates §§ 93.20 through 93.22 shall for each violation be fined not more than $150.
(C) Whoever violates any provision or fails to comply with any requirements of §§ 93.35 through
93.55 shall be fined not more than $150; and corporations, partnerships, and other firms shall be subject
to the foregoing, and natural persons shall be subject thereto whether or not acting as officers, members,
agents or employees of any corporation, partnership or other firm. The same person shall not be fined
more than once relative to or in connection with the same sidewalk project, regardless of the number of
such provisions or requirements violated or not observed, but the City Manager shall have the right and
authority, whether or not any fine is imposed, to order the removal of each and every portion of a
sidewalk not constructed in full compliance with all such provisions and requirements. The City Law
Director may apply to the proper court for the enforcement of any such order by means of injunction.
(D) Whoever violates any provision of §§ 93.70 through 93.72 shall be fined not more than $150
for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed each day the violation
continues after a period of ten days following the first conviction thereof.
(1985 Code, § 93.99)
(E) Any railroad company superintendent, agent or other employee thereof who directly or
indirectly violates any of the provisions of § 93.85 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
shall be fined not more than $150.
(1985 Code, § 93.60)
(Ord. 04-21, passed 8-23-2004)
48 Madeira - General Regulations
CHAPTER 94: CITY PARKS
Section
94.01 Regulations applicable to city parks, property and buildings
94.02 Traffic laws apply in parks
94.03 Athletic field fees
94.04 Recreation field management
94.99 Penalty
§ 94.01 REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO CITY PARKS, PROPERTY AND BUILDINGS.
The following rules and regulations are to apply to parks, property and buildings owned, leased or
operated by the city, and are to have the full force and effect of law.
(A) Meetings. No person, except with the written permission of the City Manager, shall hold or
attend any public meeting, discussion, debate, picnic or gathering of any kind on or within park premises
or property; provided that this rule shall not apply to family parties or small groups of picnickers.
(B) Concerts. No person, except with the written consent of the Manager, shall play upon or
operate any musical instrument or hold any musical concert on or within park premises or property.
(C) Flags. No person, except with the written consent of the Manager, shall display any banner,
flag, target, sign or device on or within park premises or property.
(D) Parades. No person, except with the written consent of the City Manager, shall engage in any
parade, drill or procession of any kind on or within park premises or property.
(E) Damage. No person shall take, carry away, disturb, molest, destroy, mar, deface, mutilate,
mark or damage any public or private property on or within park premises or property.
(F) Refuse. No person shall drop or throw paper, lunch boxes, bottles, cans, refuse or litter on or
within park premises or property, but shall place the same in receptacles provided therefor.
(G) Ball and golf. No person shall throw or bat a hard ball, or drive, putt or play with a golf ball,
on or within park premises or property, except at such places as may be set aside therefor by the
Manager.
49
50 Madeira - General Regulations
(H) Sales. No person shall sell or expose anything for sale on or within park premises or property,
or on any sidewalk bounding park premises, except with written permission of the Manager.
(I) Animals. No person shall take a dog on or within park premises or property where a sign is
posted prohibiting dogs, and no person shall permit any animal owned by him or her to run at large
within park premises or property under any circumstances, or tie any animal to any tree or plant or other
object, except such as may be particularly provided for such purpose by the city.
(J) Firearms. No person shall carry or discharge, on or within park premises or property,
firearms, slings or bows, or any other devices by which persons, animals or birds may be injured or
frightened, and no person shall throw stones or other missiles on or within park premises or property.
(K) Liquor. No person shall take or imbibe any intoxicating liquor upon or within any city park
premises, city property or city buildings unless a proper permit has been obtained from the City
Manager. The City Manager shall establish written guidelines for the issuance of such permits. No
alcoholic beverages except beer and wine shall be permitted.
(L) Fireworks. No person, except with the written consent of the City Manager, shall bring,
display, use or discharge any fireworks on or within park premises or property.
(M) Lakes. No person shall bathe, swim or fish in, or send or throw anything whatsoever into any
lake, pool, stream or fountain, or in any manner disturb waterfowl, birds or animals, on or within park
premises or property.
(N) Cycles and horses. No person shall use or ride any bicycle, motorcycle or horse on any walk
or footpath on or within park premises or property, except on paths or roads provided for that purpose.
(O) Conduct. Loud, boisterous, threatening, insulting or indecent talk, language or noise, or
disorderly conduct or behavior of any kind, or any act in breach of the public peace, is prohibited on or
within park premises or property.
(P) Signs. Signs posted by the city on or within park premises or property shall be complied with
by all persons entering upon park premises.
(Q) Permits.
(1) All permissions and consents issued and granted by the Manager shall be subject to these
rules and regulations, the same as though these rules and regulations were fully set forth in each permit
or consent.
(2) Every person claiming to have a permit or consent from the City Manager shall produce
and exhibit the permit or consent upon the request of any official or employee of the city, and the official
or employee shall have the right to examine same.
City Parks 51
(R) Closing and opening.
(1) Park premises shall close at dusk unless otherwise posted.
(2) No person shall enter or remain within any park premises property after that time, or enter
any park premises or property before sunrise, except with the written permission of the Manager or his
or her designee.
(3) DUSK is defined as one hour after sunset.
(1985 Code, § 94.01) (Ord. 92-49, passed 5-4-1992; Ord. 00-20, passed 6-26-2000) Penalty, see
§ 94.99
Cross-reference:
Comprehensive park and recreation plan, see Ch. 155
Recreation Board, see Ch. 33
§ 94.02 TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY IN PARKS.
The traffic laws of the city shall apply to the use and operation of motor vehicles on or within park
premises, and on or within premises owned, leased or operated by the city for recreational purposes.
(1985 Code, § 94.02) Penalty, see § 94.99
Cross-reference:
Traffic Code, see Title VII
§ 94.03 ATHLETIC FIELD FEES.
(A) There is hereby imposed the following fee schedule for any athletic teams/organizations that will
regularly use the city fields for practice and/or any games:
(1) Ten dollars per player for Madeira recreational teams or organizations; and
(2) Twenty dollars per player for any other select teams.
(B) Each association shall be responsible for the collection of and payment of the fee to the city after
registrations has been completed.
(C) Each association shall submit to the Recreation Director a list of those participants who have
registered with each association.
(D) The fee shall be waived for any player who is being permitted to play by the corresponding
association due to a financial hardship or for any families who are given reduced fees as a result of
multiple players under the policy of those associations. For example, if an association awards a third
52 Madeira - General Regulations
child to play for free, no player fee will be imposed on the third child. If the policy of the association
reduces the fee for multiple players, the city’s fee will be reduced by the same percentage.
(E) Fees collected hereunder shall be receipted into the SR-45 Park Fund.
(F) This section shall be reviewed by City Council on an annual basis.
(1985 Code, § 94.03) (Ord. 05-26, passed 11-14-2005) Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.04 RECREATION FIELD MANAGEMENT.
(A) From time to time the city may officially close certain recreation fields due to weather,
maintenance requirements or other reason determined by the City Manager or his or her designee.
(B) No person shall enter upon any recreation field that has been designated as closed by the posting
of a sign on or within the recreation field property or premises.
(C) In addition to any penalties applicable under this chapter, it shall be the policy of the city that
any person who enters upon any recreation field that has been designated as closed and thereby causes
damage to the recreation field, as determined by the City Manager, shall be prohibited from using any
and all park facilities until full restitution has been made to the city, as determined by the City Manager.
(1985 Code, § 94.04) (Ord. 06-29, passed 8-28-2006) Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not more than $150.
(1985 Code, § 94.99) (Ord. 04-21, passed 8-23-2004)
CHAPTER 95: TREES
Section
95.01 Removal of trees within street right-of-way
95.02 Owner to bear cost of removal
95.03 Determination of hazard by City Manager
95.04 Prohibiting planting certain trees
95.99 Penalty
§ 95.01 REMOVAL OF TREES WITHIN STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY.
(A) Every owner, lessee or occupant of real property in the city shall promptly remove or cause to
be removed any tree standing within such portion of the street right-of-way abutting his or her property
as is contained within the side lines of the property projected to the centerline of the right-of-way, when
the tree is a hazard to any person using the right-of-way or to any property, real or personal, in the
vicinity. The side lines shall be such as meet or intersect the side line of the abutting right-of-way.
(B) When part of a tree constitutes the hazard, and the hazard can be eliminated by removing such
part, the owner, lessee or occupant of the real property abutting the portion of the street right-of-way
within which the tree stands shall promptly remove such part, or cause the same to be removed.
(C) When any tree, or part thereof, lies fallen within any portion of any right-of-way, the owner,
lessee or occupant of the real property abutting such portion shall promptly remove the tree, or part
thereof, or cause the same to be removed, except where the tree, or part thereof, shall have been felled
by another whose duty it is to remove the same pursuant to the requirements of this chapter.
(D) A tree, or part thereof, shall, for the purposes of this chapter, be deemed a nuisance or hazard
if it is dead, or if it is in danger of falling, or, if in blocking the view of drivers of motor vehicles it
significantly reduces the safety of persons using any right-of-way.
(E) For purposes of this chapter STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY shall mean the entire area of any duly
dedicated street right-of-way, including all unimproved, sodded or otherwise unsurfaced portions thereof,
as well as the improved portions, and shall include the entire area, improved and unimproved, of
easements used by the public for vehicular or pedestrian travel.
53
54 Madeira - General Regulations
(F) REMOVAL shall mean removal from the right-of-way.
(1985 Code, § 95.01) Penalty, see § 95.99
Cross-reference:
Sidewalk construction, see § 93.35 through 93.55
§ 95.02 OWNER TO BEAR COST OF REMOVAL.
When the City Manager issues a written order or certification for the removal of any tree, or part
thereof, as referred to in § 95.01, the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises at the time of the
required removal shall bear the full cost of removal.
(1985 Code, § 95.02) Penalty, see § 95.99
§ 95.03 DETERMINATION OF HAZARD BY CITY MANAGER.
Determination by the City Manager that any condition exists that is a hazard, and his or her
determination of the amount constituting the reasonable cost of removal, shall be conclusive for the
purposes of this chapter, but the requirements of § 95.01 shall apply whether or not any determination
is made or any order is issued.
(1985 Code, § 95.03) Penalty, see § 95.99
§ 95.04 PROHIBITING PLANTING CERTAIN TREES.
(A) It shall be illegal to plant or have planted trees or shrubbery of the silver maple (Acer
saccharinum) species and all varieties of the poplars (Populus) and willows (Salix) within the street
right-of-way or between the sidewalk and street by the owner, lessee or occupant of the property within
the city.
(B) If any trees or shrubbery of the above mentioned varieties are planted after November 5, 1973,
within the street right-of-way or between the sidewalk and street by the owner, lessee or occupant, the
trees or shrubbery shall be removed within 60 days upon receipt of notice by certified mail from the City
Manager.
(C) When anyone fails to comply with the notice for removal of the above mentioned varieties of
trees and shrubbery, the city shall have the trees and shrubbery removed, and the costs of removal shall
be charged to the owner, lessee or occupant of the property.
(D) When anyone fails to pay the charges for removal of the above mentioned varieties of trees and
shrubbery within 60 days after receipt of the notice of charges by certified mail from the City Manager,
the owner, lessee or occupant who has violated any of this section shall be cited to the Mayor’s Court,
and, if found guilty, shall be fined.
(1985 Code, § 95.04) (Ord. 1132, passed 11-5-1973) Penalty, see § 95.99
Trees 55
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
(A) Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which another penalty is not provided shall,
upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $50, and each day the violation continues shall constitute
a separate offense.
(1985 Code, § 95.99)
(B) Whoever violates § 95.04(D) shall be fined not more than $50 plus the charge for removal of
the varieties of trees and shrubbery as mentioned in § 95.04.
(1985 Code, § 95.04) (Ord. 1132, passed 11-5-1973)
56 Madeira - General Regulations
CHAPTER 96: WATERS AND WATERCOURSES
Section
Waters
96.01 Abandoned wells and stagnant water
96.02 Artificial hole, well shaft or pit
96.03 Exceptions for current excavations
Watercourses
96.15 Removal of debris and obstructions
96.16 Notice to remove obstructions
96.17 Notice to owners by mail
96.99 Penalty
WATERS
§ 96.01 ABANDONED WELLS AND STAGNANT WATER.
No person being the owner, part owner, lessee, agent or tenant having charge of land within the city
shall permit any stagnant water to stand, or abandoned well or water-containing hole or other depression
to exist greater in depth than in any ground surface dimension thereon for more than 30 days after the
date of passage of this section, or the date that the person becomes the owner, part owner, lessee, agent,
or tenant, or for more than ten days after the date on which any well is abandoned or any water first
stagnates, or any water first accumulates, develops or comes into existence in any such hole or
depression, whichever is later, without either draining the same and compactly filling with solid matter,
or securely covering and capping and so maintaining during all times in which not put to active use.
(1985 Code, § 96.01) Penalty, see § 96.99
§ 96.02 ARTIFICIAL HOLE, WELL SHAFT OR PIT.
No person being the owner, part owner, lessee, agent or tenant having charge of land within the city
shall permit any artificial hole, well shaft or other shaft or pit greater in depth than in any ground surface
57
58 Madeira - General Regulations
dimension to exist thereon for more than 30 days after the person becomes the owner, part owner, lessee,
agent or tenant, or for more than ten days after the date on which the digging of any such hole, well shaft
or other shaft or pit begins, whichever is later, without either compactly filling the same with solid
matter, or securely covering and capping and so maintaining during all times in which not put to active
use.
(1985 Code, § 96.02) Penalty, see § 96.99
§ 96.03 EXCEPTIONS FOR CURRENT EXCAVATIONS.
Sections 96.01 and 96.02 shall not apply to excavations incident to construction work under current
or active prosecution.
(1985 Code, § 96.03) Penalty, see § 96.99
Cross-reference:
Excavating, grading or filling land, see Ch. 153
WATERCOURSES
§ 96.15 REMOVAL OF DEBRIS AND OBSTRUCTIONS.
Every person, natural or artificial, having the right to possession, alone or in common with others,
of privately owned real property located within the city shall promptly remove from any and all natural
watercourses traversing any part of his or her property, and from the banks of the watercourses, any and
all matter which at any time substantially obstructs the natural flow of water therein to an extent that it
is, or is likely to be, a substantial contributing factor to the backup and overflow of water, whether in
time of flood or of normal flow, upon the property of any other person or of the public. For purposes
of this section, MATTER shall, without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, be held to include
debris, whether of natural or artificial accumulation, drift, rocks, structures, roots, trees and growths
of any kind.
(1985 Code, § 96.20) Penalty, see § 96.99
Cross-reference:
Altering natural flow of water, see § 153.23
§ 96.16 NOTICE TO REMOVE OBSTRUCTIONS.
No person shall fail to remove any such matter within ten days after receiving a written notice from
the City Manager, identifying the location and nature of the matter, and ordering its immediate removal.
(1985 Code, § 96.21) Penalty, see § 96.99
Waters and Watercourses 59
§ 96.17 NOTICE TO OWNERS BY MAIL.
The person shall be deemed to have received notice if a copy thereof is delivered to the person
personally, or is left at the usual place of residence of the person within the city by the City Manager,
or, if the person is not a resident of the city, but resides at a known address, if a copy of the notice is
sent to such address by the City Manager by certified mail. The City Manager shall make return of the
service, showing the time and manner thereof.
(1985 Code, § 96.22) Penalty, see § 96.99
§ 96.99 PENALTY.
(A) Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other penalty is provided, shall
be subject to the penalty provisions of § 10.99.
(B) Whoever violates any of the provisions of §§ 96.01 through 96.03 shall be fined not to exceed
$150, and each day that the person remains in violation of such sections by continuing to fail to comply
with its requirements shall be deemed a separate offense.
(C) Whoever violates any of the provisions of §§ 96.15 through 96.17, or fails to comply with the
notice as provided therein, shall be fined not more than $150 for each offense.
(1985 Code, § 96.99) (Ord. 04-21, passed 8-23-2004)
60 Madeira - General Regulations
CHAPTER 97: INCOME TAX
Section
97.01 Purpose; effective period
97.02 Definitions
97.03 Imposition of tax
97.04 Return and payment of tax
97.05 Collection at source
97.06 Declarations
97.07 Duties of the Tax Commissioner
97.08 Investigative powers of the Tax Commissioner; penalty for divulging confidential
information
97.09 Interest and penalties
97.10 Time limitations on suits and refunds
97.11 Board of Review
97.12 Allocation of funds
97.13 Credit for tax paid to another municipality or joint economic development district
97.14 Exemptions
97.15 Reporting of resident deaths
97.99 Penalty
§ 97.01 PURPOSE; EFFECTIVE PERIOD.
(A) To provide funds for the purposes of general municipal operations, maintenance, new
equipment, extension and enlargement of municipal services and facilities, and the capital improvements
of the city there shall be, and is, levied a tax on qualifying wages, commissions and other compensation,
and on net profits as hereinafter provided.
(B) The tax imposed by this chapter shall be levied, collected and paid with respect to all income
and net profits subject to the tax earned during the annual periods commencing on January 1, 1979, and
thereafter.
(1985 Code, § 97.01) (Ord. 00-29, passed 12-11-2000; Ord. 04-23, passed 6-28-2004)
61
62 Madeira - General Regulations
§ 97.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning. The singular shall include the plural, the masculine shall
include the feminine and the neuter, and all periods set forth shall be inclusive of the first and last
mentioned dates.
ADJUSTED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME. A C corporation’s federal taxable income before
net operating losses and special deductions as determined under the Internal Revenue Code, but including
subsequent adjustments from required additions and deductions. Pass-through entities must compute
adjusted federal taxable income as if the pass-through entity was a C corporation. This definition does
not apply to any taxpayer required to file a return under R.C. § 5745.03 or to the net profit from a sole
proprietorship.
ASSOCIATION. A partnership, limited partnership or any other form of unincorporated enterprise,
owned by two or more persons.
BOARD OF REVIEW. The Board created by and constituted as provided in § 97.11.
BUSINESS. An enterprise, activity, profession or undertaking of any nature conducted for profit
or ordinarily conducted for profit, whether by an individual, partnership, association, corporation or any
other entity.
CORPORATION. A corporation or joint stock association organized under the laws of the United
States, the state or any other state, territory or foreign country or dependency.
DOMICILE. A principal residence that the taxpayer intends to use for an indefinite time and to
which whenever he or she is absent, he or she intends to return. A taxpayer has only one DOMICILE
even though he or she may have more than one residence.
EMPLOYEE. One who works for wages, salary, commissions or other types of compensation in
the services of any employer.
EMPLOYER. An individual, partnership, association, corporation, governmental body, unit or
agency, or any other entity, whether or not organized for profit, who or that employs one or more
persons on a salary, wage, commission or other compensation basis.
FISCAL YEAR. An accounting period of 12 months ending on any day other than December 31.
FORM 2106. The Internal Revenue Service Form 2106 filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal
Revenue Code.
GENERIC FORM. An electronic or paper form designed for reporting estimated municipal income
taxes and annual municipal income tax liability or for filing a refund claim that is not prescribed by a
Income Tax 63
particular municipal corporation for the reporting of that municipal corporation’s tax on income. Any
municipality that requires taxpayers to file income tax returns, reports or other documents shall accept
for filing a generic form of such a return, report or document if the generic form, once completed and
filed, contains all of the information required to be submitted with the municipality’s prescribed returns,
reports or documents.
GROSS RECEIPTS. Total income of taxpayers from whatever source derived.
INCOME FROM A PASS-THROUGH ENTITY. Partnership income of partners, membership
interests of members of a limited liability company, distributive shares of shareholders of an S
corporation or other distributive or proportionate ownership shares of income from other pass-through
entities.
INTANGIBLE INCOME. Income of any of the following types: income yield, interest, capital
gains, dividends or other income arising from the ownership, sale, exchange or other disposition of
intangible property, including but not limited to investments, deposits, money or credits as those terms
are defined in R.C. Chapter 5701, and patents, copyrights, trademarks, trade names, investments in real
estate investment trusts, investments in regulated investment companies and appreciation on deferred
compensation. INTANGIBLE INCOME does not include prizes, awards or other income associated with
any lottery winnings or other similar games of chance.
INTERNAL REVENUE CODE. The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, Stat. 2085, 26 U.S.C. §§ 1,
as amended.
JOINT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT. Districts created under R.C. §§ 715.70
through 715.83, as amended from time to time.
LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY. A limited liability company formed under R.C. Chapter 1705
or under the laws of another state.
MUNICIPALITY. The City of Madeira, Ohio.
NET PROFIT. For a taxpayer other than an individual, means adjusted federal taxable income;
NET PROFIT for a taxpayer who is an individual means the individual’s profit, required to be reported
on Schedule C, Schedule E or Schedule F.
NONQUALIFIED DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN. A compensation plan described in
§ 3121(v)(2)(C) of the Internal Revenue Code.
NONRESIDENT. An individual who is domiciled outside the city or an association, corporation
or other entity which does not have a place of business within the city.
OTHER PAYER. Any person, other than an individual’s employer or the employer’s agent, that
pays an individual any amount included in the federal gross income of the individual. 
64 Madeira - General Regulations
OWNER. A partner of a partnership, a member of a limited liability company, a shareholder of an
S corporation or other person with an ownership interest in a pass-through entity.
OWNER’S PROPORTIONATE SHARE. With respect to each owner of a pass-through entity, the
ratio of:
(1) The owner’s income from the pass-through entity that is subject to taxation by the municipal
corporation to:
(2) The total income from that entity of all owners whose income from the entity is subject to
taxation by that municipal corporation.
PASS-THROUGH ENTITY. A partnership, limited liability company, S corporation or any other
class of entity, the income or profits from which are given pass-through treatment under the Internal
Revenue Code.
PERSON. Individuals, firms, companies, business trusts, estates, trusts, partnerships, limited
liability companies, associations, corporations, governmental entities and any other entity.
PLACE OF BUSINESS. Any bona fide office (other than a mere statutory office), factory,
warehouse or other space which is occupied and used by the taxpayer in carrying on any business
activity, individually or through one or more of his or her employees regularly in attendance.
QUALIFYING WAGES. Wages, as defined in § 3121(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, without
regard to any wage limitations, adjusted in accordance with R.C. § 718.03(A).
RESIDENT. A person, whether an individual, association, corporation or other entity, domiciled
or having a place of business in the city.
RETURN PREPARER. Any person other than a taxpayer that is authorized by a taxpayer to
complete or file an income tax return, report or other document for or on behalf of the taxpayer.
SCHEDULE C. Internal Revenue Service Schedule C filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal
Revenue Code.
SCHEDULE E. Internal Revenue Service Schedule E filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal
Revenue Code.
SCHEDULE F. Internal Revenue Service Schedule F filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal
Revenue Code.
TAX COMMISSIONER. The Tax Commissioner of the city, or the person executing the duties of
the aforesaid Commissioner.
Income Tax 65
TAXABLE INCOME. Qualifying wages paid by an employer or employers, compensation for
personal services, other income defined by statute as taxable and/or adjusted federal taxable income from
the operation of a business, profession or other enterprise or activity adjusted in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
TAXABLE YEAR. The corresponding tax reporting period as prescribed for the taxpayer under the
Internal Revenue Code.
TAXPAYER. A person subject to a tax on income levied by a municipal corporation. TAXPAYER
does not include any person that is a disregarded entity or a qualifying subchapter S subsidiary for
federal income tax purposes, but TAXPAYER includes any other person who owns the disregarded entity
or qualifying subchapter S subsidiary.
(1985 Code, § 97.02) (Ord. 00-29, passed 12-11-2000; Ord. 04-23, passed 6-28-2004)
§ 97.03 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
(A) Basis of imposition. Subject to the provisions of § 97.14, an annual tax shall be levied,
commencing on January 1, 1979, and thereafter, at the rate of 1% upon the following:
(1) On all qualifying wages, including sick and vacation pay, commissions, other compensation
and other taxable income earned or received during the effective period of this chapter by residents of
the municipality;
(2) On all qualifying wages, including sick and vacation pay, commissions, other compensation
and other taxable income earned or received during the effective period of this chapter by nonresidents
for work done or service performed in the municipality;
(3) (a) On the portion attributable to the municipality of the net profits of all resident
associations, unincorporated businesses, professions or other entities derived from sales made, work
done, services performed or rendered, or business or other activities conducted in the municipality; and
(b) On a resident partner’s or owner’s share of the net profits of a resident association or
other unincorporated entity not attributable to the municipality earned during the effective period of this
chapter, and not levied against the association or other unincorporated entity.
(4) (a) On the portion attributable to the municipality of the net profits earned during the
effective period of this chapter of all nonresident associations, unincorporated businesses, professions
or other entities derived from sales made, work done, services performed or rendered, or business or
other activities conducted in the municipality, whether or not the association or other unincorporated
entity has an office or place of business in the municipality; and
(b) On a resident partner’s or owner’s share of the net profits of a nonresident association
or other unincorporated entity not attributable to the municipality earned during the effective period of
this chapter, and not levied against the association or other unincorporated entity.
66 Madeira - General Regulations
(5) On the net profits earned during the effective period of this chapter of all corporations
derived from sales made, work done, services performed or rendered, or business or other activities
conducted in the municipality, whether or not the corporations have an office or place of business in the
municipality;
(6) No taxes shall be assessed or collected on any retirement benefits received by any taxpayer;
and
(7) No tax shall be assessed or collected on any salary or other income that might be taxable
under this chapter on any person under the age of 18.
(B) Businesses both in and outside the municipal boundaries. This section does not apply to
taxpayers that are subject to and required to file reports under R.C. Chapter 5745. Except as otherwise
provided in division (D) of this section, net profit from a business or profession conducted both within
and without the boundaries of a municipal corporation shall be considered as having a taxable situs in
such municipal corporation for purposes of municipal income taxation in the same proportion as the
average ratio of the following:
(1) Multiply the entire net profits of the business by a business apportionment percentage
formula to be determined by:
(a) 1. The average original cost of the real and tangible personal property owned or used
by the taxpayer in the business or profession in the municipal corporation during the taxable period to
the average original cost of all of the real and tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer
in the business or profession during the same period, wherever situated; and
2. As used in the preceding division (B)(1)(a)1., REAL PROPERTY shall include
property rented or leased by the taxpayer and the value of such property shall be determined by
multiplying the annual rental thereon by eight.
(b) Wages, salaries and other compensation paid during the taxable period to persons
employed in the business or profession for services performed in the municipal corporation to wages,
salaries and other compensation paid during the same period to persons employed in the business or
profession, wherever their services are performed, excluding compensation that is not taxable by the
municipal corporation under R.C. § 718.011;
(c) Gross receipts of the business or profession from sales made and services performed
during the taxable period in the municipal corporation to gross receipts of the business or profession
during the same period from sales and services, wherever made or performed; and
(d) Adding together the percentages determined in accordance with divisions (B)(1) with
(B)(1)(a), (B)(1)(b) and (B)(1)(c) above, or such of the aforesaid percentages as are applicable to the
particular taxpayer, and dividing the total obtained by the number of percentages used in deriving the
total.
Income Tax 67
(2) A factor is applicable even though it may be apportioned entirely in or outside the
municipality; and
(3) In the event a just and equitable result cannot be obtained under the business apportionment
percentage formula provided for herein, the Board of Review, upon application of the taxpayer or the
Tax Commissioner, shall have the authority to substitute other factors or methods calculated to effect a
fair and proper apportionment.
(C) Definition. As used in division (B) of this section, SALES MADE IN A MUNICIPAL
CORPORATION mean:
(1) All sales of tangible personal property delivered within the municipal corporation,
regardless of where title passes if shipped or delivered from a stock of goods within the municipal
corporation;
(2) All sales of tangible personal property delivered within the municipal corporation,
regardless of where title passes, even though transported from a point outside such municipal corporation
if the taxpayer is regularly engaged through its own employees in the solicitation or promotion of sales
within the municipal corporation and the sales result from such solicitation or promotion; and
(3) All sales of tangible personal property shipped from a place within the municipal
corporation to purchasers outside the municipal corporation, regardless of where title passes if the
taxpayer is not, through its own employees, regularly engaged in the solicitation or promotion of sales
at the place where delivery is made.
(D) Net profit.
(1) Net profit from rental activity not constituting a business or profession shall be subject to
tax only by the municipal corporation in which the property generating the net profit is located.
(2) This section does not apply to individuals who are residents of the municipality and, except
as otherwise provided in R.C. § 718.01, the municipality may impose a tax on all income earned by
residents of the municipality to the extent allowed by the United States Constitution.
(E) Operating loss carry-forward.
(1) The portion of a net operating loss sustained in any taxable year, beginning April 1,1975,
apportioned to the municipality may be applied against the portion of the profit of succeeding tax years
apportioned to the municipality, until exhausted, but in no event for more than five taxable years
immediately following the year in which the loss occurred. No portion of a net operating loss shall be
carried back against net profits of any prior year.
(2) The portion of a net operation loss sustained shall be apportioned to the municipality in the
same manner as provided herein for apportioning net profits to the municipality.
68 Madeira - General Regulations
(3) The Tax Commissioner shall provide by rules and regulations the manner in which the net
operating loss carry-forward shall be determined.
(F) Consolidated returns.
(1) Filing of consolidated returns may be permitted or required in accordance with rules and
regulations prescribed by the Tax Commissioner.
(2) In the case of a corporation that carried on transactions with its stockholders or with other
corporations related by stock ownership, interlocking directorates or some other method, the Tax
Commissioner shall require information, in addition to the return hereinafter provided for, as he or she
may deem necessary to ascertain whether net profits are properly apportioned to the municipality. If the
Tax Commissioner finds net profits are not properly apportioned to the municipality by reason of
transactions with stockholders or with other corporations related by stock ownership, interlocking
directorates or some other method, he or she may require the filing of a consolidated return, or adjust
the transactions so as to produce a fair and proper apportionment of net profits to the municipality.
(G) Exception. The tax provided for herein shall not be levied upon the military pay or allowances
of members of the Armed Forces of the United States, or upon the net profits of any civic, charitable,
religious, fraternal or other organization specified in R.C. Chapter 718, to the extent that net profits are
exempted from municipal income taxes under that chapter, or any other exceptions contained within R.C.
§ 718.01(f) as the same may be amended from time to time.
(1985 Code, § 97.03) (Ord. 00-29, passed 12-11-2000; Ord. 04-23, passed 6-28-2004)
§ 97.04 RETURN AND PAYMENT OF TAX.
(A) Dates and exemptions. Each person who is engaged in business, or whose qualifying wages,
commissions, other compensation or other taxable income are subject to the tax imposed by this chapter
shall, whether or not a tax is due thereon, make and file a return with the Tax Commissioner on or
before April 15 in each year. A taxpayer on a fiscal year accounting basis for federal income tax
purposes shall, beginning with his or her first fiscal year, any part of which falls within the effective
period of this chapter, file his or her return on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month following
the end of such fiscal year or period. The Tax Commissioner is authorized to provide by regulation that
the return of an employer or employers, showing the amount of tax deducted by the employer or
employers from the salaries, wages, commissions or other compensation of an employee, and paid by
him, her or them to the Tax Commissioner, shall be accepted as the return required of any employee
whose sole income, subject to tax under this chapter, is such salary, wages, commissions or other
compensation.
(B) Return and contents thereof. The city shall accept a generic form of any return, report or
document required to be filed if the generic form, once completed and filed, contains all of the
information required to be submitted with the city’s prescribed returns, reports or documents, and if the
Income Tax 69
taxpayer or return preparer filing the generic form otherwise complies with the rules or ordinances of
the city governing the filing of returns, reports or documents. The return shall be filed with the Tax
Commissioner setting forth:
(1) The aggregate amounts of qualifying wages, commissions and other compensation earned,
and the gross income from any business, profession or other activity, less allowable expenses incurred
in the acquisition of the gross income, earned during the preceding year, and subject to tax;
(2) The amount of the tax imposed by this chapter on the earnings and profits; and
(3) Other pertinent statements, information returns or other information as the Tax
Commissioner may require, including a statement that the figures used in the return are the figures used
in the return for federal income tax, adjusted to set forth only such income as is taxable under the
provisions of this chapter.
(C) Extensions. The Tax Commissioner, upon the request of the taxpayer, shall grant a request for
an extension for filing an income tax return for a period not less than the period of the federal extension
request. The Tax Commissioner may require a tentative return and will require at least 90% payment
of the amount of tax due thereon by the date the return is normally due.
(1) Any taxpayer that has requested an extension for filing a federal income tax return may
request an extension for the filing of a city tax return. The taxpayer shall make the request by filing a
copy of the taxpayer’s request for a federal filing extension with the Tax Commissioner.
(2) Any taxpayer not required to file a federal income tax return may request in writing an
extension for filing a city tax return.
(3) The request for extension shall be filed not later than the last day for filing the city tax
return as prescribed by ordinance or rule of the municipal corporation.
(4) A valid extension request extends the due date for filing a return to the last day of the
month following the month to which the due date of the federal income tax return has been extended.
(5) The city may deny a taxpayer’s request for extension if the taxpayer:
(a) Fails to timely file the request;
(b) Fails to file a copy of the federal extension request (if applicable);
(c) Owes the city any delinquent income tax or any penalty, interest, assessment or other
charge for the late payment or nonpayment of income tax; and
(d) Has failed to file any required income tax return, report or other related document for
a prior tax period.
70 Madeira - General Regulations
(6) The granting of an extension for filing a city income tax return does not extend the last date
for payment of the tax; hence, penalty and interest may apply to any unpaid tax during the period of
extension at the rate set out by § 97.09. No penalty shall be assessed in those cases in which the return
is filed and the final tax paid within the extension period, provided all other filing and payment
requirements of the Tax Code have been met. Any extension by the Tax Commissioner shall be granted
with the understanding that declaration filing and payment requirements have been fulfilled; however,
if, upon further examination, it then becomes evident that declaration filing and payment requirements
have not been fulfilled, penalty and interest may be assessed in full and in the same manner as though
no extension had been granted.
(D) Payment with returns.
(1) The taxpayer making a return shall at the time of the filing thereof pay to the Tax
Commissioner the amount of taxes shown as due thereon. However, where the source, pursuant to the
provisions of § 97.05, or where any portion of the tax has been paid by the taxpayer, pursuant to the
provisions of § 97.06, or where an income tax creditable against the city tax pursuant to § 97.13 has
been paid to another municipality, credit for the amount paid shall be deducted from the amount shown
to be due, and only the balance, if any, shall be due and payable at the time of filing the return.
(2) A taxpayer who has overpaid the amount of tax to which the municipality is entitled under
the provisions of this chapter may have the overpayment applied against any subsequent liability
hereunder, or, at his or her election indicated on the return, the overpayment, or part thereof, shall be
refunded, provided that no additional taxes or refunds of less than $1 shall be collected or refunded.
(E) Amended returns.
(1) Where necessary, an amended return must be filed in order to report additional income and
pay any additional tax due, or claim a refund of tax overpaid, subject to the requirements and limitations
contained in §§ 97.09 and 97.13. Amended returns shall be on a form acceptable to the Tax
Commissioner.
(2) Within three months from the final determination of any federal tax liability affecting the
taxpayer’s city tax return, such taxpayer shall make and file an amended tax return showing income
subject to the municipal tax based upon the final determination of federal tax liability, and pay any
additional tax shown thereon, or make a claim for refund of any overpayment.
(1985 Code, § 97.04) (Ord. 00-29, passed 12-11-2000; Ord. 04-23, passed 6-28-2004) Penalty, see
§ 97.99
§ 97.05 COLLECTION AT SOURCE.
(A) Withholding by employer. Each employer, within the municipality, who employs one or more
persons on a salary, wage, commission or other compensation basis shall deduct at the time of the
Income Tax 71
payment of salaries, wages, commissions or other compensations due by the employer to each employee,
and shall, on or before the last day of April, July, October and January of each year, beginning July
31,1975, make a return and pay to the Tax Commissioner the amount of taxes so deducted during the
preceding calendar quarter. The return shall be on a form or forms acceptable to the Tax Commissioner,
and shall be subject to the rules and regulations prescribed therefor by the Tax Commissioner.
(B) Withholding. An employer is not required to make any withholding with respect to an
individual’s disqualifying disposition of an incentive stock option if, at the time of the disqualifying
disposition, the individual is not an employee of the corporation with respect to whose stock the option
has been issued.
(C) Failure of employer to withhold tax.
(1) An employee is not relieved from liability for a tax by the failure of the employer to
withhold the tax as required by a municipal corporation or by the employer’s exemption from the
requirement to withhold the tax.
(2) The failure of an employer to remit to the municipal corporation the tax withheld relieves
the employee from liability for that tax unless the employee colluded with the employer in connection
with the failure to remit the tax withheld.
(D) Employer considered as trustee. Each employer, in collecting the tax, shall be deemed to hold
the same, until payment is made by the employer to the municipality, as a trustee for the benefit of the
municipality, and any tax collected by the employer from his or her employees shall, until the same is
paid to the municipality, be deemed a trust fund in the hands of the employer. Each employee shall be
liable for the payment of the tax required to be deducted and withheld, whether or not the tax, in fact,
has been withheld.
(E) Corporate officers’ personal liability. It shall be the responsibility, jointly and severally, of the
president and treasurer of each corporation required to withhold the tax from qualifying wages of its
employees under this section to see that all taxes so withheld are paid to the municipality in accordance
with the provisions of this section. In the event taxes withheld by a corporation from the qualifying
wages of its employees are not paid to the municipality in accordance with the provisions of this section,
the president and treasurer of said corporation shall each be criminally liable under the provisions of
§ 97.99.
(F) Employees’ listings. On or before February 28 of each year, beginning with the year 2004,
each employer shall file a withholding return on a form or forms acceptable to the Tax Commissioner,
setting forth the names and addresses of all employees from whose compensation the tax was withheld
from the preceding calendar year, and the amount of tax withheld from the listed employees, and other
information as may be required by the rules and regulations adopted by the Tax Commissioner.
72 Madeira - General Regulations
(G) Domestic servants. No person shall be required to withhold the tax on the qualifying wages or
other compensation paid domestic servants employed exclusively in or about the person’s residence.
However, domestic servants shall be responsible for filing and paying their own returns and taxes.
(1985 Code, § 97.05) (Ord. 00-29, passed 12-11-2000; Ord. 04-23, passed 6-28-2004) Penalty, see
§ 97.99
§ 97.06 DECLARATIONS.
(A) Requirement for filing. Every person who anticipates any taxable income which is not subject
to § 97.05, or who engages in any business, profession, enterprise or activity, shall file a declaration
setting forth the estimated income or the estimated profit or loss from the business activity, together with
the estimated tax due thereon, if any.
(B) Dates for filing.
(1) The declaration shall be filed on or before April 15 of each year during the life of this
chapter, or on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month following the date the taxpayer first
becomes subject to the provisions of this section.
(2) Those taxpayers having a fiscal year or period differing from the calendar year shall file
a declaration on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month following the start of each fiscal year or
period.
(C) Forms; credit for tax withheld or paid to another community.
(1) The declaration shall be filed upon a form acceptable to the Tax Commissioner. Credit shall
be taken in the declaration for the city tax to be withheld from any portion of such income, and for
income taxes to be paid to another taxing municipality for which credit is allowed against the city tax
under § 97.13.
(2) For taxpayers who are individuals, such declaration of estimated tax to be paid the
municipality shall be accompanied by a payment of at least 22.5% of the estimated annual tax and at least
a similar amount shall be paid on or before the last day of the seventh, tenth and thirteenth months after
the beginning of the taxable year.
(3) For taxpayers that are not individuals, such declaration of estimated tax to be paid the
municipality shall be accompanied by a payment of at least 22.5% of the estimated annual tax and at least
a similar amount shall be paid on or before the fifteenth day of the sixth, ninth and twelfth months after
the beginning of the taxable year.
(4) A declaration may be amended at any time, provided, however, that in case an amended
declaration is filed, the unpaid balance shown due thereon shall be paid in equal installments on or before
the remaining payment dates.
Income Tax 73
(D) Amended declaration. An amended declaration may be filed with the filing of any quarterly
return. If it appears that the original declaration and accompanying payment made during the year
underestimated the taxpayer’s income by 30% or more, the difference between 70% of the taxpayer’s
tax liability and the amount of estimated tax he or she actually paid on or before January 31, or the date
fixed by regulation, whichever is applicable, shall be subject to the interest and penalty provisions of
§ 97.09.
(E) Annual return required. On or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month following the end
of the calendar or fiscal year, an annual return shall be filed, and any balance which may be due the
municipality shall be paid therewith in accordance with the provisions of § 97.04.
(1985 Code, § 97.06) (Ord. 00-29, passed 12-11-2000; Ord. 04-23, passed 6-28-2004) Penalty, see
§ 97.99
§ 97.07 DUTIES OF THE TAX COMMISSIONER.
(A) Collection and maintenance responsibility.
(1) There is created an Income Tax Bureau for the administration of the provisions of this
chapter. The Bureau shall consist of a Tax Commissioner and such clerical and secretarial personnel as
may be determined to be necessary for the administration of this chapter. All personnel shall be
appointed by the City Manager.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Tax Commissioner to collect and receive the tax imposed by this
chapter in the manner prescribed herein, to keep an accurate record thereof and to report all monies so
received.
(3) It shall be the duty of the Tax Commissioner to enforce payment of all income taxes owing
the municipality, to keep accurate records for a minimum of five years, showing the amount due from
each taxpayer required to file a declaration or make any return, including a return of taxes withheld, and
to show the dates and amounts of payments thereof.
(B) Enforcement authority. The Tax Commissioner is charged with the enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter, and is empowered, subject to the approval of Council, to adopt, promulgate
and enforce rules and regulations authorized or required by this chapter relating to any matter or thing
pertaining to the collection and payment of taxes and the administration and enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter, including provisions for the reexamination and correction of returns.
(C) Determination of taxes. In any case where a taxpayer has failed to file a return, or has filed a
return which does not show the proper amount of tax due, the Tax Commissioner will determine the
amount of tax appearing to be due the municipality from the taxpayer, and will send to the taxpayer a
written statement showing the amount of tax determined, together with interest and penalties thereon,
if any.
74 Madeira - General Regulations
(D) Compromise authority. Subject to the consent of the Board of Review, or pursuant to regulation
approved by the Board of Review, the Tax Commissioner shall have the power to compromise any
liability imposed by this chapter.
(1985 Code, § 97.07) (Ord. 00-29, passed 12-11-2000; Ord. 04-23, passed 6-28-2004) Penalty, see
§ 97.99
§ 97.08 INVESTIGATIVE POWERS OF THE TAX COMMISSIONER; PENALTY FOR
DIVULGING CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
(A) Examination of taxpayers’ records. The Tax Commissioner, or his or her authorized agents,
is authorized to examine the books, papers, records and federal income tax returns of any employer or
taxpayer, or any person subject to, or whom the Tax Commissioner believes subject to, the provisions
of this chapter, for the purpose of verifying the accuracy of any withholdings due under this chapter.
Every employer, supposed employer, taxpayer or supposed taxpayer is directed and required to furnish,
upon written request of the Tax Commissioner, or his or her duly authorized agent or employees, the
means, facilities and opportunity for making the examinations and investigations as are authorized.
(B) Appearance orders to taxpayers. The Tax Commissioner is authorized to order any person,
presumed to have knowledge of the facts, to appear at the office of the Tax Commissioner, and to
examine the person, under oath, concerning any income which was or should have been returned for
taxation, or withheld, or any transaction tending to affect such income, and for this purpose may compel
the production of books, papers, records and federal income tax returns, and the attendance of all
persons before him or her, whether as parties or witnesses, whenever he or she believes the persons have
knowledge of such income or information pertinent to the inquiry.
(C) Result of refusal to submit information. The refusal to produce books, papers, records and
federal income tax returns, or the refusal to submit to an examination by any employer or person subject,
or presumed to be subject, to the tax or by any officer, agent or employee of a person subject to the tax
or required to withhold tax, or the failure of any person to comply with the provisions of this section,
or with an order or subpoena of the Tax Commissioner authorized shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter, punishable as provided in § 97.99.
(D) Retention of records by taxpayer. Every taxpayer shall retain all records necessary to compute
his or her tax liability for a period of five years from the date his or her return is filed, or the taxes
required to be withheld are paid.
(E) Confidential nature of information. Any information gained as a result of any returns,
investigations, hearings or verifications required or authorized by this chapter shall be confidential, and
no disclosure thereof shall be made except to official purposes as the City Law Director shall determine,
or except in accordance with proper judicial order. Any person divulging information in violation of this
section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree for each offense. Each disclosure shall
constitute a separate offense. In addition to the above penalty, any employee of the municipality who
Income Tax 75
violates the provisions of this section relative to the disclosure of confidential information shall be guilty
of an offense punishable by immediate dismissal.
(F) Landlord reporting requirements. All landlords, owners and management companies of
apartments, office complexes, mobile home parks and warehouse operations are required to remit, upon
request of the city tax office, a current listing of tenants, showing names, addresses, telephone numbers,
if available, and the date of occupancy or vacancy.
(1985 Code, § 97.08) (Ord. 00-29, passed 12-11-2000; Ord. 04-23, passed 6-28-2004) Penalty, see
§ 97.99
§ 97.09 INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
(A) If any taxpayer or employer required to file a return by this chapter fails to make and file the
return by the dates prescribed therein, including any extension of time granted by the Tax Commissioner,
whether or not a tax is due, unless it is shown that the failure is due to reasonable cause, and not to
willful neglect, a penalty of not less than $25 shall be assessed by the Tax Commissioner. If any
employer or taxpayer fails to pay the amount of tax required to be paid under § 97.03 by the dates
described therein, unless it is shown that the failure is due to reasonable cause and not to willful neglect,
the higher of $25 or 5% of the tax required to be shown on the return shall be assessed by the
Commissioner for each month or fraction thereof elapsing between the date prescribed for payment,
including extensions, and the date of payment, up to 25% of the tax. In addition, the taxpayer will be
liable for interest on the unpaid taxes. Such interest shall be equal to the rate prescribed by R.C.
§ 5703.47. For purposes of this section, the tax required to be shown on the return shall be reduced by
the amount of any part of the tax which is paid on or before the date, including extensions thereof,
prescribed for filing the return.
(B) The Commissioner shall make assessments against any persons liable if the tax is not paid or
any deficiencies are found to be due. In each case the Commissioner shall give to the person assessed
written notice of the assessment. Notice may be served upon the person assessed personally or by
registered or certified mail.
(C) An assessment issued against either the employer or the taxpayer pursuant to this section shall
not be considered an election of remedies, nor a bar to an assessment against the other for failure to
report or pay the same tax. No assessment shall be issued against any person if the tax has actually been
paid by another.
(D) Unless the person to whom the notice of assessment is directed files, within 30 days after service
thereof, either personally or by registered or certified mail, a petition in writing, to the person assessed,
or his or her authorized agent, having knowledge of the facts, objecting to the assessment, together with
the reasons for the objections, and makes the payment of the full amount thereof shall be due and payable
from the employer or taxpayer so assessed to the Tax Commissioner, with remittance made payable to
the Treasurer of the city. When a petition for reassessment is filed, the Commissioner shall assign a time
76 Madeira - General Regulations
and place for the hearing of the same, and shall notify the petitioner thereof by certified mail, but the
Commissioner may continue the hearing from time to time, if necessary.
(E) The taxpayer or employer may appeal a determination of the Commissioner to the Board of
Review in the time and manner provided in § 97.11(C).
(1985 Code, § 97.09) (Ord. 00-29, passed 12-11-2000; Ord. 04-23, passed 6-28-2004) Penalty, see
§ 97.99
§ 97.10 TIME LIMITATIONS ON SUITS AND REFUNDS.
(A) Time limitation on suits. All taxes imposed by this chapter shall be collectible, together with
any interest and penalties thereon, by suit as other debts of like amount are recoverable. No additional
assessment shall be made after three years from the time of payment of any tax due hereunder. There
shall be no period of limitation on an additional assessment in a case of a return that omits gross income
in excess of 25% of that required to be reported, or in the case of filing a false or fraudulent return with
intent to evade the tax, or in the case of a failure to file a return. In those cases in which the
Commissioner of Internal Revenue and the taxpayer have executed a waiver of the federal statute of
limitations, the period within which an additional assessment may be made by the Tax Commissioner
shall be extended one year from the time of the final determination of the federal tax liability.
(B) Time limitation on refunds. Taxes erroneously paid shall not be refunded unless a claim for
refund is made within three years from the date on which the payment was made or the return was due,
or within three months after the final determination of federal tax liability, whichever is later.
(1985 Code, § 97.10) (Ord. 00-29, passed 12-11-2000; Ord. 04-23, passed 6-28-2004) Penalty, see
§ 97.99
§ 97.11 BOARD OF REVIEW.
(A) Composition. A Board of Review consisting of four persons shall be appointed by Council,
effective January 2 every two years in the even-numbered years. The individual acting as the local
administrator of the tax shall act as Secretary of the Board. The Secretary shall have no vote.
(B) Procedure. A majority of the members of the Board shall constitute a quorum. The Board shall
adopt its own procedural rules, and shall keep a record of its transactions. All hearings by the Board
shall be conducted privately unless the taxpayer requests a public hearing, and the provisions of § 97.08
with reference to the confidential character of information required to be disclosed by this chapter shall
apply to such matters as may be heard before the Board on appeal.
(C) Appeals.
(1) Whenever the Tax Commissioner issues a decision regarding an income tax obligation that
is subject to appeal as provided in this section, or in an ordinance or regulation of the city, the Tax
Income Tax 77
Commissioner shall notify the taxpayer at the same time of the taxpayer’s right to appeal the decision
and of the manner in which the taxpayer may appeal the decision.
(2) Any person who is aggrieved by a decision by the Tax Commissioner and who has filed
with the city the required returns or other documents pertaining to the municipal income tax obligation
at issue in the decision may appeal the decision to the Board of Review by filing a request with the
Board. The request shall be in writing, shall state with particularity why the decision should be deemed
incorrect or unlawful, and shall be filed within 30 days after the Tax Commissioner has issued the
decision.
(3) The imposition of penalty and interest as prescribed in the codified ordinances of the city
is not a sole basis for an appeal.
(4) The Board of Review shall schedule a hearing within 45 days after receiving the request,
unless the taxpayer waives a hearing.
(5) If the taxpayer does not waive the hearing, the taxpayer may appear before the Board and
may be represented by an attorney at law, certified public accountant or other representative.
(6) The Board may affirm, reverse or modify the Tax Commissioner’s decision or any part of
that decision. The Board shall issue a decision on the appeal within 90 days after the Board’s final
hearing on the appeal, and send notice of its final decision by ordinary mail to all of the parties to the
appeal within 15 days after issuing the decision. The taxpayer or the Tax Commissioner may appeal the
Board’s decision as provided in R.C. § 5717.011.
(7) The Board of Review created pursuant to this section shall adopt rules governing its
procedures and shall keep a record of its transactions. Such records are not public records available for
inspection under R.C. § 149.43. Hearings requested by a taxpayer before a Board of Review created
pursuant to this section are not meetings of a public body subject to R.C. § 121.22.
(1985 Code, § 97.11) (Ord. 00-29, passed 12-11-2000; Ord. 04-23, passed 6-28-2004)
§ 97.12 ALLOCATION OF FUNDS.
The funds collected under the provisions of this chapter shall be deposited in the General Fund.
(1985 Code, § 97.12) (Ord. 00-29, passed 12-11-2000; Ord. 04-23, passed 6-28-2004) Penalty, see
§ 97.99
§ 97.13 CREDIT FOR TAX PAID TO ANOTHER MUNICIPALITY OR JOINT ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.
(A) Limitation on amount paid. Every individual taxpayer who resides in the municipality, and who
receives salaries, wages, commissions or other compensation or net profits from sales made, work done
78 Madeira - General Regulations
or services performed or rendered outside of the municipality, if it is made to appear that he or she has
paid a municipal or a joint economic development district income tax on such income, taxable under this
chapter, to another municipality or joint economic development district, shall be allowed a credit for such
tax paid against the tax imposed by this chapter in an amount not to exceed .90 of 1% effective January
1, 2008.
(B) Credits and limitations thereof. Notwithstanding the provisions of § 97.10 or any other
provisions inconsistent herewith, a claim for refund or credit under this section shall be made in such
manner as the Tax Commissioner may provide by regulation. No claim for a refund or credit shall be
allowed unless made on or before the date of filing the taxpayer’s final return, unless the taxpayer’s
employer files with the Tax Commissioner a list showing the tax withheld from taxpayer’s wages,
salaries, or commissions for other municipalities or joint economic development districts.
(1985 Code, § 97.13) (Ord. 00-29, passed 12-11-2000; Ord. 04-23, passed 6-28-2004; Ord. 05-27,
passed 11-14-2005; Ord. 07-09, passed 3-26-2007; Ord. 07-41, passed 11-26-2007) Penalty, see § 97.99
§ 97.14 EXEMPTIONS.
This chapter shall not apply to any person, firm or corporation, or to any property as to whom or
which it is beyond the power of Council to impose the tax herein provided.
(1985 Code, § 97.14) (Ord. 00-29, passed 12-11-2000; Ord. 04-23, passed 6-28-2004) Penalty, see
§ 97.99
§ 97.15 REPORTING OF RESIDENT DEATHS.
The owners/managers of all nursing homes, homes for the aged, assisted care facilities and
independent living facilities located in the city shall, within 30 days of the death of any resident of the
facility, notify in writing the City Manager.
(1985 Code, § 97.15) (Ord. 00-29, passed 12-11-2000; Ord. 04-23, passed 6-28-2004)
§ 97.99 PENALTY.
(A) Violations. Any person who shall:
(1) Fail, neglect or refuse to make any return or declaration required by this chapter;
(2) Make an incomplete, false or fraudulent return;
(3) Fail, neglect or refuse to pay the tax, penalties or interest imposed by this chapter;
(4) Fail, neglect or refuse to withhold the tax from his or her employees, and remit the
withholding tax to the Tax Commissioner;
Income Tax 79
(5) Refuse to permit the Tax Commissioner or any duly authorized agent or employee to
examine his or her or his or her employer’s books, records, papers and federal income tax returns;
(6) Fail to appear before the Tax Commissioner, and to produce his or her employer’s books,
records, papers or federal income tax returns upon order or subpoena of the Tax Commissioner;
(7) Refuse to disclose to the Tax Commissioner any information with respect to the person’s
or the person’s employer’s income or net profits;
(8) Fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any order or subpoena of the Tax
Commissioner;
(9) Fail, neglect or refuse to make any payment on the estimated tax for any year as required
by § 97.06;
(10) Fail, as president or treasurer of a corporation, to cause the tax withheld from the wages
of the employees of the corporation pursuant to this chapter to be paid to the municipality in accordance
with the provisions of § 97.05; or
(11) Attempt to do anything whatever to avoid the payment of the whole or any part of the tax,
penalties or interest imposed by this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(B) Time limitations on prosecutions. All criminal prosecutions under this section must be
commenced within three years, and all civil actions within five years following the date on which the
final return for a taxable year was due, or five years from the time of any other offense complained of.
(C) Failure to obtain forms not a defense. The failure of any employer, taxpayer or person to
receive or procure a return, declaration or other required form shall not excuse him or her from making
any information return or declaration, from filing such form, or from paying the tax.
(D) Responsibility of corporation employees. The term PERSON, as used in this section, shall, in
addition to the meaning prescribed in § 97.02, include in the case of an association or corporation not
having any partner, member or officer within the municipality, any employee or agent of the association
or corporation who can be found within the corporate limits of the municipality.
(E) Fine. Whoever is found guilty of a violation of any part of this section may be punished by a
fine of not more than $500 and imprisonment of not more than 60 days.
(1985 Code, § 97.99) (Ord. 00-29, passed 12-11-2000; Ord. 04-23, passed 6-28-2004)
80 Madeira - General Regulations

TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter
110. AMUSEMENT DEVICES
111. CIRCUS, CARNIVAL OR SHOW
112. DANCE HALLS, NIGHTCLUBS AND RESTAURANTS
113. CHARITABLE AND COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION
114. ADVERTISING; SIGNS AND HANDBILLS
115. VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER
1
2 Madeira - Business Regulations
CHAPTER 110: AMUSEMENT DEVICES
Section
General Provisions
110.01 License required
110.02 Definitions
110.03 License fee
110.04 Applications; information
110.05 Good moral character required for license
110.06 Tokens or certificates of value prohibited
110.07 Distance from school grounds
110.08 Minors prohibited
110.09 License may be transferred
110.10 Relocation of machines to be approved
110.11 Open to inspection
110.12 Revocation of license
110.13 Seizure and destruction of machines
Pool and Billiard Tables
110.25 Definition
110.26 License fee for pool tables
110.27 Licenses not to be transferred without permission
110.28 Hours
110.99 Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 110.01 LICENSE REQUIRED.
No person shall engage in the business of operating or exhibiting pinball machines without first
obtaining a license to do so and conforming to the regulations provided for such business in accordance
with the provisions of this subchapter.
(1985 Code, § 110.01) (Ord. 1425, passed 2-4-1980) Penalty, see § 110.99
3
4 Madeira - Business Regulations
§ 110.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
EXHIBITOR. A person owning, managing or conducting a place of business in the city and
operating or exhibiting one or more pinball machines at such place of business.
PINBALL MACHINE. Includes any machine or device commonly or popularly known as a
PINBALL MACHINE and any machine or device which registers a score and in which or on which a
person can shoot or roll, either manually, electrically or mechanically, one or more pellets, balls or
marbles upon the insertion of a coin, disc or other insertion piece or upon the payment of a
consideration. It shall not include coin-operated vending machines, music machines, motion picture
machines or other machines or devices used bona fide solely for the vending of service, food,
merchandise or entertainment.
(1985 Code, § 110.02) (Ord. 1425, passed 2-4-1980)
§ 110.03 LICENSE FEE.
Every exhibitor shall pay an annual license fee of $100 plus an annual fee of $100 for each pinball
machine maintained or exhibited. An exhibitor operating at more than one location shall pay a license
fee for each location.
(1985 Code, § 110.03) (Ord. 1425, passed 2-4-1980)
§ 110.04 APPLICATIONS; INFORMATION.
(A) Applications for exhibitor’s licenses or for pinball machine licenses shall be made to the City
Manager on forms provided by him or her.
(B) Applications for exhibitor’s licenses shall state the number of pinball machines for which the
licenses are requested, the trade names, the design or operation of each such machine, the location of
the premises, the particular room on the premises in which such pinball machines are to be exhibited and
the name and address of the distributor. If the City Manager is satisfied that the applicant has complied
with all the provisions of this subchapter and is otherwise eligible to be a licensee, he or she shall issue
the license on payment of the license fee. The license stamps for pinball machines shall specify the
locations in which they are to be exhibited or maintained. If a location consists of more than one room,
the particular room shall be specified. Each license stamp shall be attached to the machine for which it
is issued so as to be in plain view of the persons playing the same.
(1985 Code, § 110.04) (Ord. 1425, passed 2-4-1980)
Amusement Devices 5
§ 110.05 GOOD MORAL CHARACTER REQUIRED FOR LICENSE.
No person shall be licensed as an exhibitor unless he or she is of good moral character, and unless
all the members of such corporation and the chief business manager of such corporation are of good
moral character. A person convicted within the preceding five years of a felony or of a misdemeanor
involving moral turpitude shall be considered as being not of good moral character.
(1985 Code, § 110.05) (Ord. 1466, passed 6-23-1980)
§ 110.06 TOKENS OR CERTIFICATES OF VALUE PROHIBITED.
No exhibitor or other person shall exhibit, operate or have in his or her possession a pinball machine
which is so constructed as to make possible, either directly or by the use of an adjustment, of any kind
to a player operating the same, whether or not such further playing or other privileges. Only machines
operated exclusively for the amusement provided by the operation thereof shall be licensed.
(1985 Code, § 110.06) (Ord. 1425, passed 2-4-1980) Penalty, see § 110.99
§ 110.07 DISTANCE FROM SCHOOL GROUNDS.
No person shall maintain or exhibit a pinball machine on any premises situated less than 500 feet
from the building and grounds of any elementary school or high school, the 500 feet to be measured
along the line of the nearest curb.
(1985 Code, § 110.07) (Ord. 1425, passed 2-4-1980) Penalty, see § 110.99
§ 110.08 MINORS PROHIBITED.
No exhibitor of one or more pinball machines shall permit the same to be played or used by a person
under 18 years of age.
(1985 Code, § 110.08) (Ord. 1425, passed 2-4-1980) Penalty, see § 110.99
§ 110.09 LICENSE MAY BE TRANSFERRED.
When the business of a exhibitor is sold or otherwise transferred, the license of such exhibitor may
be transferred to the transferee with the consent of the City Manager for the remainder of the license
period if the latter is satisfied that the successor would be eligible to receive a new license. The transfer
of an exhibitor’s license shall carry with it the transfer of the pinball machine licenses issued to him or
her, and this shall be noted on the books of the Manager and upon the license stamps issued for the
pinball machines.
(1985 Code, § 110.09) (Ord. 1425, passed 2-4-1980) Penalty, see § 110.99
6 Madeira - Business Regulations
§ 110.10 RELOCATION OF MACHINES TO BE APPROVED.
(A) No licensed pinball machines shall be removed from one premises to another or from one room
to another room on the same premises, unless the new location shall be approved by the City Manager
and duly noted on the license stamp and on his or her records.
(B) Nothing herein, however, shall be understood to prevent the replacement of one machine by
another and the transfer of the license to such substituted machine, if it complies with the requirements
of this subchapter.
(1985 Code, § 110.10) (Ord. 1425, passed 2-4-1980) Penalty, see § 110.99
§ 110.11 OPEN TO INSPECTION.
All pinball machines and all premises in which pinball machines are maintained or exhibited shall
be open to inspection by the police at all times.
(1985 Code, § 110.11) (Ord. 1425, passed 2-4-1980)
§ 110.12 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
(A) Should any exhibitor violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this subchapter, it
shall be the duty of the City Manager to revoke his or her license.
(B) In case of the revocation of any exhibitor’s license, the licenses of all machines operated by him
or her or on his or her premises shall be revoked and such machines removed from the premises within
24 hours thereafter.
(C) An exhibitor whose license has been revoked shall not be eligible to apply for or receive a new
license within the period of one year after the revocation.
(1985 Code, § 110.12) (Ord. 1425, passed 2-4-1980)
§ 110.13 SEIZURE AND DESTRUCTION OF MACHINES.
If any pinball machine is used as a gambling device or is held, exhibited or operated contrary to the
provisions of the laws of the state or of this subchapter, such machine may be seized by any police
officer and upon a judicial finding, either by the Mayor’s Court or the County Municipal Court, that the
pinball machine was used as a gambling device or was held, exhibited or operated contrary to the
provisions of the laws of the state or of this subchapter, then, the judicial officer may order that the
pinball machine be destroyed.
(1985 Code, § 110.13) (Ord. 1425, passed 2-4-1980)
Amusement Devices 7
POOL AND BILLIARD TABLES
§ 110.25 DEFINITION.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
PROPRIETOR. As used in §§ 110.25 through 110.28, shall be construed to mean any person or
group of persons that has in his, her or their possession or control a pool or billiard table for use by the
public for a consideration or for use in connection with a business enterprise.
(1985 Code, § 110.20)
§ 110.26 LICENSE FEE FOR POOL TABLES.
The proprietor shall pay an annual license fee of $150 for one pool or billiard table and $100 for
each additional table. The City Manager is authorized to issue the license, together with annual renewals
thereof. However, no license shall be issued to any person who is not a citizen of the United States. If
a license issued prior to July 1 of any year, the full annual fee of $150 and $100, respectively, for the
first and each additional table shall be paid. For licenses issued on or after July l, the fee for the
remainder of that year shall be $75 for the first, and $50 for each additional table.
(1985 Code, § 110.21) Penalty, see § 110.99
§ 110.27 LICENSES NOT TO BE TRANSFERRED WITHOUT PERMISSION.
(A) No license issued hereunder shall be assigned or transferred nor shall the license be issued in
connection with any business other than that for which the license was originally issued, unless, in either
instance, with the written permission of the Mayor endorsed thereon.
(B) In no case shall a cash refund of any part of the license fee be made.
(1985 Code, § 110.22) Penalty, see § 110.99
§ 110.28 HOURS.
No proprietor shall permit pool or billiard tables to be used on weekdays between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 8:00 a.m., and on Sundays between 2:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon, except in conformance with
establishment liquor license requirements.
(1985 Code, § 110.23) (Ord. 1353, passed 7-10-1978) Penalty, see § 110.99
8 Madeira - Business Regulations
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
(A) Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other penalty is provided, shall
be subject to the penalty provisions of § 10.99.
(B) Whoever violates any of the provisions of §§ 110.01 through 110.13 is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100. Each and every day in which the person continues
the violation or failure shall be deemed a separate offense.
(C) Whoever violates any provision of §§ 110.25 through 110.28 shall be fined not more than $500;
and, within the discretion of the Mayor, shall forfeit his or her right to a license under §§ 110.25 through
110.28.
(1985 Code, § 110.99)
CHAPTER 111: CIRCUS, CARNIVAL OR SHOW
Section
111.01 Permit required for circus, carnival or show
111.02 Application for permit
111.03 Term of permit limited
111.99 Penalty
§ 111.01 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR CIRCUS, CARNIVAL OR SHOW.
No person, firm or corporation shall conduct, stage or give a circus, menagerie, carnival or
medicine show within the territorial limits of the city without obtaining a permit therefor from the City
Manager.
(1985 Code, § 111.01) Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.02 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
(A) No permit shall be issued except upon written application therefor, filed with the City Manager
at least seven days prior to the first day upon which any circus, menagerie, carnival or medicine show
is sought to be conducted, staged or given, and stating the type of show proposed, the date or dates of
proposed performances thereof and the location on which the shows are proposed to be presented.
(B) The City Manager shall give his or her written consent to the issuance of a permit upon any
application if:
(1) It is timely filed and states all required information;
(2) The City Manager deems that the location proposed is suitable for the purposes;
(3) The location will properly accommodate the proposed circus, menagerie, carnival or
medicine show; and
9
10 Madeira - Business Regulations
(4) The use of the location for such purpose will neither be injurious to the public health and
safety nor impose an undue additional burden upon the police and firefighting forces of or at the
command of the city.
(1985 Code, § 111.02) Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.03 TERM OF PERMIT LIMITED.
No single circus, menagerie, carnival or medicine show shall be given, and no permit therefor shall
authorize the same to be given, for more than six consecutive days, except where Council shall by
special resolution allow a longer period.
(1985 Code, § 111.03) Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not
more than $500.
(1985 Code, § 111.99)
CHAPTER 112: DANCE HALLS, NIGHTCLUBS AND RESTAURANTS; NOISE
Section
Dance Halls, Nightclubs and Restaurants
112.01 Definitions
112.02 License fee to hold public dance
112.03 Revocation of license
112.04 Private clubs, fraternal orders or societies
Loud Noise
112.15 Disturbing the peace by noise and music
112.16 Loud noise or music prohibited after 11:00 p.m.
112.99 Penalty
DANCE HALLS, NIGHTCLUBS AND RESTAURANTS
§ 112.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
FACILITIES FOR DANCING. The providing of music either by the use of radio, phonograph or
any other mechanical or electrical device for the production of music; or the providing of music by any
individual or group of individuals or otherwise, together with floor space for dancing.
PUBLIC DANCE. Any dance to which admission may be had by the payment of a fee or cover
charge; or by the purchase of food or beverages or the equivalent; or the purchase, possession or
presentation of a ticket or token; or any other dance to which the public generally may gain admission
with or without the payment of a fee.
(1985 Code, § 112.01)
11
12 Madeira - Business Regulations
§ 112.02 LICENSE FEE TO HOLD PUBLIC DANCE.
No person shall hold any public dance, provide facilities for dancing or permit patrons to dance, in
connection with any public restaurant, any nightclub or other place of public entertainment within the
limits of the city, until the premises in which the public dance or the facilities for dancing are provided
have been duly licensed for such purpose. The license shall be issued by the City Manager, and the
license so issued shall provide that no dance shall be given nor shall any dancing be permitted on the
premises so licensed between the hours of 2:30 a.m. on Sunday and 12:01 a.m. on Monday. The fee
shall be paid at the time of issuance of the license, and shall be $10 per year. The City Manager may
issue a license for a single day or night under the provisions of this subchapter; the fee for the license
shall be $2.
(1985 Code, § 112.02) Penalty, see § 112.99
§ 112.03 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
The license provided for herein may be forfeited or revoked by the City Manager for disorderly or
immoral conduct on the premises; permitting or creating unnecessary noise on or in the neighborhood
of the premises; or for violation of any of the rules, regulations, ordinances and laws governing or
applying to the premises.
(1985 Code, § 112.03) Penalty, see § 112.99
§ 112.04 PRIVATE CLUBS, FRATERNAL ORDERS OR SOCIETIES.
The provisions of §§ 112.01 through 112.04 shall not apply to bona fide clubs, fraternal orders or
societies conducting dances where admission is restricted to members of the clubs, orders or societies
and the families of members, whether held on their own premises or in a hall leased or donated for the
purpose. Nor shall such sections apply to dances the entire proceeds from which are used for local
school, church, civic or charitable purposes.
(1985 Code, § 112.04)
LOUD NOISE
§ 112.15 DISTURBING THE PEACE BY NOISE AND MUSIC.
(A) No person operating a restaurant, hotel, summer garden or other place of refreshment or
entertainment shall permit or engage in the playing or rendition of music of any kind, singing, loud
talking or other noises on or about the premises in such manner as to disturb the peace and quiet of two
or more separate residences before 7:00 a.m. and after 11:00 p.m.
Dance Halls, Nightclubs and Restaurants; Noise 13
(B) In every charge of violation of this section, the affidavit shall state the hour at which the offense
is alleged to have occurred.
(1985 Code, § 112.10) (Ord. 1550, passed 9-21-1981) Penalty, see § 112.99
Cross-reference:
Loud noises, see § 132.17
§ 112.16 LOUD NOISE OR MUSIC PROHIBITED AFTER 11:00 P.M.
(A) It shall be prima facie unlawful for any person, association, firm or corporation operating a
restaurant, hotel, summer garden or other place of refreshment or entertainment to permit, or for any
person in or about such restaurant, hotel, summer garden or other place of refreshment or entertainment
to engage in, the playing or rendition of music of any kind, singing, loud talking or other noises on or
about the premises before 7:00 a.m. and after 11:00 p.m.
(B) In every charge of violation of this section, the affidavit shall state the hour at which the offense
is alleged to have occurred.
(1985 Code, § 112.11) Penalty, see § 112.99
Cross-reference:
Loud noises, see § 132.17
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
(A) Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other penalty is provided, shall
be subject to the penalty provisions of § 10.99.
(B) Any person, society, club or corporation who violates the provisions of §§ 112.01 through
112.04 or of any ordinance with reference to public dances or the premises on which facilities are
provided for public dancing, shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than $50 for the first offense, and
not more than $500 for a second offense.
(C) Any person, association, firm or corporation violating §§ 112.15 or 112.16 shall be fined not
more than $50 for the first offense, and not more than $500 for a second offense.
(1985 Code, § 112.99)
14 Madeira - Business Regulations
CHAPTER 113: CHARITABLE AND COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION
Section
113.01 Definitions
113.02 Purpose
113.03 Commercial solicitation prohibited unless registered
113.04 Registration for commercial door-to-door solicitation; no commercial soliciting address
list
113.05 Time limitation for all soliciting
113.99 Penalty
§ 113.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
DOOR-TO-DOOR SOLICITATION. The act of a person attempting to contact or contacting
persons who are on a property used for residential use for the purpose of selling any goods or services
or soliciting money, donations, property, membership of any organization, financial assistance of any
kind, publications, advertisements, tickets or subscriptions of any kind, including the selling of any
publications or advertisement of the same. It shall also include such acts as are a direct or implied plea
that the solicitation or sale is for charitable, educational, fraternal, civic, patriotic, religious, political
or philanthropic purpose. For purposes of this chapter, DOOR-TO-DOOR SOLICITATION shall be
categorized as follows.
(1) CHARITABLE/RELIGIOUS/POLITICAL SOLICITATION. Door-to-door solicitations
by any person, the primary purpose of which is to solicit funds or sell goods for the benefit of charitable
or non-profit organizations or for the purpose of providing information to the occupants of the dwelling
about candidates for public office, political issues or religious or church related matters.
(2) COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION. The act of door-to-door solicitation for the purpose
of soliciting orders for or making sales of goods, wares, merchandise or services, or with the intent to
influence the occupants of such dwellings to purchase any article or service, without prior appointment
or permission of the occupant or occupants of such dwellings and which is not charitable/
religious/political solicitation.
15
16 Madeira - Business Regulations
(3) NO COMMERCIAL SOLICITING ADDRESS LIST. A list to which residents may elect
to be added. When an address is on this list, it may not be subject to commercial solicitation by anyone
who does not have permission from the resident. Registration for commercial solicitation with the city
under this regulation shall not constitute permission by the resident.
(4) NO COMMERCIAL SOLICITING INSIGNIA. A symbol displayed at any residence that
provides reasonable notice to a person that the resident intends to prohibit solicitation, precluding
door-to-door solicitation, including but not limited to small yard signs or decals.
(1985 Code, § 113.01) (Ord. 93-66, passed 2-7-1994; Ord. 11-20, passed 3-26-2012)
§ 113.02 PURPOSE.
(A) It is recognized that the home has been described as “the one retreat to which men and women
can repair to escape from the tribulations of their daily pursuits.” One activity which is often accused
of eroding the sanctity of the home is door-to-door solicitation. Door-to-door solicitation may be an
undesirable intrusion on the privacy of the home, not merely because the solicitation interrupts a
resident’s private routine, but also because it may involve contact with speakers whose views offend the
resident. As a result, many citizens desire to protect their fundamental right to privacy by limiting or
denying limits to door-to-door solicitation.
(B) It is recognized herein that door-to-door solicitation is an exercise of the traditional, fundamental
right to the freedom of speech protected by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution.
However, it is further recognized that the resident of a dwelling has the right to deny access to persons
who wish to intrude upon one’s privacy within his, her or their dwelling without invitation.
(C) It is necessary to find a balance between, on one hand, the right of privacy and, on the other
hand, the freedom of speech, including commercial speech, to give individuals a collective voice to
express his, her or their preferences for privacy and to allow commercial door-to-door solicitors to
reasonably practice his, her or their First Amendment rights.
(1985 Code, § 113.02) (Ord. 11-20, passed 3-26-2012)
§ 113.03 COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION PROHIBITED UNLESS REGISTERED.
(A) No person shall perform commercial door-to-door solicitation within the city without first
registering with the city.
(B) Whoever violates this provision shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(C) Each offending commercial solicitation at a separate dwelling shall be considered a separate
offense.
(1985 Code, § 113.03) (Ord. 11-20, passed 3-26-2012) Penalty, see § 113.99
Charitable and Commercial Solicitation 17
§ 113.04 REGISTRATION FOR COMMERCIAL DOOR-TO-DOOR SOLICITATION; NO
COMMERCIAL SOLICITING ADDRESS LIST.
(A) Each individual, or an organization on behalf of one or more designated individuals, wishing
to engage in commercial door-to-door solicitation within the city shall first register with the city. The
process of registering shall include obtaining a registration form from the city, completing the form and
returning the form with the required fee. The fee shall be established by the City Manager, but in no
event shall be more than $25 per individual.
(B) Once registration is complete, the individual will receive the no commercial soliciting address
list. The presence of a resident’s address on the no commercial soliciting address list or the display of
any notice by a resident that reasonably conveys a “no solicitation” message are sufficient in itself to
express the privacy wishes of the resident.
(C) Commercial soliciting at a residence that is either on the no commercial soliciting address list
or that displays a notice of “no solicitation” (or similar notice, including but not limited to “no trespass,”
“ no peddlers,” “keep out” or similar notices) in a reasonably visible manner, without invitation from
the resident, is hereby prohibited and punishable as a misdemeanor.
(D) Nothing in this regulation shall be construed:
(1) To change the meaning or efficacy of the traditional exercises of the right to privacy such
as “no trespassing” signs and the like; or
(2) To preempt, replace or in any other way affect the crime of trespass as defined under the
laws of the city or the state.
(1985 Code, § 113.04) (Ord. 11-20, passed 3-26-2012) Penalty, see § 113.99
§ 113.05 TIME LIMITATION FOR ALL SOLICITING.
All forms of solicitation, including both commercial and noncommercial solicitation, shall only be
permitted in residential areas after 9:00 a.m. and before 8:00 p.m.
(1985 Code, § 113.05) (Ord. 11-20, passed 3-26-2012) Penalty, see § 113.99
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
(A) Any person found guilty of violating the regulations of this chapter, including but not limited
to failure to register as a commercial solicitor, soliciting someone on the no commercial soliciting
address list or someone who displays the “no solicitation” or similar notice, soliciting outside the hours
specified in this chapter shall be fined not more than $100 for each offense. It shall be considered a
separate violation for each dwelling called upon in violation of this chapter.
18 Madeira - Business Regulations
(B) Whoever is found guilty of violating any of the regulations of this chapter shall be fined not
more than $250 and imprisoned not more than 30 days for the second or subsequent offense.
(1985 Code, § 113.99) (Ord. 11-20, passed 3-26-2012)
CHAPTER 114: ADVERTISING; SIGNS AND HANDBILLS
Section
114.01 Posting signs or handbills; banners across right-of-way
114.02 Display of messages over public rights-of-way
114.03 Display of messages for city-sponsored events
114.99 Penalty
Cross-reference:
Sign regulations, see Ch. 159
§ 114.01 POSTING SIGNS OR HANDBILLS; BANNERS ACROSS RIGHT-OF-WAY.
(A) No person shall hand out, tack upon or otherwise attach any handbill, notice, leaflet, card,
circular or other printed or written material or sign to any utility pole or other structure within any public
right-of-way within the city limits, or to any public property, without the permission of the City
Manager.
(B) No person shall attach or embed any wire, cable, hook, nail or other fastener to or in any pole,
structure or public property within the city limits for the purpose of suspending, supporting, carrying
the weight of, facilitating the display of or for any other purpose, any banners, posters or other signs
above or within the limits of any right-of-way or public property without the permission of the City
Manager.
(1985 Code, § 114.01) Penalty, see § 114.99
§ 114.02 DISPLAY OF MESSAGES OVER PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
The Council hereby finds and determines that the air space over public rights-of-way shall not be
used to display any messages other than those messages and signals incidental and necessary for the
control of pedestrian and vehicular traffic on or in the vicinity of public rights-of-way. This prohibition
shall not apply to persons holding signs displaying noncommercial messages on a public sidewalk,
provided sidewalks are not blocked or used in a manner that unreasonably restricts the passage of other
pedestrians.
(1985 Code, § 114.02) (Ord. 06-10, passed 3-13-2006) Penalty, see § 114.99
19
20 Madeira - Business Regulations
§ 114.03 DISPLAY OF MESSAGES FOR CITY-SPONSORED EVENTS.
(A) The purpose of this regulation serves three public needs. First, in order to fulfill its
responsibility of protecting the public health, safety and welfare, the city enacts this provision which
serves to alert the public to events that may impact the normal flow of pedestrians and vehicular traffic.
This is necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare, in that the city has a responsibility to
keep its streets safe. Furthermore, this regulation serves to make citizens and others aware of city
sponsored events in order for the public to plan to participate in events that increase civic pride and
enthusiasm. In addition, it is hereby determined that publicity of city sponsored events is consistent with
and supports the economic development goals of the community through the development of pride in the
community and promotion of economic vitality of the city.
(B) (1) As used in this section, a CITY SPONSORED EVENT is either one of the following:
(a) An event for which the city plans, administers, coordinates and finances, and includes
all of the following criteria:
1. The event is open to the public, non-partisan, noncommercial, viewpoint neutral;
2. The event serves to educate and entertain its citizens and to promote safety or to
celebrate the city’s culture, heritage, natural features, attractions, facilities, resources or community; and
3. The event will also significantly impact the normal flow of pedestrian and/or
vehicular traffic.
(b) An event for which the city partially contributes financial support and for which the
legislature makes the determination that all of the following criteria apply:
1. The event is open to the public, non-partisan, noncommercial, viewpoint neutral;
2. The event educates and entertains its citizens and promotes safety or celebrates the
city’s culture, heritage, natural features, attractions, facilities, resources or community; and
3. The event significantly impacts the normal flow of pedestrian and/or vehicular
traffic.
(2) The legislature’s decision to sponsor one event neither guarantees nor hinders the
legislature’s decision to sponsor a similar future event.
(C) (1) The City Manager or designee is hereby authorized to display one banner across Euclid
Avenue, approximately 100 feet west of Miami Avenue, to alert the public to the occurrence of any of
the city-sponsored events listed below:
(a) Memorial Day march;
Advertising; Signs and Handbills 21
(b) Independence Day parade and fireworks;
(c) Street dance; and
(d) Any public safety announcements (i.e., “Click it or Ticket”).
(2) These events may be publicized by display of an appropriate banner by the city
administration without further action of Council. In addition, events which meet all the criteria set forth
in division (B)(1)(b) above may be publicized by display of an appropriate banner.
(D) The City Manager or designee shall determine the appropriate size of the banner, but in no
event shall such banner be more than three feet by 25 feet.
(E) Every banner displayed pursuant to these regulations shall include, in all capital, block letters,
no less than six inches in height, the phrase, “PLEASE DRIVE SAFELY.”
(F) The City Manager or designee is authorized to display said banner up to 30 days prior to the
commencement of the event in order to sufficiently alert the public of such impending intrusions to the
public right-of-way, as well as anticipated diversions of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. Said banner
shall be promptly removed at the conclusion of the event.
(1985 Code, § 114.03) (Ord. 06-18, passed 6-26-2006; Ord. 06-25, passed 9-11-2006)
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not more than $50.
(1985 Code, § 114.99)
22 Madeira - Business Regulations
CHAPTER 115: VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER
Section
115.01 Payment of video service provider fee required
§ 115.01 PAYMENT OF VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE REQUIRED.
(A) Following notice of a video service provider’s (hereinafter “VSP”) intent to offer service in the
city pursuant to R.C. § 1332.27 and as compensation for the benefits and privileges granted under the
state video service and in consideration of permission to use the city’s streets and rights-of-way, the VSP
shall pay to the city a video service provider fee in the amount of 5% of the VSP’s gross revenues, which
gross revenue base shall include advertising revenue, as defined by R.C. § 1332.32. Notice of this video
service provider fee shall be served upon the VSP by the City Manager, or duly appointed designee,
within ten days of the city receiving notice of the VSP’s intent to offer service in the city.
(B) The city, at its sole expense, may conduct an annual audit for the purpose of verifying the
accuracy of a VSP’s calculation of the video service provider fees paid to the city in the audit period.
For the purpose of the audit, the VSP shall make available for inspection, at the location where such
records are kept in the normal course of business, those records pertaining to gross revenues, including
advertising revenues.
(C) A VSP shall pay any amounts found to have been underpaid in the audit within 30 days after
notice and shall include interest on the underpayments as provided in R.C. § 1343.03, unless the VSP
brings an action pursuant to R.C. § 1332.33(D).
(D) Except as otherwise provided by law, no acceptance of any payment by the city shall be
construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the city may have for further or
additional sums payable as a video service provider fee or from the performance of any other obligation
of the VSP.
(E) Video service provider payments shall be made no sooner than 45 nor later than 60 days after
the end of each calendar quarter.
(F) The city represents that it is its intention to be able to charge up to the maximum amount of
video service provider fees allowed by law which is presently set at 5% pursuant to R.C.
§ 1332.32(C)(1)(b).
(G) A VSP shall meet all the customer service standards contained in R.C. § 1332.26.
23
24 Madeira - Business Regulations
(H) A VSP currently providing PEG (activities or actions performed for the benefit of public,
educational and government video programming) channel pursuant to a franchise competitive video
service agreement, ordinance or resolution shall continue to provide the PEG channel(s) and support
pursuant to R.C. § 1332.30.
(1985 Code, § 115.01) (Ord. 08-06, passed 1-14-2008)

TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
Chapter
130. GENERAL PROVISIONS
131. OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
132. OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
133. OFFENSES AGAINST MORALS
134. GAMBLING
135. OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
136. OFFENSES AGAINST JUSTICE AND
ADMINISTRATION
137. WEAPONS CONTROL
138. DRUG OFFENSES
139. MISCELLANEOUS
1
2 Madeira - General Offenses
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
130.01 Application of Title XIII
130.02 Definitions
130.03 Classification of offenses
130.04 Common law offenses abrogated
130.05 Rules of construction
130.06 Limitation of criminal prosecutions
130.07 Requirements for criminal liability; voluntary intoxication
130.08 Culpable mental states
130.09 Organizational criminal liability
130.10 Personal accountability for organizational conduct
130.11 Attempt
130.12 Complicity
130.13 Disposition of property held by law enforcement agency
130.14 Presumption of innocence; proof of offense; affirmative defense
130.15 Battered woman syndrome
130.16 Delinquency adjudications deemed convictions
130.17 Criminal law jurisdiction
130.18 Imposing sentence for misdemeanor
130.19 Multiple sentences
130.20 Apprehension, detention or arrest of persons on bond
130.21 Self defense: limitations on duty to retreat prior to using force
130.99 Penalty for Title XIII
Statutory reference:
Mayor’s court generally, see R.C. Chapter 1905
Municipal court generally, see R.C. Chapter 1901
Trials, Magistrate courts, see R.C. Chapter 2938
§ 130.01 APPLICATION OF TITLE XIII.
(A) Title XIII of this code of ordinances embodies and prescribes penalties for offenses against the
municipality not classifiable in previous titles and chapters. The word “misdemeanors,” as used in this
title, is not exhaustive and does not imply that offenses found elsewhere in this code of ordinances are
not also misdemeanors and punishable as such.
3
4 Madeira - General Offenses
(B) Each act or omission for which a fine, imprisonment or both is provided under this Title or
elsewhere in this code, or each act or omission which is declared a violation of this code, is unlawful and
is hereby made a misdemeanor. Upon conviction, the penalty or penalties so provided shall be imposed
by the court.
(1985 Code, § 130.01) (Ord. 1306, passed 6-13-1977)
§ 130.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
CONTRABAND. Any property that is illegal for a person to acquire or possess under a statute,
ordinance or rule, or that a trier of fact lawfully determines to be illegal to possess by reason of the
property’s involvement in an offense. The term includes but is not limited to all of the following:
(1) Any controlled substance, as defined in R.C. § 3719.01, or any device or paraphernalia
related thereto;
(2) Any unlawful gambling device or paraphernalia; and
(3) Any dangerous ordnance or obscene material.
DANGEROUS OFFENDER. A person who has committed an offense, whose history, character
and condition reveal a substantial risk that he or she will be a danger to others, and whose conduct has
been characterized by a pattern of repetitive, compulsive or aggressive behavior with heedless
indifference to the consequences.
DEADLY FORCE. Any force that carries a substantial risk that it will proximately result in the
death of any person.
FORCE. Any violence, compulsion or constraint physically exerted by any means upon or against
a person or thing.
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any of the following:
(1) A Sheriff, Deputy Sheriff, constable, police officer of a township or joint police district,
Marshal, Deputy Marshal, municipal police officer, member of a police force employed by a
metropolitan housing authority under R.C. § 3735.31(D) or state highway patrol trooper;
(2) An officer, agent or employee of the state or any of its agencies, instrumentalities or
political subdivisions, upon whom, by statute, a duty to conserve the peace or to enforce all or certain
laws is imposed and the authority to arrest violators is conferred, within the limits of such statutory duty
and authority;
General Provisions 5
(3) The Mayor, in a capacity as chief conservator of the peace within the municipality;
(4) A member of an auxiliary police force organized by the county, township or municipal law
enforcement authorities, within the scope of the member’s appointment or commission;
(5) A person lawfully called pursuant to R.C. § 311.07 to aid a Sheriff in keeping the peace,
for the purposes and during the time when the person is called;
(6) A person appointed by a Mayor pursuant to R.C. § 737.01 as a special patrolling officer
during a riot or emergency, for the purposes and during the time when the person is appointed;
(7) A member of the organized militia of this state or the armed forces of the United States,
lawfully called to duty to aid civil authorities in keeping the peace or protect against domestic violence;
(8) A prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, secret service officer or municipal
prosecutor;
(9) A veterans’ home police officer appointed under R.C. § 5907.02;
(10) A member of a police force employed by a regional transit authority under R.C.
§ 306.35(Y);
(11) A special police officer employed by a port authority under R.C. § 4582.04 or 4582.28;
(12) The House of Representatives Sergeant at Arms if the House of Representatives Sergeant
at Arms has arrest authority pursuant to R.C. § 101.311(E)(1) and an Assistant House of Representatives
Sergeant at Arms;
(13) The Senate Sergeant at Arms and an Assistant Senate Sergeant at Arms; and
(14) A special police officer employed by a municipal corporation at a municipal airport, or
other municipal air navigation facility, that has scheduled operations, as defined in 14 C.F.R. § 119.3,
as amended, and that is required to be under a security program and is governed by aviation security
rules of the Transportation Security Administration of the United States Department of Transportation
as provided in 49 C.F.R. Parts 1542 and 1544, as amended.
NOT GUILTY BY REASON OF INSANITY. A person is NOT GUILTY BY REASON OF
INSANITY relative to a charge of an offense only if the person proves, in the manner specified in R.C.
§ 2901.05, that at the time of the commission of the offense, he or she did not know, as a result of a
severe mental disease or defect, the wrongfulness of his or her acts.
OFFENSE OF VIOLENCE.
(1) A violation of R.C. § 2903.01, 2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04, 2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13,
2903.15, 2903.21, 2903.211, 2903.22, 2905.01, 2905.02, 2905.11, 2905.32, 2907.02, 2907.03,
6 Madeira - General Offenses
2907.05, 2909.02, 2909.03, 2909.24, 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2917.01, 2917.02, 2917.03,
2917.31, 2919.25, 2921.03, 2921.04, 2921.34 or 2923.161, division (A)(1), (A)(2) or (A)(3) of R.C.
§ 2911.12, or of division (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3) or (B)(4) of R.C. § 2919.22, or felonious sexual
penetration in violation of former R.C. § 2907.12;
(2) A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state
or of the United States, substantially equivalent to any section, division or offense listed in division (1)
of this definition;
(3) An offense, other than a traffic offense, under an existing or former municipal ordinance
or law of this or any other state or of the United States, committed purposely or knowingly, and
involving physical harm to persons or a risk of serious physical harm to persons; or
(4) A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing, any offense under division
(1), (2) or (3) of this definition.
PERSON.
(1) (a) Subject to division (2) of this definition, as used in any section contained in Title XIII
of this code that sets forth a criminal offense, the term includes all of the following:
1. An individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust, partnership and
association; and
2. An unborn human who is viable.
(b) As used in any section contained in Title XIII of this code that does not set forth a
criminal offense, the term includes an individual, corporation, business trust, estate, partnership and
association.
(c) As used in division (1)(a)2. of this definition, UNBORN HUMAN means an individual
organism of the species Homo sapiens from fertilization until live birth. VIABLE means the stage of
development of a human fetus at which there is a realistic probability of maintaining and nourishing of
a life outside the womb with or without temporary artificial life-sustaining support.
(2) Notwithstanding division (1)(a) of this definition, in no case shall the portion of the
definition of the term PERSON that is set forth in division (1)(a)2. of this definition be applied or
construed in any section contained in Title XIII of this code that sets forth a criminal offense in any of
the following manners:
(a) Except as otherwise provided in division (2)(a) of this definition, in a manner so that
the offense prohibits or is construed as prohibiting any pregnant woman or her physician from
performing an abortion with the consent of the pregnant woman, with the consent of the pregnant woman
implied by law in a medical emergency, or with the approval of one otherwise authorized by law to
consent to medical treatment on behalf of the pregnant woman. An abortion that violates the conditions
General Provisions 7
described in the immediately preceding sentence may be punished as a violation of R.C. § 2903.01,
2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04, 2903.05, 2903.06, 2903.08, 2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.14, 2903.21
or 2903.22, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, as applicable. An abortion that does
not violate the conditions described in the second immediately preceding sentence but that does violate
R.C. § 2919.12, 2919.13(B), 2919.151, 2919.17 or 2919.18, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, may be punished as a violation of such section, as applicable. Consent is sufficient under this
division (2)(a) if it is of the type otherwise adequate to permit medical treatment to the pregnant woman,
even if it does not comply with R.C. § 2919.12.
(b) In a manner so that the offense is applied or is construed as applying to a woman based
on an act or omission of the woman that occurs while she is or was pregnant and that results in any of
the following:
1. Her delivery of a stillborn baby;
2. Her causing, in any other manner, the death in utero of a viable, unborn human
that she is carrying;
3. Her causing the death of her child who is born alive but who dies from one or
more injuries that are sustained while the child is a viable, unborn human;
4. Her causing her child who is born alive to sustain one or more injuries while the
child is a viable, unborn human; and
5. Her causing, threatening to cause, or attempting to cause, in any other manner,
an injury, illness or other psychological illness or condition, regardless of its duration or gravity, to a
viable, unborn human that she is carrying.
PHYSICAL HARM TO PERSONS. Any injury, illness or other physiological impairment,
regardless of its gravity or duration.
PHYSICAL HARM TO PROPERTY. Any tangible or intangible damage to property that, in any
degree, results in loss to its value or interferes with its use or enjoyment. The term does not include wear
and tear occasioned by normal use.
PRIVILEGE. An immunity, license or right conferred by law, or bestowed by express or implied
grant, or arising out of status, position, office or relationship, or growing out of necessity.
PROPERTY.
(1) Any property, real or personal, tangible or intangible, and any interest or license in that
property. The term includes but is not limited to cable television service, other telecommunications
service, telecommunications devices, information service, computers, data, computer software, financial
instruments associated with computers, other documents associated with computers, or copies of the
documents, whether in machine or human-readable form, trade secrets, trademarks, copyrights, patents
8 Madeira - General Offenses
and property protected by a trademark, copyright or patent. FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
ASSOCIATED WITH COMPUTERS include but are not limited to checks, drafts, warrants, money
orders, notes of indebtedness, certificates of deposit, letters of credit, bills of credit or debit cards,
financial transaction authorization mechanisms, marketable securities or any computer system
representations of any of them.
(2) As used in this definition, “trade secret” has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1333.61, and
“telecommunications service” and “information service” have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.
(3) As used in this definition and in the definition of “contraband” in this section, “cable
television service,” “computer,” “computer network,” “computer software,” “computer system,” “data”
and “telecommunications device” have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.
REPEAT OFFENDER. A person who has a history of persistent criminal activity and whose
character and condition reveal a substantial risk that he or she will commit another offense. It is prima
facie evidence that a person is a repeat offender if any of the following applies:
(1) Having been convicted of one or more offenses of violence, as defined in R.C. § 2901.01,
and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for one or more of those offenses, he or she commits
a subsequent offense of violence;
(2) Having been convicted of one or more sexually oriented offenses, as defined in R.C.
§ 2950.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for one or more of those offenses, he or
she commits a subsequent sexually oriented offense;
(3) Having been convicted of one or more theft offenses, as defined in R.C. § 2913.01, and
having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for one or more of those offenses, he or she commits a
subsequent theft offense;
(4) Having been convicted of one or more felony drug abuse offenses, as defined in R.C.
§ 2925.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for one or more of those offenses, he or
she commits a subsequent felony drug abuse offense;
(5) Having been convicted of two or more felonies, and having been imprisoned pursuant to
sentence for any such offense, he or she commits a subsequent offense; or
(6) Having been convicted of three or more offenses of any type or degree other than traffic
offenses, alcoholic intoxication offenses or minor misdemeanors, and having been imprisoned pursuant
to sentence for any such offense, he or she commits a subsequent offense.
RISK. A significant possibility, as contrasted with a remote possibility, that a certain result may
occur or that certain circumstances may exist.
SCHOOL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.
General Provisions 9
SCHOOL ACTIVITY. Any activity held under the auspices of a board of education of a city, local,
exempted village, joint vocational or cooperative education school district; a governing authority of a
community school established under R.C. Chapter 3314; a governing board of an educational service
center; or the governing body of a nonpublic school for which the State Board of Education prescribes
minimum standards under R.C. § 3301.07.
SCHOOL BUILDING. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.
SCHOOL BUS. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
SCHOOL PREMISES. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.
SCHOOL SAFETY ZONE. Consists of a school, school building, school premises, school activity
and school bus.
SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM TO PERSONS. Any of the following:
(1) Any mental illness or condition of such gravity as would normally require hospitalization
or prolonged psychiatric treatment;
(2) Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death;
(3) Any physical harm that involves some permanent incapacity, whether partial or total, or
that involves some temporary, substantial incapacity;
(4) Any physical harm that involves some permanent disfigurement, or that involves some
temporary, serious disfigurement; or
(5) Any physical harm that involves acute pain of such duration as to result in substantial
suffering, or that involves any degree of prolonged or intractable pain.
SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM TO PROPERTY. Any physical harm to property that does either
of the following:
(1) Results in substantial loss to the value of the property, or requires a substantial amount of
time, effort or money to repair or replace; or
(2) Temporarily prevents the use or enjoyment of the property, or substantially interferes with
its use or enjoyment for an extended period of time.
SUBSTANTIAL RISK. A strong possibility, as contrasted with a remote or significant possibility,
that a certain result may occur or that certain circumstances may exist.
(R.C. §§ 2901.01, 2935.36(E)) (1985 Code, § 130.02)
10 Madeira - General Offenses
§ 130.03 CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENSES.
As used in this Title:
(A) Offenses include misdemeanors of the first, second, third and fourth degree, minor
misdemeanors and offenses not specifically classified;
(B) Regardless of the penalty that may be imposed, any offense specifically classified as a
misdemeanor is a misdemeanor;
(C) Any offense not specifically classified is a misdemeanor if imprisonment for not more than one
year may be imposed as a penalty; and
(D) Any offense not specifically classified is a minor misdemeanor if the only penalty that may be
imposed is one of the following:
(1) For an offense committed prior to January 1, 2004, a fine not exceeding $100; and
(2) For an offense committed on or after January 1, 2004, a fine not exceeding $150,
community service under R.C. § 2929.27(D) or a financial sanction other than a fine under R.C.
§ 2929.28.
(R.C. § 2901.02) (1985 Code, § 130.03)
§ 130.04 COMMON LAW OFFENSES ABROGATED.
(A) No conduct constitutes a criminal offense against the municipality unless it is defined as an
offense in this code.
(B) An offense is defined when one or more sections of this code state a positive prohibition or
enjoin a specific duty, and provide a penalty for violation of such prohibition or failure to meet such
duty.
(C) This section does not affect the power of a court to punish for contempt or to employ any
sanction authorized by law to enforce an order, civil judgment or decree.
(R.C. § 2901.03) (1985 Code, § 130.04)
§ 130.05 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
(A) Except as otherwise provided in division (C) or (D) of this section, sections of this code defining
offenses or penalties shall be strictly construed against the municipality and liberally construed in favor
of the accused.
General Provisions 11
(B) Rules of criminal procedure and sections of this code providing for criminal procedure shall be
construed so as to effect the fair, impartial, speedy and sure administration of justice.
(C) Any provision of a section of this code that refers to a previous conviction of or plea of guilty
to a violation of a section of this code, the Ohio Revised Code or a division of a section of this code or
the Ohio Revised Code shall be construed to also refer to a previous conviction of or plea of guilty to
a substantially equivalent offense under an existing or former law of this municipality, state, another
state, or the United States or under an existing or former municipal ordinance.
(D) Any provision of this code that refers to a section, or to a division of a section, of this code that
defines or specifies a criminal offense shall be construed to also refer to an existing or former law of this
state, another state or the United States, to an existing or former municipal ordinance, or to an existing
or former division of any such existing or former law or ordinance that defines or specifies, or that
defined or specified, a substantially equivalent offense.
(R.C. § 2901.04) (1985 Code, § 130.05)
§ 130.06 LIMITATION OF CRIMINAL PROSECUTIONS.
(A) (1) Except as provided in division (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this section or as otherwise provided in
this section, a prosecution shall be barred unless it is commenced within the following periods after an
offense is committed:
(a) For a felony, six years;
(b) For a misdemeanor other than a minor misdemeanor, two years; and
(c) For a minor misdemeanor, six months.
(2) There is no period of limitation for the prosecution of a violation of R.C. § 2903.01 or
R.C. § 2903.02.
(3) Except as otherwise provided in divisions (B) through (H) of this section, a prosecution of
any of the following offenses shall be barred unless it is commenced within 20 years after the offense
is committed:
(a) A violation of R.C. § 2903.03, 2903.04, 2905.01, 2905.32, 2907.02, 2907.03,
2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.21, 2909.02, 2909.22, 2909.23, 2909.24, 2909.26, 2909.27, 2909.28,
2909.29, 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2911.12 or 2917.02, a violation of R.C. § 2903.11 or 2903.12
if the victim is a peace officer, a violation of R.C. § 2903.13 that is a felony, or a violation of former
R.C. § 2907.12; and
(b) A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in committing a violation
set forth in division (A)(3)(a) of this section.
12 Madeira - General Offenses
(B) (1) Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2) of this section, if the period of limitation
provided in division (A)(1) or (A)(3) of this section has expired, prosecution shall be commenced for an
offense of which an element is fraud or breach of fiduciary duty within one year after discovery of the
offense either by an aggrieved person or by the aggrieved person’s legal representative who is not a party
to the offense.
(2) If the period of limitation provided in division (A)(1) or (A)(3) of this section has expired,
prosecution for a violation of R.C. § 2913.49 shall be commenced within five years after discovery of
the offense either by an aggrieved person or the aggrieved person’s legal representative who is not a
party to the offense.
(C) (1) If the period of limitation provided in division (A)(1) or (A)(3) of this section has expired,
prosecution shall be commenced for the following offenses during the following specified periods of
time:
(a) For an offense involving misconduct in office by a public servant at any time while the
accused remains a public servant, or within two years thereafter; and
(b) For an offense by a person who is not a public servant but whose offense is directly
related to the misconduct in office of a public servant, at any time while that public servant remains a
public servant, or within two years thereafter.
(2) As used in this division:
OFFENSE IS DIRECTLY RELATED TO THE MISCONDUCT IN OFFICE OF A
PUBLIC SERVANT. The phrase includes but is not limited to a violation of R.C. § 101.71, 101.91,
121.61 or 2921.13, 102.03(F) or (H), 2921.02(A), 2921.43(A) or (B), or 3517.13(F) or (G), that is
directly related to an offense involving misconduct in office of a public servant, or a violation of any
municipal ordinance substantially equivalent to those Ohio Revised Code sections listed in this division
(C)(2).
PUBLIC SERVANT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.01.
(D) An offense is committed when every element of the offense occurs. In the case of an offense
of which an element is a continuing course of conduct, the period of limitation does not begin to run until
such course of conduct or the accused’s accountability for it terminates, whichever occurs first.
(E) A prosecution is commenced on the date an indictment is returned or an information filed, or
on the date a lawful arrest without a warrant is made, or on the date a warrant, summons, citation, or
other process is issued, whichever occurs first. A prosecution is not commenced by the return of an
indictment or the filing of an information unless reasonable diligence is exercised to issue and execute
process on the same. A prosecution is not commenced upon issuance of a warrant, summons, citation,
or other process unless reasonable diligence is exercised to execute the same.
General Provisions 13
(F) The period of limitation shall not run during any time when the corpus delicti remains
undiscovered.
(G) The period of limitation shall not run during any time when the accused purposely avoids
prosecution. Proof that the accused departed this municipality or conceals the accused’s identity or
whereabouts is prima facie evidence of the accused’s purpose to avoid prosecution.
(H) The period of limitation shall not run during any time a prosecution against the accused based
on the same conduct is pending in this state, even though the indictment, information, or process that
commenced the prosecution is quashed or the proceedings on the indictment, information, or process are
set aside or reversed on appeal.
(I) The period of limitation for a violation of this Title XIII or Title XXIX of the Ohio Revised
Code that involves a physical or mental wound, injury, disability or condition of a nature that reasonably
indicates abuse or neglect of a child under 18 years of age or of a mentally retarded, developmentally
disabled, or physically impaired child under 21 years of age shall not begin to run until either of the
following occurs:
(1) The victim of the offense reaches the age of majority; or
(2) A public children services agency, or a municipal or county peace officer that is not the
parent or guardian of the child, in the county in which the child resides or in which the abuse or neglect
is occurring or has occurred has been notified that abuse or neglect is known, suspected, or believed to
have occurred.
(J) As used in this section, PEACE OFFICER has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01.
(R.C. § 2901.13) (1985 Code, § 130.06) (Ord. 1306, passed 6-13-1977)
§ 130.07 REQUIREMENTS FOR CRIMINAL LIABILITY; VOLUNTARY INTOXICATION.
(A) Except as provided in division (B) of this section, a person is not guilty of an offense unless both
of the following apply:
(1) The person’s liability is based on conduct that includes either a voluntary act, or an
omission to perform an act or duty that the person is capable of performing; and
(2) The person has the requisite degree of culpability for each element as to which a culpable
mental state is specified by the section defining the offense.
(B) When the section defining an offense does not specify any degree of culpability, and plainly
indicates a purpose to impose strict criminal liability for the conduct described in the section, then
culpability is not required for a person to be guilty of the offense. When the section neither specifies
culpability nor plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict liability, recklessness is sufficient culpability
to commit the offense.
14 Madeira - General Offenses
(C) Voluntary intoxication may not be taken into consideration in determining the existence of a
mental state that is an element of a criminal offense. Voluntary intoxication does not relieve a person of
a duty to act if failure to act constitutes a criminal offense. Evidence that a person was voluntarily
intoxicated may be admissible to show whether or not the person was physically capable of performing
the act with which the person is charged.
(D) As used in this section:
CULPABILITY. Means purpose, knowledge, recklessness or negligence, as defined in R.C.
§ 2901.22.
INTOXICATION. Includes but is not limited to intoxication resulting from the ingestion of
alcohol, a drug, or alcohol and a drug.
INVOLUNTARY ACTS. Means reflexes, convulsions, body movements during unconsciousness
or sleep, and body movements that are not otherwise a product of the actor’s volition are involuntary
acts.
POSSESSION. Means a voluntary act if the possessor knowingly procured or received the
thing possessed, or was aware of the possessor’s control of the thing possessed for a sufficient time to
have ended possession.
(R.C. § 2901.21) (1985 Code, § 130.07)
§ 130.08 CULPABLE MENTAL STATES.
(A) A person acts purposely when it is his or her specific intention to cause a certain result, or,
when the gist of the offense is a prohibition against conduct of a certain nature, regardless of what the
offender intends to accomplish thereby, it is his or her specific intention to engage in conduct of that
nature.
(B) A person acts knowingly, regardless of his or her purpose, when he or she is aware that his or
her conduct will probably cause a certain result or will probably be of a certain nature. A person has
knowledge of circumstances when he or she is aware that such circumstances probably exist.
(C) A person acts recklessly when, with heedless indifference to the consequences, he or she
perversely disregards a known risk that his or her conduct is likely to cause a certain result or is likely
to be of a certain nature. A person is reckless with respect to circumstances when, with heedless
indifference to the consequences, he or she perversely disregards a known risk that such circumstances
are likely to exist.
(D) A person acts negligently when, because of a substantial lapse from due care, he or she fails to
perceive or avoid a risk that his or her conduct may cause a certain result or may be of a certain nature.
A person is negligent with respect to circumstances when, because of a substantial lapse from due care,
he or she fails to perceive or avoid a risk that such circumstances may exist.
General Provisions 15
(E) When the section defining an offense provides that negligence suffices to establish an element
thereof, then recklessness, knowledge or purpose is also sufficient culpability for such element. When
recklessness suffices to establish an element of an offense, then knowledge or purpose is also sufficient
culpability for such element. When knowledge suffices to establish an element of an offense, then
purpose is also sufficient culpability for such element.
(R.C. § 2901.22) (1985 Code, § 130.08)
§ 130.09 ORGANIZATIONAL CRIMINAL LIABILITY.
(A) An organization may be convicted of an offense under any of the following circumstances:
(1) The offense is a minor misdemeanor committed by an officer, agent or employee of the
organization acting in its behalf and within the scope of the officer’s, agent’s or employee’s office or
employment, except that if the section defining the offense designates the officers, agents or employees
for whose conduct the organization is accountable or the circumstances under which it is accountable,
those provisions shall apply;
(2) A purpose to impose organizational liability plainly appears in the section defining the
offense, and the offense is committed by an officer, agent or employee of the organization acting in its
behalf and within the scope of the officer’s, agent’s or employee’s office or employment, except that if
the section defining the offense designates the officers, agents or employees for whose conduct the
organization is accountable or the circumstances under which it is accountable, those provisions shall
apply;
(3) The offense consists of an omission to discharge a specific duty imposed by law on the
organization; or
(4) If, acting with the kind of culpability otherwise required for the commission of the offense,
its commission was authorized, requested, commanded, tolerated or performed by the board of directors,
trustees, partners or by a high managerial officer, agent or employee acting in behalf of the organization
and within the scope of such a board’s or person’s office or employment.
(B) If strict liability is imposed for the commission of an offense, a purpose to impose organizational
liability shall be presumed, unless the contrary plainly appears.
(C) In a prosecution of an organization for an offense other than one for which strict liability is
imposed, it is a defense that the high managerial officer, agent or employee having supervisory
responsibility over the subject matter of the offense exercised due diligence to prevent its commission.
This defense is not available if it plainly appears inconsistent with the purpose of the section defining the
offense.
(D) As used in this section, ORGANIZATION means a corporation for profit or not for profit,
partnership, limited partnership, joint venture, unincorporated nonprofit association, estate, trust or other
16 Madeira - General Offenses
commercial or legal entity. The term does not include an entity organized as or by a governmental
agency for the execution of a governmental program.
(R.C. § 2901.23) (1985 Code, § 130.09)
§ 130.10 PERSONAL ACCOUNTABILITY FOR ORGANIZATIONAL CONDUCT.
(A) An officer, agent or employee of an organization, as defined in R.C. § 2901.23, may be
prosecuted for an offense committed by such organization, if he or she acts with the kind of culpability
required for the commission of the offense, and any of the following apply:
(1) In the name of the organization or in its behalf, he or she engages in conduct constituting
the offense, or causes another to engage in such conduct, or tolerates such conduct when it is of a type
for which he or she has direct responsibility; or
(2) He or she has primary responsibility to discharge a duty imposed on the organization by
law, and such duty is not discharged.
(B) When a person is convicted of an offense by reason of this section, he or she is subject to the
same penalty as if he or she had acted in his or her own behalf.
(R.C. § 2901.24) (1985 Code, § 130.10)
§ 130.11 ATTEMPT.
(A) No person, purposely or knowingly, and when purpose or knowledge is sufficient culpability
for the commission of an offense, shall engage in conduct that, if successful, would constitute or result
in the offense.
(B) It is no defense to a charge under this section that, in retrospect, commission of the offense that
was the object of the attempt was either factually or legally impossible under the attendant circumstances,
if that offense could have been committed had the attendant circumstances been as the actor believed
them to be.
(C) No person who is convicted of committing a specific offense, of complicity in the commission
of an offense, or of conspiracy to commit an offense, shall be convicted of an attempt to commit the
same offense in violation of this section.
(D) It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the actor abandoned his or her
effort to commit the offense or otherwise prevented its commission, under circumstances manifesting a
complete and voluntary renunciation of his or her criminal purpose.
(E) (1) Whoever violates this section is guilty of an attempt to commit an offense. An attempt to
commit aggravated murder, murder or an offense for which the maximum penalty is imprisonment for
life is a felony of the first degree, to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. An attempt to commit
General Provisions 17
a drug abuse offense for which the penalty is determined by the amount or number of unit doses of the
controlled substance involved in the drug abuse offense is an offense of the same degree as the drug
abuse offense attempted would be if that drug abuse offense had been committed and had involved an
amount or number of unit doses of the controlled substance that is within the next lower range of
controlled substance amounts than was involved in the attempt. An attempt to commit any other offense
is an offense of the next lesser degree than the offense attempted. In the case of an attempt to commit
an offense other than a violation of R.C. Chapter 3734 that is not specifically classified, an attempt is
a misdemeanor of the first degree if the offense attempted is a felony, and a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree if the offense attempted is a misdemeanor. In the case of an attempt to commit a violation of any
provision of R.C. Chapter 3734, other than R.C. § 3734.18, that relates to hazardous wastes, an attempt
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. An attempt to commit a minor misdemeanor,
or to engage in conspiracy, is not an offense under this section.
(2) In addition to any other sanctions imposed pursuant to division (E)(1) of this section for an
attempt to commit aggravated murder or murder in violation of division (A) of this section, if the
offender used a motor vehicle as the means to attempt to commit the offense, the court shall impose upon
the offender a class two suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident operating privilege as specified in R.C.
§ 4510.02(A)(2).
(3) If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to attempted rape and also is convicted of or
pleads guilty to a specification of the type described in R.C. § 2941.1418, 2941.1419 or 2941.1420, the
offender shall be sentenced to a prison term or term of life imprisonment pursuant to R.C. § 2971.03.
(F) As used in this section:
DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.
MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
(R.C. § 2923.02) (1985 Code, § 130.11)
§ 130.12 COMPLICITY.
(A) No person, acting with the kind of culpability required for the commission of an offense, shall
do any of the following:
(1) Solicit or procure another to commit the offense;
(2) Aid or abet another in committing the offense;
(3) Conspire with another to commit the offense in violation of R.C. § 2923.01; or
(4) Cause an innocent or irresponsible person to commit the offense.
18 Madeira - General Offenses
(B) It is no defense to a charge under this section that no person with whom the accused was in
complicity has been convicted as a principal offender.
(C) No person shall be convicted of complicity under this section unless an offense is actually
committed, but a person may be convicted of complicity in an attempt to commit an offense in violation
of R.C. § 2923.02 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(D) If an alleged accomplice of the defendant testifies against the defendant in a case in which the
defendant is charged with complicity in the commission of or an attempt to commit an offense, an
attempt to commit an offense, or an offense, the court shall charge the jury in accordance with R.C.
§ 2923.03(D).
(E) It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that, prior to the commission of or
attempt to commit the offense, the actor terminated his or her complicity, under circumstances
manifesting a complete and voluntary renunciation of his or her criminal purpose.
(F) Whoever violates this section is guilty of complicity in the commission of an offense, and shall
be prosecuted and punished as if he or she were a principal offender. A charge of complicity may be
stated in terms of this section, or in terms of the principal offense.
(R.C. § 2923.03) (1985 Code, § 130.12) (Ord. 1306, passed 6-13-1977; Ord. 87-44, passed 9-8-1987)
§ 130.13 DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY HELD BY LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY.
(A) Safekeeping of property in custody.
(1) (a) Any property that has been lost, abandoned, stolen, seized pursuant to a search warrant
or otherwise lawfully seized or forfeited and that is in the custody of the Police Department shall be kept
safely by the Police Department, pending the time it no longer is needed as evidence or for another
lawful purpose, and shall be disposed of pursuant to this section or R.C. §§ 2981.12 and 2981.13.
(b) This section does not apply to the custody and disposal of any of the following:
1. Vehicles subject to forfeiture under R.C. Title 45, except as provided in division
(B)(1)(f) of this section;
2. Abandoned junk motor vehicles or other property of negligible value;
3. Property held by a department of rehabilitation and correction institution that is
unclaimed, that does not have an identified owner, that the owner agrees to dispose of, or that is
identified by the department as having little value;
4. Animals taken, and devices used in unlawfully taking animals, under R.C.
§ 1531.20;
General Provisions 19
5. Controlled substances sold by a peace officer in the performance of the officer’s
official duties under R.C. § 3719.141;
6. Property recovered by a township law enforcement agency under R.C. §§ 505.105
to 505.109; or
7. Property held and disposed of under an ordinance of the municipality or under
R.C. §§ 737.29 to 737.33, except that if the municipality has received notice of a citizens’ reward
program as provided in division (B)(5) of this section and disposes of property under an ordinance shall
pay 25% of any moneys acquired from any sale or auction to the citizens’ reward program.
(2) (a) The Police Department shall adopt and comply with a written internal control policy
that does all of the following:
1. Provides for keeping detailed records as to the amount of property acquired by the
Police Department and the date property was acquired;
2. Provides for keeping detailed records of the disposition of the property, which shall
include but not be limited to both of the following:
a. The manner in which it was disposed, the date of disposition, detailed financial
records concerning any property sold, and the name of any person who received the property. The
record shall not identify or enable identification of the individual officer who seized any item of property;
and
b. The general types of expenditures made with amounts that are gained from
the sale of the property and that are retained by the agency, including the specific amount expended on
each general type of expenditure, except that the policy shall not provide for or permit the identification
of any specific expenditure that is made in an ongoing investigation.
3. Complies with R.C. § 2981.13 if the Police Department has a Law Enforcement
Trust Fund or similar fund created under that section.
(b) The records kept under the internal control policy shall be open to public inspection
during the Police Department’s regular business hours. The policy adopted under this section is a public
record open for inspection under R.C. § 149.43.
(3) The Police Department, with custody of property to be disposed of under this section or
R.C. §§ 2981.12 or 2981.13, shall make a reasonable effort to locate persons entitled to possession of
the property, to notify them of when and where it may be claimed, and to return the property to them
at the earliest possible time. In the absence of evidence identifying persons entitled to possession, it is
sufficient notice to advertise in a newspaper of general circulation in the county and to briefly describe
the nature of the property in custody and inviting persons to view and establish their right to it.
20 Madeira - General Offenses
(4) As used in this section:
CITIZENS’ REWARD PROGRAM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 9.92.
LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. Includes correctional institutions.
TOWNSHIP LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. Means an organized police department
of a township, a township police district, a joint police district, or the office of a township constable.
(R.C. § 2981.11)
(B) Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property.
(1) Unclaimed or forfeited property in the custody of the Police Department, other than
property described in division (A)(1)(b) of this section, shall be disposed of by order of any court of
record that has territorial jurisdiction over the municipality, as follows:
(a) Drugs shall be disposed of pursuant to R.C. § 3719.11 or placed in the custody of the
Secretary of the Treasury of the United States for disposal or use for medical or scientific purposes under
applicable federal law;
(b) Firearms and dangerous ordnance suitable for police work may be given to a law
enforcement agency for that purpose. Firearms suitable for sporting use or as museum pieces or
collectors’ items may be sold at public auction pursuant to division (B)(2) of this section. The Police
Department may sell other firearms and dangerous ordnance to a federally licensed firearms dealer in
a manner that the court considers proper. The Police Department shall destroy any firearms or dangerous
ordnance not given to a law enforcement agency or sold or shall send them to the Bureau of Criminal
Identification and Investigation for destruction by the Bureau;
(c) Obscene materials shall be destroyed;
(d) Beer, intoxicating liquor or alcohol seized from a person who does not hold a permit
issued under R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303 or otherwise forfeited to the state for an offense under R.C.
§ 4301.45 or R.C. § 4301.53 shall be sold by the Division of Liquor Control if the Division determines
that it is fit for sale or shall be placed in the custody of the Investigations Unit in the Ohio Department
of Public Safety and be used for training relating to law enforcement activities. The Ohio Department
of Public Safety, with the assistance of the Division of Liquor Control, shall adopt rules in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 119 to provide for the distribution to state or local law enforcement agencies upon
their request. If any tax imposed under R.C. Title 43 has not been paid in relation to the beer,
intoxicating liquor, or alcohol, any moneys acquired from the sale shall first be used to pay the tax. All
other money collected under this division (B)(1)(d) shall be paid into the State Treasury. Any beer,
intoxicating liquor or alcohol that the Division determines to be unfit for sale shall be destroyed;
(e) Money received by an inmate of a correctional institution from an unauthorized source
or in an unauthorized manner shall be returned to the sender, if known, or deposited in the Inmates’
Industrial and Entertainment Fund of the institution if the sender is not known;
General Provisions 21
(f) 1. Any mobile instrumentality forfeited under R.C. Chapter 2981 may be given to
the law enforcement agency that initially seized the mobile instrumentality for use in performing its
duties, if the agency wants the mobile instrumentality. The agency shall take the mobile instrumentality
subject to any security interest or lien on the mobile instrumentality.
2. Vehicles and vehicle parts forfeited under R.C. §§ 4549.61 to 4549.63 may be
given to a law enforcement agency for use in performing its duties. Those parts may be incorporated into
any other official vehicle. Parts that do not bear vehicle identification numbers or derivatives of them
may be sold or disposed of as provided by rules of the Director of Public Safety. Parts from which a
vehicle identification number or derivative of it has been removed, defaced, covered, altered, or
destroyed and that are not suitable for police work or incorporation into an official vehicle shall be
destroyed and sold as junk or scrap.
(g) Computers, computer networks, computer systems, and computer software suitable for
police work may be given to a law enforcement agency for that purpose or disposed of under division
(B)(2) of this section; and
(h) Money seized in connection with a violation of R.C. § 2905.32, 2907.21, or 2907.22
shall be deposited in the Victims of Human Trafficking Fund created by R.C. § 5101.87.
(2) Unclaimed or forfeited property that is not described in division (B)(1) of this section or
division (A)(1)(b) of this section, with court approval, may be used by the law enforcement agency in
possession of it. If it is not used by the agency, it may be sold without appraisal at a public auction to
the highest bidder for cash or disposed of in another manner that the court considers proper.
(3) Except as provided in divisions (B)(1) and (B)(5) of this section and after compliance with
division (B)(4) of this section when applicable, any moneys acquired from the sale of property disposed
of pursuant to this section shall be placed in the General Revenue Fund of the state, or the General Fund
of the municipality.
(4) If the property was in the possession of the Police Department in relation to a delinquent
child proceeding in a juvenile court, 10% of any moneys acquired from the sale of property disposed
of under this section shall be applied to one or more community addiction treatment services providers
that are certified by the Department of Mental Health and Addiction Services under R.C. § 5119.36. A
juvenile court shall not specify a services provider, except as provided in this division, unless the
services provider is in the same county as the court or in a contiguous county. If no certified services
provider is located in any of those counties, the juvenile court may specify a certified services provider
anywhere in Ohio. The remaining 90% of the proceeds or cash shall be applied as provided in division
(B)(3) of this section.
(5) (a) If the Board of County Commissioners recognizes a citizens’ reward program under
R.C. § 9.92, the Board shall notify the Police Department of the recognition by filing a copy of its
resolution conferring that recognition with the Police Department. When the Board recognizes a citizens’
22 Madeira - General Offenses
reward program and the county includes a part, but not all, of the territory of the municipality, the Board
shall so notify the Police Department of the recognition of the citizens’ reward program only if the
county contains the highest percentage of the municipality’s population.
(b) Upon being so notified, the Police Department shall pay 25% of any forfeited proceeds
or cash derived from each sale of property disposed of pursuant to this section to the citizens’ reward
program for use exclusively to pay rewards. No part of the funds may be used to pay expenses associated
with the program. If a citizens’ reward program that operates in more than one county or in another state
in addition to this state receives funds under this section, the funds shall be used to pay rewards only for
tips and information to law enforcement agencies concerning offenses committed in the county from
which the funds were received.
(6) Any property forfeited under R.C. Chapter 2981 not be used to pay any fine imposed upon
a person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to an underlying criminal offense or a different offense
arising out of the same facts and circumstances.
(7) Any moneys acquired from the sale of personal effects, tools, or other property seized
because the personal effects, tools, or other property were used in the commission of a violation of R.C.
§ 2905.32, 2907.21, or 2907.22 or derived from the proceeds of the commission of a violation of R.C.
§ 2905.32, 2907.21, or 2907.22 and disposed of pursuant to this division (B) shall be placed in the
Victims of Human Trafficking Fund created by R.C. § 5101.87.
(R.C. § 2981.12)
(C) Disposition of contraband, proceeds, or instrumentalities. Except as otherwise provided in R.C.
§ 2981.13, property ordered forfeited as contraband, proceeds, or an instrumentality pursuant to R.C.
Chapter 2981 shall be disposed of, used, or sold pursuant to division (B) of this section or R.C.
§ 2981.12. If the property is to be sold under division (B) of this section or R.C. § 2981.12, the
prosecutor shall cause notice of the proposed sale to be given in accordance with law.
(R.C. § 2981.13(A)) (1985 Code, § 130.13) (Ord. 1670, passed 4-2-1984; Ord. 87-43, passed
9-8-1987)
Statutory reference:
Disposition of property held by law enforcement agencies, see R.C. § 2981.06
§ 130.14 PRESUMPTION OF INNOCENCE; PROOF OF OFFENSE; AFFIRMATIVE
DEFENSE.
(A) Every person accused of an offense is presumed innocent until proven guilty beyond a
reasonable doubt, and the burden of proof for all elements of the offense is upon the prosecution. The
burden of going forward with the evidence of an affirmative defense, and the burden of proof by a
preponderance of the evidence, for an affirmative defense, is upon the accused.
(B) (1) Subject to division (B)(2) of this section, a person is presumed to have acted in self defense
or defense of another when using defensive force that is intended or likely to cause death or great bodily
harm to another if the person against whom the defensive force is used is in the process of unlawfully
General Provisions 23
and without privilege to do so entering, or has unlawfully and without privilege to do so entered, the
residence or vehicle occupied by the person using the defensive force.
(2) (a) The presumption set forth in division (B)(1) of this section does not apply if the person
against whom the defensive force is used has a right to be in, or is a lawful resident of, the residence or
vehicle.
(b) The presumption set forth in division (B)(1) of this section does not apply if the person
who uses the defensive force uses it while in a residence or vehicle and the person is unlawfully, and
without privilege to be, in that residence or vehicle.
(3) The presumption set forth in division (B)(1) of this section is a rebuttable presumption and
may be rebutted by a preponderance of the evidence.
(C) As part of its charge to the jury in a criminal case, the court shall read the definitions of
reasonable doubt and proof beyond a reasonable doubt, contained in division (D) of this section.
(D) As used in this section:
AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE. An affirmative defense is either of the following:
(a) A defense expressly designated as affirmative; or
(b) A defense involving an excuse or justification peculiarly within the knowledge of the
accused, on which the accused can fairly be required to adduce supporting evidence.
DWELLING. Means a building or conveyance of any kind that has a roof over it and that is
designed to be occupied by people lodging in the building or conveyance at night, regardless of whether
the building or conveyance is temporary or permanent or is mobile or immobile. As used in this
definition, a building or conveyance includes but is not limited to an attached porch, and a building or
conveyance with a roof over it includes but is not limited to a tent.
PROOF BEYOND A REASONABLE DOUBT. Proof of such character that an ordinary person
would be willing to rely and act upon it in the most important of the person’s own affairs.
REASONABLE DOUBT. Reasonable doubt is present when the jurors, after they have
carefully considered and compared all the evidence, cannot say they are firmly convinced of the truth
of the charge. It is a doubt based on reasonable and common sense. The term is not mere possible doubt,
because everything relating to human affairs or depending on moral evidence is open to some possible
or imaginary doubt.
RESIDENCE. Means a dwelling in which a person resides either temporarily or permanently
or is visiting as a guest.
24 Madeira - General Offenses
VEHICLE. Means a conveyance of any kind, whether or not motorized, that is designed to
transport people or property.
(R.C. § 2901.05) (1985 Code, § 130.14)
§ 130.15 BATTERED WOMAN SYNDROME.
(A) The municipality hereby declares that it recognizes both of the following, in relation to the
battered woman syndrome: that the syndrome currently is a matter of commonly accepted scientific
knowledge; and that the subject matter and details of the syndrome are not within the general
understanding or experience of a person who is a member of the general populace and are not within the
field of common knowledge.
(B) If a person is charged with an offense involving the use of force against another and the person,
as a defense to the offense charged, raises the affirmative defense of self defense, the person may
introduce expert testimony of the battered woman syndrome and expert testimony that the person
suffered from that syndrome as evidence to establish the requisite belief of an imminent danger of death
or great bodily harm that is necessary, as an element of the affirmative defense, to justify the person’s
use of force in question. The introduction of any expert testimony under this division (B) shall be in
accordance with the Ohio Rules of Evidence.
(R.C. § 2901.06) (1985 Code, § 130.15)
§ 130.16 DELINQUENCY ADJUDICATIONS DEEMED CONVICTIONS.
(A) If a person is alleged to have committed an offense and if the person previously has been
adjudicated a delinquent child or juvenile traffic offender for a violation of a law or ordinance, except
as provided in division (B) of this section, the adjudication as a delinquent child or as a juvenile traffic
offender is a conviction for a violation of the law for purposes of determining the offense with which the
person should be charged and, if the person is convicted of or pleads guilty to an offense, the sentence
to be imposed upon the person relative to the conviction or guilty plea.
(B) A previous adjudication of a person as a delinquent child or juvenile traffic offender for a
violation of a law or ordinance is not a conviction for a violation of the law or ordinance for purposes
of determining whether the person is a repeat violent offender, as defined in R.C. § 2929.01, or whether
the person should be sentenced as a repeat violent offender under R.C. § 2929.14(B)(2) and R.C.
§ 2941.149.
(R.C. § 2901.08) (1985 Code, § 130.16)
§ 130.17 CRIMINAL LAW JURISDICTION.
(A) A person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in this municipality if any of the
following occur:
General Provisions 25
(1) The person commits an offense under the laws of this municipality, any element of which
takes place in this municipality;
(2) While in this municipality, the person attempts to commit, or is guilty of complicity in the
commission of, an offense in another jurisdiction, which offense is an offense under both the laws of this
municipality and the other jurisdiction, or, while in this municipality, the person conspires to commit
an offense in another jurisdiction, which offense is an offense under both the laws of this municipality
and the other jurisdiction, and a substantial overt act in furtherance of the conspiracy is undertaken in
this municipality by the person or another person involved in the conspiracy, subsequent to the person’s
entrance into the conspiracy. In any case in which a person attempts to commit, is guilty of complicity
in the commission of, or conspires to commit an offense in another jurisdiction as described in this
division (A), the person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in this municipality for the
attempt, complicity or conspiracy, and for any resulting offense that is committed or completed in the
other jurisdiction;
(3) While out of this municipality, the person conspires or attempts to commit, or is guilty of
complicity in the commission of, an offense in this municipality;
(4) While out of this municipality, the person omits to perform a legal duty imposed by the
laws of this municipality, which omission affects a legitimate interest of the municipality in protecting,
governing or regulating any person, property, thing, transaction or activity in this municipality;
(5) While out of this municipality, the person unlawfully takes or retains property and
subsequently brings any of the unlawfully taken or retained property into this municipality;
(6) While out of this municipality, the person unlawfully takes or entices another person and
subsequently brings the other person into this municipality; or
(7) The person, by means of a computer, computer system, computer network,
telecommunication, telecommunications device, telecommunications service or information service,
causes or knowingly permits any writing, data, image or other telecommunication to be disseminated or
transmitted into this municipality in violation of the law of this state or municipality.
(B) In homicide, the element referred to in division (A)(1) of this section includes the act that causes
death, the physical contact that causes death, the death itself or any other element that is set forth in the
offense in question. If any part of the body of a homicide victim is found in this municipality, the death
is presumed to have occurred within this municipality.
(C) (1) This municipality includes the land and water within its boundaries and the air space above
that land and water, with respect to which this municipality has either exclusive or concurrent legislative
jurisdiction. Where the boundary between this municipality and another jurisdiction is disputed, the
disputed territory is conclusively presumed to be within this municipality for purposes of this section.
(2) The courts of common pleas of Adams, Athens, Belmont, Brown, Clermont, Columbiana,
Gallia, Hamilton, Jefferson, Lawrence, Meigs, Monroe, Scioto and Washington counties have
26 Madeira - General Offenses
jurisdiction beyond the north or northwest shore of the Ohio River extending to the opposite shore line,
between the extended boundary lines of any adjacent counties or adjacent state. Each of those courts of
common pleas has concurrent jurisdiction on the Ohio River with any adjacent court of common pleas
that borders on that river and with any court of Kentucky or of West Virginia that borders on the Ohio
River and that has jurisdiction on the Ohio River under the law of Kentucky or the law of West Virginia,
whichever is applicable, or under federal law.
(D) When an offense is committed under the laws of this municipality, and it appears beyond a
reasonable doubt that the offense or any element of the offense took place either in this municipality or
in another jurisdiction or jurisdictions, but it cannot reasonably be determined in which it took place, the
offense or element is conclusively presumed to have taken place in this municipality for purposes of this
section.
(E) When a person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in this municipality for an
offense committed or completed outside this municipality, the person is subject to all specifications for
that offense that would be applicable if the offense had been committed within this municipality.
(F) Any act, conduct or element that is a basis of a person being subject under this section to
criminal prosecution and punishment in this municipality need not be committed personally by the person
as long as it is committed by another person who is in complicity or conspiracy with the person.
(G) This section shall be liberally construed, consistent with constitutional limitations, to allow this
municipality the broadest possible jurisdiction over offenses and persons committing offenses in, or
affecting, this municipality.
(H) For purposes of division (A)(2) of this section, an overt act is substantial when it is of a
character that manifests a purpose on the part of the actor that the object of the conspiracy should be
completed.
(I) As used in this section, COMPUTER, COMPUTER SYSTEM, COMPUTER NETWORK,
INFORMATION SERVICE, TELECOMMUNICATION, TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE,
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE, DATA and WRITING have the same meanings as in R.C.
§ 2913.01.
(R.C. § 2901.11) (1985 Code, § 130.17)
Statutory reference:
State criminal law jurisdiction, see R.C. § 2901.11
§ 130.18 IMPOSING SENTENCE FOR MISDEMEANOR.
(A) (1) Unless a mandatory jail term is required to be imposed by R.C. § 1547.99(G), 4510.14(B)
or 4511.19(G), or any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code, or any municipal ordinance, a court
that imposes a sentence under this chapter upon an offender for a misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor
has discretion to determine the most effective way to achieve the purposes and principles of sentencing
set forth in § 130.99(B).
General Provisions 27
(2) Unless a specific sanction is required to be imposed or is precluded from being imposed
by the section setting forth an offense or the penalty for an offense or by any provision of § 130.99 or
133.99 of this code or R.C. §§ 2929.23 through 2929.28, a court that imposes a sentence upon an
offender for a misdemeanor may impose on the offender any sanction or combination of sanctions under
§ 130.99(C) through (G). The court shall not impose a sentence that imposes an unnecessary burden on
local government resources.
(B) (1) In determining the appropriate sentence for a misdemeanor, the court shall consider all of
the following factors:
(a) The nature and circumstances of the offense or offenses;
(b) Whether the circumstances regarding the offender and the offense or offenses indicate
that the offender has a history of persistent criminal activity and that the offender’s character and
condition reveal a substantial risk that the offender will commit another offense;
(c) Whether the circumstances regarding the offender and the offense or offenses indicate
that the offender’s history, character, and condition reveal a substantial risk that the offender will be a
danger to others and that the offender’s conduct has been characterized by a pattern of repetitive,
compulsive, or aggressive behavior with heedless indifference to the consequences;
(d) Whether the victim’s youth, age, disability, or other factor made the victim particularly
vulnerable to the offense or made the impact of the offense more serious;
(e) Whether the offender is likely to commit future crimes in general, in addition to the
circumstances described in divisions (B)(1)(b) and (B)(1)(c) of this section;
(f) Whether the offender has an emotional, mental, or physical condition that is traceable
to the offender’s service in the armed forces of the United States and that was a contributing factor in
the offender’s commission of the offense or offenses; and
(g) The offender’s military service record.
(2) In determining the appropriate sentence for a misdemeanor, in addition to complying with
division (B)(1) of this section, the court may consider any other factors that are relevant to achieving the
purposes and principles of sentencing set forth in § 130.99(B).
(C) Before imposing a jail term as a sentence for a misdemeanor, a court shall consider the
appropriateness of imposing a community control sanction or a combination of community control
sanctions under § 130.99(D), (E), (F) and (G). A court may impose the longest jail term authorized
under § 130.99(C) only upon offenders who commit the worst forms of the offense or upon offenders
whose conduct and response to prior sanctions for prior offenses demonstrate that the imposition of the
longest jail term is necessary to deter the offender from committing a future crime.
28 Madeira - General Offenses
(D) (1) A sentencing court shall consider any relevant oral or written statement made by the victim,
the defendant, the defense attorney, or the prosecuting authority regarding sentencing for a misdemeanor.
This division does not create any rights to notice other than those rights authorized by R.C. Chapter
2930.
(2) At the time of sentencing for a misdemeanor or as soon as possible after sentencing, the
court shall notify the victim of the offense of the victim’s right to file an application for an award of
reparations pursuant to R.C. §§ 2743.51 through 2743.72.
(R.C. § 2929.22) (1985 Code, § 130.18)
§ 130.19 MULTIPLE SENTENCES.
(A) Except as provided in division (B) of this section, R.C. § 2929.14(C), or R.C. § 2971.03(D)
or (E), a prison term, jail term or sentence of imprisonment shall be served concurrently with any other
prison term, jail term or sentence of imprisonment imposed by a court of this municipality, this state,
another state or the United States. Except as provided in division (B)(2) of this section, a jail term or
sentence of imprisonment for misdemeanor shall be served concurrently with a prison term or sentence
of imprisonment for felony served in a state or federal correctional institution.
(B) (1) A jail term or sentence of imprisonment for a misdemeanor shall be served consecutively
to any other prison term, jail term or sentence of imprisonment when the trial court specifies that it is
to be served consecutively or when it is imposed for a misdemeanor violation of R.C. § 2907.322,
2921.34 or 2923.131. When consecutive sentences are imposed for misdemeanors under this division
(B), the term to be served is the aggregate of the consecutive terms imposed, except that the aggregate
term to be served shall not exceed 18 months.
(2) A jail term or sentence of imprisonment imposed for a misdemeanor violation of R.C.
§ 4510.11, 4510.14, 4510.16, 4510.21 or 4511.19, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
shall be served consecutively to a prison term that is imposed for a felony violation of R.C. § 2903.06,
2903.07, 2903.08 or 4511.19 or a felony violation of R.C. § 2903.04 involving the operation of a motor
vehicle by the offender and that is served in a state correctional institution when the trial court specifies
that it is to be served consecutively. When consecutive jail terms or sentences of imprisonment and
prison terms are imposed for one or more misdemeanors and one or more felonies under this division
(B), the term to be served is the aggregate of the consecutive terms imposed, and the offender shall serve
all terms imposed for a felony before serving any term imposed for a misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 2929.41) (1985 Code, § 130.19)
§ 130.20 APPREHENSION, DETENTION OR ARREST OF PERSONS ON BOND.
(A) No person, other than a law enforcement officer, shall apprehend, detain or arrest a principal
on bond, wherever issued, unless that person meets all of the following criteria:
(1) The person is any of the following:
General Provisions 29
(a) Qualified, licensed and appointed as a surety bail bond agent under R.C. §§ 3905.83
through 3905.95;
(b) Licensed as a surety bail bond agent by the state where the bond was written;
(c) Licensed as a private investigator under R.C. Chapter 4749;
(d) Licensed as a private investigator by the state where the bond was written; or
(e) An off-duty peace officer, as defined in R.C. § 2921.51.
(2) The person, prior to apprehending, detaining or arresting the principal, has entered into a
written contract with the surety or with a licensed surety bail bond agent appointed by the surety, which
contract sets forth the name of the principal who is to be apprehended, detained or arrested. For purposes
of this division (A)(2), SURETY has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3905.83.
(3) The person, prior to apprehending, detaining or arresting the principal, has notified the
local law enforcement agency having jurisdiction over the area in which such activities will be performed
and has provided any form or identification or other information requested by the law enforcement
agency.
(B) No person shall represent the person’s self to be a bail enforcement agent or bounty hunter, or
claim any similar title, in this municipality.
(C) Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal bail bond agent practices.
(1) A violation of division (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of division (A) of
this section, or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
(2) A violation of division (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of division (B) of
this section, or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2927.27) (1985 Code, § 130.20)
§ 130.21 SELF DEFENSE: LIMITATIONS ON DUTY TO RETREAT PRIOR TO USING
FORCE.
(A) As used in this section, RESIDENCE and VEHICLE have the same meanings as in R.C.
§ 2901.05.
30 Madeira - General Offenses
(B) For purposes of any section of this code that sets forth a criminal offense, a person who lawfully
is in that person’s residence has no duty to retreat before using force in self defense, defense of another
or defense of that person’s residence, and a person who lawfully is an occupant of that person’s vehicle
or who lawfully is an occupant in a vehicle owned by an immediate family member of the person has
no duty to retreat before using force in self defense or defense of another.
(R.C. § 2901.09) (1985 Code, § 130.21)
§ 130.99 PENALTY FOR TITLE XIII.
(A) Generally. Except where otherwise specifically classified within the body of the section of a
chapter of this title, a violation of such section shall be deemed a misdemeanor punishable upon
conviction by a fine of not more than $500, imprisonment of not more than six months, or both.
(R.C. § 715.67)
(B) Considerations in misdemeanor sentencing.
(1) A court that sentences an offender for a misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor violation of
any provision of the Ohio Revised Code, or of any municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent
to a misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor violation of a provision of the Ohio Revised Code, shall be
guided by the overriding purposes of misdemeanor sentencing. The overriding purposes of misdemeanor
sentencing are to protect the public from future crime by the offender and others and to punish the
offender. To achieve those purposes, the sentencing court shall consider the impact of the offense upon
the victim and the need for changing the offender’s behavior, rehabilitating the defender and making
restitution to the victim of the offense, the public or the victim and the public.
(2) A sentence imposed for a misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor violation of an Ohio Revised
Code provision or for a violation of a municipal ordinance that is subject to division (B)(1) of this section
shall be reasonably calculated to achieve the two overriding purposes of misdemeanor sentencing set
forth in division (B)(1) of this section, commensurate with and not demeaning to the seriousness of the
offender’s conduct and its impact upon the victim, and consistent with sentences imposed for similar
offenses committed by similar offenders.
(3) A court that imposes a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor
violation of an Ohio Revised Code provision or for a violation of a municipal ordinance that is subject
to division (B)(1) of this section shall not base the sentence upon the race, ethnic background, gender
or religion of the offender.
(4) Divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2) of this section shall not apply to any offense that is disposed of
by a traffic violations bureau of any court pursuant to Traffic Rule 13 and shall not apply to any violation
of any provision of the Ohio Revised Code that is a minor misdemeanor and that is disposed of without
a court appearance. Divisions (B)(1) through (B)(3) of this section do not affect any penalties established
General Provisions 31
by the municipality for a violation of its ordinances that are not substantially equivalent to a misdemeanor
or minor misdemeanor violation of a provision of the Ohio Revised Code.
(R.C. § 2929.21)
(C) Misdemeanor jail terms.
(1) Except as provided in § 130.18 or 133.99 of this code or R.C. § 2929.22 or 2929.23 or
division (C)(5) or (C)(6) of this section and unless another term is required or authorized pursuant to
law, if the sentencing court imposing a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor elects or is required
to impose a jail term on the offender pursuant to this chapter, the court shall impose a definite jail term
that shall be one of the following:
(a) For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than 180 days;
(b) For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than 90 days;
(c) For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than 60 days; or
(d) For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than 30 days.
(2) (a) A court that sentences an offender to a jail term under division (C) of this section may
permit the offender to serve the sentence in intermittent confinement or may authorize a limited release
of the offender as provided in division (E)(2) of this section. The court retains jurisdiction over every
offender sentenced to jail to modify the jail sentence imposed at any time, but the court shall not reduce
any mandatory jail term.
(b)1. If a prosecutor, as defined in R.C. § 2935.01, has filed a notice with the court that
the prosecutor wants to be notified about a particular case and if the court is considering modifying the
jail sentence of the offender in that case, the court shall notify the prosecutor that the court is considering
modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case. The prosecutor may request a hearing regarding
the court’s consideration of modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case, and, if the prosecutor
requests a hearing, the court shall notify the eligible offender of the hearing.
2. If the prosecutor requests a hearing regarding the court’s consideration of
modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case, the court shall hold the hearing before
considering whether or not to release the offender from the offender’s jail sentence.
(3) If a court sentences an offender to a jail term under division (C) of this section and the court
assigns the offender to a county jail that has established a county jail industry program pursuant to R.C.
§ 5147.30, the court shall specify, as part of the sentence, whether the offender may be considered for
participation in the program. During the offender’s term in the county jail, the court retains jurisdiction
to modify its specification regarding the offender’s participation in the county jail industry program.
(4) If a person sentenced to a jail term pursuant to division (C) of this section, the court may
impose as part of the sentence pursuant to R.C. § 2929.28 a reimbursement sanction, and, if the local
32 Madeira - General Offenses
detention facility in which the term is to be served is covered by a policy adopted pursuant to R.C.
§ 307.93, 341.14, 341.19, 341.21, 341.23, 753.02, 753.04, 753.16, 2301.56 or 2947.19 and R.C.
§ 2929.37, both of the following apply:
(a) The court shall specify both of the following as part of the sentence:
1. If the person is presented with an itemized bill pursuant to R.C. § 2929.37 for
payment of the costs of confinement, the person is required to pay the bill in accordance with that
section; and
2. If the person does not dispute the bill described in division (C)(4)(a)1. of this
section and does not pay the bill by the times specified in R.C. § 2929.37, the Clerk of the court may
issue a certificate of judgment against the person as described in that section.
(b) The sentence automatically includes any certificate of judgment issued as described in
division (C)(4)(a)2. of this section.
(5) If an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(B), or
any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, also is convicted of or also pleads guilty to a
specification of the type described in R.C. § 2941.1414 and if the court imposes a jail term on the
offender for the underlying offense, the court shall impose upon the offender an additional definite jail
term of not more than six months. The additional jail term shall not be reduced pursuant to any provision
of the Ohio Revised Code. The offender shall serve the additional jail term consecutively to and prior
to the jail term imposed for the underlying offense and consecutively to any other mandatory term
imposed in relation to the offense.
(6) (a) If an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor violation of R.C.
§ 2907.23, 2907.24, 2907.241 or 2907.25, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and to
a specification of the type described in R.C. § 2941.1421 and if the court imposes a jail term on the
offender for the misdemeanor violation, the court may impose upon the offender an additional definite
jail term as follows:
1. Subject to division (C)(6)(a)2. of this section, an additional definite jail term of
not more than 60 days; and
2. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more
misdemeanor or felony violations of R.C. § 2907.22, 2907.23, 2907.24, 2907.241 or 2907.25, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and also was convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
specification of the type described in R.C. § 2941.1421 regarding one or more of those violations, an
additional definite jail term of not more than 120 days.
(b) In lieu of imposing an additional definite jail term under division (C)(6)(a) of this
section, the court may directly impose on the offender a sanction that requires the offender to wear a
real-time processing, continual tracking electronic monitoring device during the period of time specified
by the court. The period of time specified by the court shall equal the duration of an additional jail term
General Provisions 33
that the court could have imposed upon the offender under division (C)(6)(a) of this section. A sanction
imposed under this division (C) shall commence on the date specified by the court, provided that the
sanction shall not commence until after the offender has served the jail term imposed for the
misdemeanor violation of R.C. § 2907.23, 2907.24, 2907.241 or 2907.25, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, and any residential sanction imposed for the violation under division (E)
of this section or R.C. § 2929.26. A sanction imposed under this division (C) shall be considered to be
a community control sanction for purposes of division (D) or this section or R.C. § 2929.25, and all
provisions of this code and the Ohio Revised Code that pertain to community control sanctions shall
apply to a sanction imposed under this division (C), except to the extent that they would by their nature
be clearly inapplicable. The offender shall pay all costs associated with a sanction imposed under this
division (C), including the cost of the use of the monitoring device.
(7) If an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor violation of R.C. § 2903.13
and also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a specification of the type described in R.C. § 2941.1423 that
charges that the victim of the violation was a woman whom the offender knew was pregnant at the time
of the violation, the court shall impose on the offender a mandatory jail term that is a definite term of
at least 30 days.
(8) If a court sentences an offender to a jail term under this division (C), the sentencing court
retains jurisdiction over the offender and the jail term. Upon motion of either party or upon the court’s
own motion, the court, in the court’s sole discretion and as the circumstances warrant, may substitute
one or more community control sanctions under division (E) or (F) of this section for any jail days that
are not mandatory jail days.
(R.C. § 2929.24)
(D) Misdemeanor community control sanctions.
(1) (a) Except as provided in §§ 130.18 and 133.99 of this code or R.C. §§ 2929.22 and
2929.23 or when a jail term is required by law, in sentencing an offender for a misdemeanor, other than
a minor misdemeanor, the sentencing court may do either of the following:
1. Directly impose a sentence that consists of one or more community control
sanctions authorized by divisions (E), (F) or (G) of this section. The court may impose any other
conditions of release under a community control sanction that the court considers appropriate. If the
court imposes a jail term upon the offender, the court may impose any community control sanction or
combination of community control sanctions in addition to the jail term; or
2. Impose a jail term under division (C) of this section from the range of jail terms
authorized under that division for the offense, suspend all or a portion of the jail term imposed, and place
the offender under a community control sanction or combination of community control sanctions
authorized under divisions (E), (F) or (G) of this section.
(b) The duration of all community control sanctions imposed upon an offender and in effect
for an offender at any time shall not exceed five years.
34 Madeira - General Offenses
(c) At sentencing, if a court directly imposes a community control sanction or combination
of community control sanctions pursuant to division (D)(1)(a)1. of this section, the court shall state the
duration of the community control sanctions imposed and shall notify the offender that if any of the
conditions of the community control sanctions are violated the court may do any of the following:
1. Impose a longer time under the same community control sanction if the total time
under all of the offender’s community control sanctions does not exceed the five-year limit specified in
division (D)(1)(b) of this section;
2. Impose a more restrictive community control sanction under division (E), (F) or
(G) of this section, but the court is not required to impose any particular sanction or sanctions; or
3. Impose a definite jail term from the range of jail terms authorized for the offense
under division (C) of this section.
(2) If a court sentences an offender to any community control sanction or combination of
community control sanctions pursuant to division (D)(1)(a)1. of this section, the sentencing court retains
jurisdiction over the offender and the period of community control for the duration of the period of
community control. Upon the motion of either party or on the court’s own motion, the court, in the
court’s sole discretion and as the circumstances warrant, may modify the community control sanctions
or conditions of release previously imposed, substitute a community control sanction or condition of
release for another community control sanction or condition of release previously imposed, or impose
an additional community control sanction or condition of release.
(3) (a) If a court sentences an offender to any community control sanction or combination of
community control sanctions authorized under division (E), (F) or (G) of this section, the court shall
place the offender under the general control and supervision of the court or of a department of probation
in the jurisdiction that serves the court for purposes of reporting to the court a violation of any of the
conditions of the sanctions imposed. If the offender resides in another jurisdiction and a department of
probation has been established to serve the municipal court or county court in that jurisdiction, the
sentencing court may request the municipal court or the county court to receive the offender into the
general control and supervision of that department of probation for purposes of reporting to the
sentencing court a violation of any of the conditions of the sanctions imposed. The sentencing court
retains jurisdiction over any offender whom it sentences for the duration of the sanction or sanctions
imposed.
(b) The sentencing court shall require as a condition of any community control sanction
that the offender abide by the law and not leave the state without the permission of the court or the
offender’s probation officer. In the interests of doing justice, rehabilitating the offender and ensuring the
offender’s good behavior, the court may impose additional requirements on the offender. The offender’s
compliance with the additional requirements also shall be a condition of the community control sanction
imposed upon the offender.
(4) (a) If the court imposing sentence upon an offender sentences the offender to any
community control sanction or combination of community control sanctions authorized under division
General Provisions 35
(E), (F) or (G) of this section, and the offender violates any of the conditions of the sanctions, the public
or private person or entity that supervises or administers the program or activity that comprises the
sanction shall report the violation directly to the sentencing court or to the department of probation or
probation officer with general control and supervision over the offender. If the public or private person
or entity reports the violation to the department of probation or probation officer, the department or
officer shall report the violation to the sentencing court.
(b) If an offender violates any condition of a community control sanction, the sentencing
court may impose upon the violator one or more of the following penalties:
1. A longer time under the same community control sanction if the total time under
all of the community control sanctions imposed on the violator does not exceed the five-year limit
specified in division (D)(1)(b) of this section;
2. A more restrictive community control sanction; and
3. A combination of community control sanctions, including a jail term.
(c) If the court imposes a jail term upon a violator pursuant to division (D)(4)(b) of this
section, the total time spent in jail for the misdemeanor offense and the violation of a condition of the
community control sanction shall not exceed the maximum jail term available for the offense for which
the sanction that was violated was imposed. The court may reduce the longer period of time that the
violator is required to spend under the longer sanction or the more restrictive sanction imposed under
division (D)(4)(b) of this section by all or part of the time the violator successfully spent under the
sanction that was initially imposed.
(5) Except as otherwise provided in this division (D), if an offender, for a significant period
of time, fulfills the conditions of a community control sanction imposed pursuant to division (E), (F) or
(G) of this section in an exemplary manner, the court may reduce the period of time under the
community control sanction or impose a less restrictive community control sanction. Fulfilling the
conditions of a community control sanction does not relieve the offender of a duty to make restitution
under division (G) of this section.
(R.C. § 2929.25)
(E) Community residential sanction.
(1) Except when a mandatory jail term is required by law, the court imposing a sentence for
a misdemeanor, other than a minor misdemeanor, may impose upon the offender any community
residential sanction or combination of community residential sanctions under this division (E).
Community residential sanctions include but are not limited to the following:
(a) A term of up to 180 days in a halfway house or a term in a halfway house not to exceed
the longest jail term available for the offense, whichever is shorter, if the political subdivision that would
have responsibility for paying the costs of confining the offender in a jail has entered into a contract with
the halfway house for use of the facility for misdemeanor offenders; and
36 Madeira - General Offenses
(b) If the offender is an eligible offender, as defined in R.C. § 307.932, a term of up to
60 days in a community alternative sentencing center or district community alternative sentencing center
established and operated in accordance with that section, in the circumstances specified in that section,
with one of the conditions of the sanction being that the offender complete in the center the entire term
imposed.
(2) A sentence to a community residential sanction under division (E)(1)(c) of this section shall
be in accordance with R.C. § 307.932. In all other cases, the court that sentences an offender to a
community residential sanction under this division (E) may do either or both of the following:
(a) Permit the offender to serve the offender’s sentence in intermittent confinement,
overnight, on weekends or at any other time or times that will allow the offender to continue at the
offender’s occupation or care for the offender’s family; or
(b) Authorize the offender to be released so that the offender may seek or maintain
employment, receive education or training, receive treatment, perform community service or otherwise
fulfill an obligation imposed by law or by the court. A release pursuant to this division (E) shall be only
for the duration of time that is needed to fulfill the purpose of the release and for travel that reasonably
is necessary to fulfill the purposes of release.
(3) The court may order that a reasonable portion of the income earned by the offender upon
a release pursuant to division (E)(2) of this section be applied to any financial sanction imposed under
division (G) of this section.
(4) No court shall sentence any person to a prison term for a misdemeanor or to a jail term for
a minor misdemeanor.
(5) If a court sentences a person who has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor
to a community residential sanction as described in division (E)(1) of this section, at the time of reception
and at other times the person in charge of the operation of the halfway house, community alternative
sentencing center, district community alternative sentencing center, or other place at which the offender
will serve the residential sanction determines to be appropriate, the person in charge of the operation of
the halfway house, community alternative sentencing center, district community alternative sentencing
center or other place may cause the convicted offender to be examined and tested for tuberculosis, HIV
infection, hepatitis, including but not limited to hepatitis A, B and C, and other contagious diseases. The
person in charge of the operation of the halfway house, community alternative sentencing center, district
community alternative sentencing center or other place at which the offender will serve the residential
sanction may cause a convicted offender in the halfway house, community alternative sentencing center,
district community alternative sentencing center or other place who refuses to be tested or treated for
tuberculosis, HIV infection, hepatitis, including but not limited to hepatitis A, B and C, or another
contagious disease to be tested and treated involuntarily.
(6) The municipality may enter into a contract with a halfway house for use of the halfway
house to house misdemeanor offenders under a sanction imposed under division (E)(1)(a) of this section.
(R.C. § 2929.26)
General Provisions 37
(F) Nonresidential sanction where jail term is not mandatory.
(1) Except when a mandatory jail term is required by law, the court imposing a sentence for
a misdemeanor, other than a minor misdemeanor, may impose upon the offender any nonresidential
sanction or combination of nonresidential sanctions authorized under this division (F). Nonresidential
sanctions include but are not limited to the following:
(a) A term of day reporting;
(b) A term of house arrest with electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring
or both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol monitoring, a term of electronic monitoring or
continuous alcohol monitoring without house arrest, or a term of house arrest without electronic
monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring;
(c) A term of community service of up to 500 hours for misdemeanor of the first degree
or 200 hours for a misdemeanor of the second, third or fourth degree;
(d) A term in a drug treatment program with a level of security for the offender as
determined necessary by the court;
(e) A term of intensive probation supervision;
(f) A term of basic probation supervision;
(g) A term of monitored time;
(h) A term of drug and alcohol use monitoring, including random drug testing;
(i) A curfew term;
(j) A requirement that the offender obtain employment;
(k) A requirement that the offender obtain education or training;
(l) Provided the court obtains the prior approval of the victim, a requirement that the
offender participate in victim-offender mediation;
(m) If authorized by law, suspension of the offender’s privilege to operate a motor vehicle,
immobilization or forfeiture of the offender’s motor vehicle, a requirement that the offender obtain a
valid motor vehicle operator’s license, or any other related sanction; and
(n) A requirement that the offender obtain counseling if the offense is a violation of R.C.
§ 2919.25 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or a violation of R.C. § 2903.13 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance involving a person who was a family or household member
at the time of the violation, if the offender committed the offense in the vicinity of one or more children
38 Madeira - General Offenses
who are not victims of the offense, and if the offender or the victim of the offense is a parent, guardian,
custodian or person in loco parentis of one or more of those children. This division (F) does not limit
the court in requiring that the offender obtain counseling for any offense or in any circumstance not
specified in this division (F).
(2) If the court imposes a term of community service pursuant to division (F)(1)(c) of this
section, the offender may request that the court modify the sentence to authorize the offender to make
a reasonable contribution, as determined by the court, to the General Fund of the county, municipality
or other local entity that provides funding to the court. The court may grant the request if the offender
demonstrates a change in circumstances from the date the court imposes the sentence or that the
modification would otherwise be in the interests of justice. If the court grants the request, the offender
shall make a reasonable contribution to the court, and the Clerk of the court shall deposit that
contribution into the General Fund of the county, municipality or other local entity that provides funding
to the court. If more than one entity provides funding to the court, the Clerk shall deposit a percentage
of the reasonable contribution equal to the percentage of funding the entity provides to the court in that
entity’s General Fund.
(3) In addition to the sanctions authorized under division (F)(1) of this section, the court
imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a minor misdemeanor, upon an offender who is not
required to serve a mandatory jail term may impose any other sanction that is intended to discourage the
offender or other persons from committing a similar offense if the sanction is reasonably related to the
overriding purposes and principles of misdemeanor sentencing.
(4) The court imposing a sentence for a minor misdemeanor may impose a term of community
service in lieu of all or part of a fine. The term of community service imposed for a minor misdemeanor
shall not exceed 30 hours. After imposing a term of community service, the court may modify the
sentence to authorize a reasonable contribution, as determined by the court, to the appropriate General
Fund as provided in division (F)(2) of this section.
(R.C. § 2929.27)
(G) Financial sanctions.
(1) In addition to imposing court costs pursuant to R.C. § 2947.23, the court imposing a
sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor, including a minor misdemeanor, may sentence the
offender to any financial sanction or combination of financial sanctions authorized under this division
(G). If the court in its discretion imposes one or more financial sanctions, the financial sanctions that may
be imposed pursuant to this section include but are not limited to the following.
(a) Restitution.
1. Unless the misdemeanor offense is a minor misdemeanor or could be disposed of
by the Traffic Violations Bureau serving the court under Traffic Rule 13, restitution by the offender to
the victim of the offender’s crime or any survivor of the victim, in an amount based upon the victim’s
economic loss. The court may not impose restitution as a sanction pursuant to this division (G) if the
offense is a minor misdemeanor or could be disposed of by the Traffic Violations Bureau serving the
General Provisions 39
court under Traffic Rule 13. If the court requires restitution, the court shall order that the restitution be
made to the victim in open court or to the adult probation department that serves the jurisdiction or the
Clerk of the court on behalf of the victim.
2. If the court imposes restitution, the court shall determine the amount of restitution
to be paid by the offender. If the court imposes restitution, the court may base the amount of restitution
it orders on an amount recommended by the victim, the offender, a presentence investigation report,
estimates or receipts indicating the cost of repairing or replacing property, and other information,
provided that the amount the court orders as restitution shall not exceed the amount of economic loss
suffered by the victim as a direct and proximate result of the commission of the offense. If the court
decides to impose restitution, the court shall hold an evidentiary hearing on restitution if the offender,
victim or survivor disputes the amount of restitution. If the court holds an evidentiary hearing, at the
hearing the victim or survivor has the burden to prove by a preponderance of the evidence the amount
of restitution sought from the offender.
3. All restitution payments shall be credited against any recovery of economic loss
in a civil action brought by the victim or any survivor of the victim against the offender. No person may
introduce evidence of an award of restitution under this section in a civil action for purposes of imposing
liability against an insurer under R.C. § 3937.18.
4. If the court imposes restitution, the court may order that the offender pay a
surcharge, of not more than 5% of the amount of the restitution otherwise ordered, to the entity
responsible for collecting and processing restitution payments.
5. The victim or survivor of the victim may request that the prosecutor in the case
file a motion, or the offender may file a motion, for modification of the payment terms of any restitution
ordered. If the court grants the motion, it may modify the payment terms as it determines appropriate.
(b) Fines. A fine of the type described in divisions (G)(1)(b)1. and (G)(1)(b)2. of this
section payable to the appropriate entity as required by law:
1. A fine in the following amount:
a. For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than $1,000;
b. For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than $750;
c. For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than $500;
d. For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than $250; or
e. For a minor misdemeanor, not more than $150.
40 Madeira - General Offenses
2. A state fine or cost as defined in R.C. § 2949.111.
(c) Reimbursement.
1. Reimbursement by the offender of any or all of the costs of sanctions incurred by
the government, including but not limited to the following:
a. All or part of the costs of implementing any community control sanction,
including a supervision fee under R.C. § 2951.021;
b. All or part of the costs of confinement in a jail or other residential facility,
including but not limited to a per diem fee for room and board, the costs of medical and dental treatment
and the costs of repairing property damaged by the offender while confined; and
c. All or part of the cost of purchasing and using an immobilizing or disabling
device, including a certified ignition interlock device, or a remote alcohol monitoring device that a court
orders an offender to use under R.C. § 4510.13.
2. The amount of reimbursement under division (G)(1)(c)1. of this section shall not
exceed the total amount of reimbursement the offender is able to pay and shall not exceed the actual cost
of the sanctions. The court may collect any amount of reimbursement the offender is required to pay
under that division. If the court does not order reimbursement under that division, confinement costs may
be assessed pursuant to a repayment policy adopted under R.C. § 2929.37. In addition, the offender may
be required to pay the fees specified in R.C. § 2929.38 in accordance with that section.
(2) (a) If the court determines a hearing is necessary, the court may hold a hearing to
determine whether the offender is able to pay the financial sanction imposed pursuant to this division (G)
or court costs or is likely in the future to be able to pay the sanction or costs.
(b) If the court determines that the offender is indigent and unable to pay the financial
sanction or court costs, the court shall consider imposing and may impose a term of community service
under division (F)(1) of this section in lieu of imposing a financial sanction or court costs. If the court
does not determine that the offender is indigent, the court may impose a term of community service
under division (F)(1) of this section in lieu of or in addition to imposing a financial sanction under this
division (G) and in addition to imposing court costs. The court may order community service for a minor
misdemeanor pursuant to division (F)(4) of this section in lieu of or in addition to imposing a financial
sanction under this section and in addition to imposing court costs. If a person fails to pay a financial
sanction or court costs, the court may order community service in lieu of the financial sanction or court
costs.
(3) (a) The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed upon the offender pursuant to division
(G)(1)(c) of this section to pay the costs incurred by a county pursuant to any sanction imposed under
division (E), (F) or (G) of this section or in operating a facility used to confine offenders pursuant to a
sanction imposed under division (E) of this section to the county treasurer. The county treasurer shall
deposit the reimbursements in the county’s General Fund. The county shall use the amounts deposited
General Provisions 41
in the fund to pay the costs incurred by the county pursuant to any sanction imposed under division (E),
(F) or (G) of this section or in operating a facility used to confine offenders pursuant to a sanction
imposed under division (E) of this section.
(b) The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed upon the offender pursuant to division
(G)(1)(c) of this section to pay the costs incurred by a municipal corporation pursuant to any sanction
imposed under division (E), (F) or (G) of this section or in operating a facility used to confine offenders
pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (E) of this section to the treasurer of the municipal
corporation. The treasurer shall deposit the reimbursements in the municipal corporation’s General Fund.
The municipal corporation shall use the amounts deposited in the fund to pay the costs incurred by the
municipal corporation pursuant to any sanction imposed under division (E), (F) or (G) of this section or
in operating a facility used to confine offenders pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (E) of this
section.
(c) The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed pursuant to division (G)(1)(c) of this
section for the costs incurred by a private provider pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (E),
(F) or (G) of this section to the provider.
(4) (a) Except as otherwise provided in this division (G)(4), a financial sanction imposed under
division (G)(1) of this section is a judgment in favor of the state or the political subdivision that operates
the court that imposed the financial sanction, and the offender subject to the financial sanction is the
judgment debtor. A financial sanction of reimbursement imposed pursuant to division (G)(1)(c)1.a. of
this section upon an offender is a judgment in favor of the entity administering the community control
sanction, and the offender subject to the financial sanction is the judgment debtor. A financial sanction
of reimbursement imposed pursuant to division (G)(1)(c)1.b. of this section upon an offender confined
in a jail or other residential facility is a judgment in favor of the entity operating the jail or other
residential facility, and the offender subject to the financial sanction is the judgment debtor. A financial
sanction of restitution imposed pursuant to division (G)(1)(a) of this section is an order in favor of the
victim of the offender’s criminal act that can be collected through a certificate of judgment as described
in division (G)(4)(b)1. of this section, through execution as described in division (G)(4)(b)2. of this
section or through an order as described in division (G)(4)(b)3. of this section and the offender shall be
considered for purposes of the collection as a judgment debtor.
(b) Once a financial sanction is imposed as a judgment or order under this division (G),
the victim, private provider, state or political subdivision may do any of the following:
1. Obtain from the Clerk of the court in which the judgment was entered a certificate
of judgment that shall be in the same manner and form as a certificate of judgment issued in a civil
action;
2. Obtain execution of the judgment or order through any available procedure,
including any of the procedures identified in R.C. § 2929.18(D)(1) and (D)(2) or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance; or
42 Madeira - General Offenses
3. Obtain an order for the assignment of wages of the judgment debtor under R.C.
§ 1321.33 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(5) The civil remedies authorized under division (G)(4) of this section for the collection of the
financial sanction supplement, but do not preclude, enforcement of the criminal sentence.
(6) Each court imposing a financial sanction upon an offender under this division (G) may
designate the Clerk of the court or another person to collect the financial sanction. The Clerk, or another
person authorized by law or the court to collect the financial sanction may do the following:
(a) Enter into contracts with one or more public agencies or private vendors for the
collection of amounts due under the sanction. Before entering into a contract for the collection of
amounts due from an offender pursuant to any financial sanction imposed pursuant to this division (G),
a court shall comply with R.C. §§ 307.86 through 307.92;
(b) Permit payment of all or any portion of the sanction in installments, by financial
transaction device if the court is a county court or a municipal court operated by a county, or by any
other reasonable method, in any time, and on any terms that the court considers just, except that the
maximum time permitted for payment shall not exceed five years. If the court is a county court or a
municipal court operated by a county, the acceptance of payments by any financial transaction device
shall be governed by the policy adopted by the board of county commissioners of the county pursuant
to R.C. § 301.28. If the court is a municipal court not operated by a county, the Clerk may pay any fee
associated with processing an electronic transfer out of public money or may charge the fee to the
offender; and
(c) To defray administrative costs, charge a reasonable fee to an offender who elects a
payment plan rather than a lump sum payment of any financial sanction.
(7) No financial sanction imposed under this division (G) shall preclude a victim from bringing
a civil action against the offender.
(R.C. § 2929.28)
(H) Organizational penalties.
(1) Regardless of the other penalties provided in this section, an organization convicted of an
offense pursuant to § 130.09 shall be fined by the court as follows:
(a) For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than $5,000;
(b) For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than $4,000;
(c) For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than $3,000;
(d) For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than $2,000;
General Provisions 43
(e) For a minor misdemeanor, not more than $1,000;
(f) For a misdemeanor not specifically classified, not more than $2,000; and
(g) For a minor misdemeanor not specifically classified, not more than $1,000.
(2) When an organization is convicted of an offense not specifically classified, and the section
defining the offense or penalty plainly indicates a purpose to impose the penalty provided for violation
upon organizations, then such penalty shall be imposed in lieu of the penalty provided in this section.
(3) When an organization is convicted of an offense not specifically classified, and the penalty
provided includes a higher fine than that provided in this section, then the penalty imposed shall be
pursuant to the penalty provided for violation of the section defining the offense.
(4) This section does not prevent the imposition of available civil sanctions against an
organization convicted of an offense pursuant to § 130.09, either in addition to or in lieu of a fine
imposed pursuant to this section.
(R.C. § 2929.31)
(1985 Code, § 130.99)
Cross-reference:
Sentencing for sexually oriented offenses; sexual predators; registration, see § 133.99
Statutory reference:
Citation issuance and limitations on arrest for minor misdemeanors, see R.C. § 2935.26
Crime Victim’s Reparations Fund, see R.C. § 2929.32
Habitual sex offender and sexual predator registration, see R.C. Chapter 2950
Reimbursement for costs of confinement, see R.C. §§ 2929.36 et seq.
Reports to health care licensing boards of criminal offenses, see R.C. § 2929.42
44 Madeira - General Offenses
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
131.01 Definitions
131.02 Arson
131.03 Criminal damaging or endangering; vehicular vandalism
131.04 Criminal mischief
131.05 Determining property value or amount of physical harm
131.06 Criminal trespass
131.07 Aggravated trespass
131.08 Tampering with coin machines
131.09 Theft
131.10 Unauthorized use of a vehicle
131.11 Unauthorized use of property; unauthorized use of computer or telecommunication
property
131.12 Passing bad checks
131.13 Misuse of credit cards
131.14 Making or using slugs
131.15 Prima facie evidence of purpose to defraud
131.16 Tampering with records
131.17 Securing writings by deception
131.18 Defrauding creditors
131.19 Receiving stolen property
131.20 Value of stolen property
131.21 Degree of offense when certain property involved
131.22 Injuring vines, bushes, trees or crops
131.23 Tampering with or removing municipal property
131.24 Tampering with hydrant, pipe or meter
131.25 Possession of property belonging to the municipality
131.26 Damaging or endangering aircraft, airport operations
131.27 Motion picture piracy
131.28 Diminishing or interfering with forfeitable property
131.29 Detention and arrest of shoplifters and those committing motion picture piracy;
protection of institutional property
131.30 Insurance fraud; workers’ compensation fraud; medicaid fraud
131.31 Evidence of intent to commit theft of rented property or rental services; evidence of
lack of capacity to consent
131.32 Forgery of identification cards
131.33 Criminal simulation
45
46 Madeira - General Offenses
131.34 Trademark counterfeiting
131.35 Recording credit card, telephone or Social Security numbers
131.36 Prosecutions for theft of utilities
§ 131.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
ANHYDROUS AMMONIA. A compound formed by the combination of two gaseous elements,
nitrogen and hydrogen, in the manner described below. ANHYDROUS AMMONIA is one part nitrogen
to three parts hydrogen (NH3). Anhydrous ammonia by weight is 14 parts nitrogen to three parts
hydrogen, which is approximately 82% nitrogen to 18% hydrogen.
ASSISTANCE DOG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 955.011.
CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE. Any services provided by or through the facilities of any cable
television system or other similar closed circuit coaxial cable communications system, or any microwave
or similar transmission service used in connection with any cable television system or other similar
closed circuit coaxial cable communications system.
COIN MACHINE. Any mechanical or electronic device designed to do both of the following:
(1) Receive a coin or bill, or token made for that purpose; and
(2) In return for the insertion or deposit of a coin, bill, or token, automatically dispense
property, provide a service, or grant a license.
COMPUTER. An electronic device that performs logical, arithmetic, and memory functions by the
manipulation of electronic or magnetic impulses. The term includes but is not limited to all input, output,
processing, storage, computer program, or communication facilities that are connected, or related, in
a computer system or network to an electronic device of that nature.
COMPUTER CONTAMINANT. Means a computer program that is designed to modify, damage,
destroy, disable, deny or degrade access to, allow unauthorized access to, functionally impair, record
or transmit information within a computer, computer system or computer network without the express
or implied consent of the owner or other person authorized to give consent and that is of a type or kind
described in divisions (1) through (4) of this definition or of a type or kind similar to a type or kind
described in divisions (1) through (4) of this definition:
(1) A group of computer programs commonly known as “viruses” and “worms” that are
self-replicating or self-propagating and that are designed to contaminate other computer programs,
compromise computer security, consume computer resources, modify, destroy, record or transmit data,
or disrupt the normal operation of the computer, computer system or computer network;
Offenses Against Property 47
(2) A group of computer programs commonly known as “Trojans” or “Trojan horses” that are
not self-replicating or self-propagating and that are designed to compromise computer security, consume
computer resources, modify, destroy, record or transmit data, or disrupt the normal operation of the
computer, computer system or computer network;
(3) A group of computer programs commonly known as “zombies” that are designed to use
a computer without the knowledge and consent of the owner, or other person authorized to give consent,
and that are designed to send large quantities of data to a targeted computer network for the purpose of
degrading the targeted computer’s or network’s performance, or denying access through the network to
the targeted computer or network, resulting in what is commonly known as “denial of service” or
“distributed denial of service” attacks; and
(4) A group of computer programs commonly known as “trap doors,” “back doors” or “root
kits” that are designed to bypass standard authentication software and that are designed to allow access
or use of a computer without the knowledge or consent of the owner, or other person authorized to give
consent.
COMPUTER HACKING.
(1) The term means any of the following:
(a) Gaining access or attempting to gain access to all or part of a computer, computer
system, or a computer network without express or implied authorization with the intent to defraud or
with intent to commit a crime;
(b) Misusing computer or network services including but not limited to mail transfer
programs, file transfer programs, proxy servers, and web servers by performing functions not authorized
by the owner of the computer, computer system, or computer network or other person authorized to give
consent. As used in this division, “misuse of computer and network services” includes but is not limited
to the unauthorized use of any of the following:
1. Mail transfer programs to send mail to persons other than the authorized users of
that computer or computer network;
2. File transfer program services or proxy servers to access other computers,
computer systems, or computer networks; or
3. Web servers to redirect users to other web pages or web servers.
(c) 1. Subject to division (1)(c)2. of this definition, using a group of computer programs
commonly known as “port scanners” or “probes” to intentionally access any computer, computer
system, or computer network without the permission of the owner of the computer, computer system,
or computer network or other person authorized to give consent. The group of computer programs
referred to in this division includes but is not limited to those computer programs that use a computer
network to access a computer, computer system, or another computer network to determine any of the
48 Madeira - General Offenses
following: the presence or types of computers or computer systems on a network; the computer
network’s facilities and capabilities; the availability of computer or network services; the presence or
versions of computer software including but not limited to operating systems, computer services, or
computer contaminants; the presence of a known computer software deficiency that can be used to gain
unauthorized access to a computer, computer system, or computer network; or any other information
about a computer, computer system, or computer network not necessary for the normal and lawful
operation of the computer initiating the access.
2. The group of computer programs referred to in division (1)(c)1. of this definition
does not include standard computer software used for the normal operation, administration, management,
and test of a computer, computer system, or computer network including but not limited to domain name
services, mail transfer services, and other operating system services, computer programs commonly
called “ping”, “tcpdump”, and “traceroute” and other network monitoring and management computer
software, and computer programs commonly knows as “nslookup” and “whois” and other systems
administration computer software.
(d) The intentional use of a computer, computer system or a computer network in a manner
that exceeds any right or permission granted by the owner of the computer, computer system, or
computer network or other person authorized to give consent.
(2) The term does not include the introduction of a computer contaminant, as defined in this
section, into a computer, computer system, computer program or computer network.
COMPUTER NETWORK. A set of related and remotely-connected computers and communication
facilities that includes more than one computer system that has the capability to transmit among the
connected computers and communication facilities through the use of computer facilities.
COMPUTER PROGRAM. An ordered set of data representing coded instructions or statements that,
when executed by a computer, causes the computer to process data.
COMPUTER SERVICES. Includes but is not limited to the use of a computer system, computer
network, computer program, data that is prepared for computer use or data that is contained within a
computer system or computer network.
COMPUTER SOFTWARE. Computer programs, procedures, and other documentation associated
with the operation of a computer system.
COMPUTER SYSTEM. A computer and related devices, whether connected or unconnected,
including but not limited to data input, output, and storage devices, data communications links and
computer programs and data that make the system capable of performing specified special purpose data
processing tasks.
COUNTERFEIT TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. A telecommunications device that, alone
or with another telecommunications device, has been altered, constructed, manufactured or programmed
to acquire, intercept, receive or otherwise facilitate the use of a telecommunications service or
Offenses Against Property 49
information service without the authority or consent of the provider of the telecommunications service
or information service. The phrase includes but is not limited to a clone telephone, clone microchip,
tumbler telephone, or tumbler microchip; a wireless scanning device capable of acquiring, intercepting,
receiving, or otherwise facilitating the use of telecommunications service or information service without
immediate detection; or a device, equipment, hardware or software designed for, or capable of, altering
or changing the electronic serial number in a wireless telephone.
CREATE A SUBSTANTIAL RISK OF SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM TO ANY PERSON. Includes
the creation of a substantial risk of serious physical harm to any emergency personnel.
CREDIT CARD. Includes but is not limited to a card, code, device, or other means of access to a
customer’s account for the purpose of obtaining money, property, labor, or services on credit, or for
initiating an electronic fund transfer at a point-of-sale terminal, an automated teller machine, or a cash
dispensing machine. It also includes a county procurement card issued under R.C. § 301.29.
DANGEROUS DRUG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
DANGEROUS ORDNANCE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2923.11.
DATA. A representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts or instructions that are being
or have been prepared in a formalized manner and that are intended for use in a computer, computer
system, or computer network.
DECEPTION. To knowingly deceive another or cause another to be deceived by any false or
misleading representation, by withholding information, by preventing another from acquiring
information, or by any other conduct, act, or omission that creates, confirms, or perpetuates a false
impression in another, including a false impression as to law, value, state of mind, or other objective or
subjective fact.
DEFRAUD. To knowingly obtain, by deception, some benefit for oneself or another, or to
knowingly cause, by deception, some detriment to another.
DEPRIVE. To do any of the following:
(1) To withhold property of another permanently, or for a period that appropriates a substantial
portion of its value or use, or with purpose to restore it only upon payment of a reward or other
consideration;
(2) To dispose of property so as to make it unlikely that the owner will recover it; or
(3) To accept, use, or appropriate money, property or services, with purpose not to give proper
consideration in return for the money, property or services, and without reasonable justification or
excuse for not giving proper consideration.
50 Madeira - General Offenses
DISABLED ADULT. A person who is 18 years of age or older and has some impairment of body
or mind that makes the person unable to work at any substantially remunerative employment that the
person otherwise would be able to perform and that will, with reasonable probability, continue for a
period of at least 12 months without any present indication of recovery from the impairment, or who is
18 years of age or older and has been certified as permanently and totally disabled by an agency of this
state or the United States that has the function of so classifying persons.
DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.
ELDERLY PERSON. A person who is 65 years of age or older.
ELECTRONIC FUND TRANSFER. Has the same meaning as in 92 Stat. 3728, 15 U.S.C. § 1693a,
as amended.
EMERGENCY PERSONNEL. Means any of the following persons:
(1) A peace officer, as defined in R.C. § 2935.01;
(2) A member of a fire department or other firefighting agency of a municipal corporation,
township, township fire district, joint fire district, other political subdivision or combination of political
subdivisions;
(3) A member of a private fire company, as defined in R.C. § 9.60, or a volunteer firefighter;
(4) A member of a joint ambulance district or joint emergency medical services district;
(5) An emergency medical technician-basic, emergency medical technician-intermediate,
emergency medical technician-paramedic, ambulance operator or other member of an emergency medical
service that is owned or operated by a political subdivision or a private entity;
(6) The State Fire Marshal, the Chief Deputy State Fire Marshal or an assistant state fire
marshal; or
(7) A fire prevention officer of a political subdivision or an arson, fire or similar investigator
of a political subdivision.
FEDERALLY-LICENSED FIREARMS DEALER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5502.63.
FIREARM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2923.11.
FORGE. To fabricate or create, in whole or in part and by any means, any spurious writing, or to
make, execute, alter, complete, reproduce or otherwise purport to authenticate any writing, when the
writing in fact is not authenticated by that conduct.
Offenses Against Property 51
GAIN ACCESS. To approach, instruct, communicate with, store data in, retrieve data from or
otherwise make use of any resources of a computer, computer system, or computer network, or any
cable service or cable system both as defined in R.C. § 2913.04.
INFORMATION SERVICE.
(1) Subject to division (2) of this definition, the offering of a capability for generating,
acquiring, storing, transforming, processing, retrieving, utilizing or making available information via
telecommunications, including but not limited to electronic publishing.
(2) The term does not include any use of a capability of a type described in division (1) of this
definition for the management, control, or operation of a telecommunications system or the management
of a telecommunications service.
INTERNET. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 341.42.
MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
OCCUPIED STRUCTURE. Means any house, building, outbuilding, watercraft, aircraft, railroad
car, truck, trailer, tent or other structure, vehicle or shelter, or any portion thereof, to which any of the
following applies:
(1) It is maintained as a permanent or temporary dwelling, even though it is temporarily
unoccupied and whether nor not any person is actually present;
(2) At the time, it is occupied as the permanent or temporary habitation of any person, whether
or not any person is actually present;
(3) At the time, it is specially adapted for the overnight accommodation of any person, whether
or not any person is actually present; and
(4) At the time, any person is present or likely to be present in it.
OWNER. Unless the context requires a different meaning, any person, other than the actor, who
is the owner of, who has possession or control of, or who has any license or interest in property or
services, even though the ownership, possession, control, license, or interest is unlawful.
POLICE DOG OR HORSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.321.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2744.01.
RENTED PROPERTY. Personal property in which the right of possession and use of the property
is for a short and possibly indeterminate term in return for consideration; the rentee generally controls
the duration of possession of the property within any applicable minimum or maximum term; and the
amount of consideration is generally determined by the duration of possession of the property.
52 Madeira - General Offenses
SERVICES. Includes labor, personal services, professional services, rental services, public utility
services including wireless service as defined in R.C. § 128.01(F)(1), common carrier services, and
food, drink, transportation, entertainment, and cable television services and, for purposes of R.C.
§ 2913.04 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, includes cable services as defined in that
section.
SLUG. An object that, by virtue of its size, shape, composition, or other quality, is capable of being
inserted or deposited in a coin machine as an improper substitute for a genuine coin, bill, or token made
for that purpose.
STATE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2744.01.
TELECOMMUNICATION. The origination, emission, dissemination, transmission or reception of
data, images, signals, sounds or other intelligence or equivalence or intelligence of any nature over any
communications system by any method, including but not limited to a fiber optic, electronic, magnetic,
optical, digital or analog method.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Any instrument, equipment, machine or other device that
facilitates telecommunication, including but not limited to a computer, computer network, computer chip,
computer circuit, scanner, telephone, cellular telephone, pager, personal communications device,
transponder, receiver, radio, modem or device that enables the use of a modem.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. The providing, allowing, facilitating, or generating of any
form of telecommunication through the use of a telecommunications device over a telecommunications
system.
THEFT OFFENSE. Any of the following:
(1) A violation of R.C. § 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2911.12, 2911.13, 2911.31, 2911.32,
2913.02, 2913.03, 2913.04, 2913.041, 2913.11, 2913.21, 2913.31, 2913.32, 2913.33, 2913.34,
2913.40, 2913.42, 2913.43, 2913.44, 2913.45, 2913.47, 2913.48, former R.C. § 2913.47 or 2913.48
or R.C. § 2913.51, 2915.05 or 2921.41;
(2) A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state
or of the United States substantially equivalent to any section listed in division (1) of this definition, or
a violation of R.C. § 2913.41, 2913.81 or 2915.06 as it existed prior to July 1, 1996;
(3) An offense under an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state
or the United States involving robbery, burglary, breaking and entering, theft, embezzlement, wrongful
conversion, forgery, counterfeiting, deceit or fraud; and/or
(4) A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in committing any offense under
division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.
Offenses Against Property 53
UTTER. To issue, publish, transfer, use, put or send into circulation, deliver or display.
WRITING. Any computer software, document, letter, memorandum, note, paper, plate, data, film,
or other thing having in or upon it any written, type-written, or printed matter, and any token, stamp,
seal, credit card, badge, trademark, label or other symbol of value, right, privilege, license or
identification.
(R.C. §§ 2909.01, 2913.01) (1985 Code, § 131.01)
§ 131.02 ARSON.
(A) No person, by means of fire or explosion, shall knowingly cause or create a substantial risk of
physical harm to any property of another without the other person’s consent.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of arson. Except as otherwise provided in this division
(B), violation of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the property or the
amount of physical harm involved is $1,000 or more, then the violation is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2909.03) (1985 Code, § 131.02)
§ 131.03 CRIMINAL DAMAGING OR ENDANGERING; VEHICULAR VANDALISM.
(A) Criminal damaging or endangering.
(1) No person shall cause or create a substantial risk of physical harm to any property of
another without the other person’s consent:
(a) Knowingly, by any means; or
(b) Recklessly, by means of fire, explosion, flood, poison gas, poison, radioactive
material, caustic or corrosive material, or other inherently dangerous agency or substance.
(2) Whoever violates this division (A) is guilty of criminal damaging or endangering, a
misdemeanor of the second degree. If violation of this division (A) creates a risk of physical harm to any
person, criminal damaging or endangering is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the property involved
in a violation of this division (A) is an aircraft, an aircraft engine, propeller, appliance, spare part or any
other equipment or implement used or intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft and if the
violation creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal damaging or endangering is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the property involved in a violation of this division (A)
is an aircraft, an aircraft engine, propeller, appliance, spare part or any other equipment or implement
used or intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft and if the violation creates a substantial risk
of physical harm to any person or if the property involved in a violation of this division (A) is an
54 Madeira - General Offenses
occupied aircraft, criminal damaging or endangering is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
(R.C. § 2909.06)
(B) Vehicular vandalism.
(1) As used in this division (B):
ALLEY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
HIGHWAY. Means any highway as defined in R.C. § 4511.01 or any lane, road, street,
alley, bridge or overpass.
STREET. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
VESSEL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1547.01.
WATERS IN THIS STATE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1547.01.
(2) No person shall knowingly, and by any means, drop or throw any object at, onto or in the
path of any of the following:
(a) Any vehicle on a highway; or
(b) Any boat or vessel on any of the waters in this state.
(3) Whoever violates this division (B) is guilty of vehicular vandalism. Except as otherwise
provided in this division (B)(3), vehicular vandalism is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation
of this division (B) creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person or the violation of this
division (B) causes serious physical harm to property, vehicular vandalism is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law. If the violation of this division (B) causes physical harm to any person or
serious physical harm to any person, vehicular vandalism is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(R.C. § 2909.09)
(1985 Code, § 131.03) (Ord. 1169, passed 6-10-1974; Ord. 1306, passed 6-13-1977)
§ 131.04 CRIMINAL MISCHIEF.
(A) No person shall:
(1) Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy or otherwise
improperly tamper with the property of another;
Offenses Against Property 55
(2) With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of property of another, employ a tear
gas device, stink bomb, smoke generator or other device releasing a substance that is harmful or
offensive to persons exposed, or that tends to cause public alarm;
(3) Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy or otherwise
improperly tamper with a bench mark, triangulation station, boundary marker or other survey station,
monument or marker;
(4) Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy or otherwise
improperly tamper with any safety device, the property of another, or the property of the offender when
required or placed for the safety of others, so as to destroy or diminish its effectiveness or availability
for its intended purpose;
(5) With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of the property of another, set a fire
on the land of another or place personal property that has been set on fire on the land of another, which
fire or personal property is outside and apart from any building, other structure or personal property that
is on that land; and
(6) Without privilege to do so, and with intent to impair the functioning of any computer,
computer system, computer network, computer software or computer program, knowingly do any of the
following:
(a) In any manner or by any means, including but not limited to computer hacking, alter,
damage, destroy or modify a computer, computer system, computer network, computer software or
computer program or data contained in a computer, computer system, computer network, computer
software or computer program; and
(b) Introduce a computer contaminant into a computer, computer system, computer
network, computer software or computer program.
(B) As used in this section, SAFETY DEVICE means any fire extinguisher, fire hose or fire axe,
or any fire escape, emergency exit or emergency escape equipment, or any life line, life-saving ring, life
preserver, or life boat or raft, or any alarm, light, flare, signal, sign or notice intended to warn of danger
or emergency, or intended for other safety purposes, or any guard railing or safety barricade, or any
traffic sign or signal, or any railroad grade crossing sign, signal or gate, or any first aid or survival
equipment, or any other device, apparatus or equipment intended for protecting or preserving the safety
of persons or property.
(C) Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal mischief, and shall be punished as provided
in division (C)(1) or (C)(2) of this section.
(1) Except as otherwise provided in this division (C), criminal mischief committed in violation
of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4) or (A)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third degree.
Except as otherwise provided in this division (C), if the violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3),
(A)(4) or (A)(5) of this section creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal mischief
56 Madeira - General Offenses
committed in violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4) or (A)(5) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the property involved in the violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2),
(A)(3), (A)(4) or (A)(5) of this section is an aircraft, an aircraft engine, propeller, appliance, spare part,
fuel, lubricant, hydraulic fluid, any other equipment, implement or material used or intended to be used
in the operation of an aircraft, or any cargo carried or intended to be carried in an aircraft and if the
violation creates any risk of physical harm to any person, or if the aircraft in question is an occupied
aircraft, criminal mischief committed in violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4) or (A)(5) of
this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(2) Except as otherwise provided in this division (C), criminal mischief committed in violation
of division (A)(6) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the computer,
computer system, computer network, computer software, computer program or data involved in the
violation of division (A)(6) of this section or the loss to the victim resulting from the violation is $1,000
or more, or if the computer, computer system, computer network, computer software, computer program
or data involved in the violation of division (A)(6) is used or intended to be used in the operation of an
aircraft and the violation creates any risk of physical harm to any person, or if the aircraft in question
is an occupied aircraft, criminal mischief committed in violation of division (A)(6) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2909.07) (1985 Code, § 131.04) (Ord. 1169, passed 6-10-1974; Ord. 1306, passed 6-13-1977;
Ord. 87-44, passed 9-8-1987)
§ 131.05 DETERMINING PROPERTY VALUE OR AMOUNT OF PHYSICAL HARM.
(A) The following criteria shall be used in determining the value of property or amount of physical
harm involved in a violation of § 131.02.
(1) If the property is an heirloom, memento, collector’s item, antique, museum piece,
manuscript, document, record or other thing that is either irreplaceable or is replaceable only on the
expenditure of substantial time, effort or money, the value of the property or the amount of physical
harm involved is the amount that would compensate the owner for its loss.
(2) If the property is not covered under division (A)(1) of this section, and the physical harm
is such that the property can be restored substantially to its former condition, the amount of physical
harm involved is the reasonable cost of restoring the property.
(3) If the property is not covered under division (A)(1) of this section, and the physical harm
is such that the property cannot be restored substantially to its former condition, the value of the
property, in the case of personal property, is the cost of replacing the property with new property of like
kind and quality, and in the case of real property or real property fixtures, is the difference in the fair
market value of the property immediately before and immediately after the offense.
(B) As used in this section, FAIR MARKET VALUE has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.61.
Offenses Against Property 57
(C) Prima facie evidence of the value of property, as provided in R.C. § 2913.61(D), may be used
to establish the value of property pursuant to this section.
(R.C. § 2909.11(B) - (D)) (1985 Code, § 131.05)
§ 131.06 CRIMINAL TRESPASS.
(A) No person, without privilege to do so, shall do any of the following:
(1) Knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of another;
(2) Knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of another, the use of which is lawfully
restricted to certain persons, purposes, modes or hours, when the offender knows the offender is in
violation of any such restriction or is reckless in that regard;
(3) Recklessly enter or remain on the land or premises of another, as to which notice against
unauthorized access or presence is given by actual communication to the offender, or in a manner
prescribed by law, or by posting in a manner reasonably calculated to come to the attention of potential
intruders, or by fencing or other enclosure manifestly designed to restrict access; or
(4) Being on the land or premises of another, negligently fail or refuse to leave upon being
notified by signage posted in a conspicuous place or otherwise being notified to do so by the owner or
occupant, or the agent or servant of either.
(B) It is no defense to a charge under this section that the land or premises involved was owned,
controlled or in custody of a public agency.
(C) It is no defense to a charge under this section that the offender was authorized to enter or remain
on the land or premises involved, when the authorization was secured by deception.
(D) (1) Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of criminal trespass, a misdemeanor
of the fourth degree.
(2) Notwithstanding R.C. § 2929.28, if the person, in committing the violation of this section,
used a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle, the court shall impose a fine of two
times the usual amount imposed for the violation.
(3) If an offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations
of this section, R.C. § 2911.21 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and the offender, in
committing each violation, used a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle, the court,
in addition to or independent of all other penalties imposed for the violation, may impound the certificate
of registration of that snowmobile or off-highway motorcycle or the certificate of registration and license
plate of that all-purpose vehicle for not less than 60 days. In such a case, R.C. § 4519.47 applies.
58 Madeira - General Offenses
(E) Notwithstanding any provision of the Ohio Revised Code, if the offender, in committing the
violation of this section, used an all-purpose vehicle, the Clerk of the court shall pay the fine imposed
pursuant to this section to the State Recreational Vehicle Fund created by R.C. § 4519.11.
(F) As used in this section:
(1) ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLE, OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLE and SNOWMOBILE.
Have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4519.01.
(2) LAND or PREMISES. Includes any land, building, structure or place belonging to,
controlled by, or in custody of another, and any separate enclosure or room, or portion thereof.
(R.C. § 2911.21) (Ord. 1306, passed 6-13-1977)
(G) Criminal trespass on a place of public amusement:
(1) As used in this division (G), PLACE OF PUBLIC AMUSEMENT means a stadium, theater
or other facility, whether licensed or not, at which a live performance, sporting event or other activity
takes place for entertainment of the public and to which access is made available to the public, regardless
of whether admission is charged;
(2) No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly enter or remain on any restricted
portion of a place of public amusement and, as a result of that conduct, interrupt or cause the delay of
the live performance, sporting event or other activity taking place at the place of public amusement after
a printed written notice has been given as provided in division (G)(4)(a) of this section that the general
public is restricted from access to that restricted portion of the place of public amusement. A restricted
portion of a place of public amusement may include but is not limited to a playing field, an athletic
surface or a stage located at the place of public amusement;
(3) An owner or lessee of a place of public amusement, an agent of the owner or lessee, or a
performer or participant at a place of public amusement may use reasonable force to restrain and remove
a person from a restricted portion of the place of public amusement if the person enters or remains on
the restricted portion of the place of public amusement and, as a result of that conduct, interrupts or
causes the delay of the live performance, sporting event or other activity taking place at the place of
public amusement. This division (G) does not provide immunity from criminal liability for any use of
force beyond reasonable force by an owner or lessee of a place of public amusement, an agent of either
the owner or lessee, or a performer or participant at a place of public amusement;
(4) (a) Notice has been given that the general public is restricted from access to a portion of
a place of public amusement if a printed written notice of the restricted access has been conspicuously
posted or exhibited at the entrance to that portion of the place of public amusement. If a printed written
notice is posted or exhibited as described in this division (G) regarding a portion of a place of public
amusement, in addition to that posting or exhibition, notice that the general public is restricted from
access to that portion of the place of public amusement also may be given, but is not required to be
given, by either of the following means:
Offenses Against Property 59
1. By notifying the person personally, either orally or in writing, that access to that
portion of the place of public amusement is restricted; or
2. By broadcasting over the public address system of the place of public amusement
an oral warning that access to that portion of the place of public amusement is restricted.
(b) If notice that the general public is restricted from access to a portion of a place of
public amusement is provided by the posting or exhibition of a printed written notice as described in
division (G)(4)(a) of this section, the municipality, in a criminal prosecution for a violation of division
(G)(2) of this section, is not required to prove that the defendant received actual notice that the general
public is restricted from access to a portion of a place of public amusement.
(5) (a) Whoever violates division (G)(2) of this section is guilty of criminal trespass on a place
of public amusement, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(b) In addition to any jail term, fine or other sentence, penalty or sanction it imposes upon
the offender pursuant to division (G)(5)(a) of this section, a court may require an offender who violates
this section to perform not less than 30 and not more than 120 hours of supervised community service
work.
(R.C. § 2911.23)
(1985 Code, § 131.06)
§ 131.07 AGGRAVATED TRESPASS.
(A) No person shall enter or remain on the land or premises of another with purpose to commit on
that land or those premises a misdemeanor, the elements of which involve causing physical harm to
another person or causing another person to believe that the offender will cause physical harm to him
or her; and
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of aggravated trespass, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2911.211)
(1985 Code, § 131.061)
§ 131.08 TAMPERING WITH COIN MACHINES.
(A) No person, with purpose to commit theft or to defraud, shall knowingly enter, force an entrance
into, tamper with or insert any part of an instrument into any coin machine.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of tampering with coin machines, a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this section or of any theft
offense as defined in R.C. § 2913.01, tampering with coin machines is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2911.32) (1985 Code, § 131.07)
60 Madeira - General Offenses
§ 131.09 THEFT.
(A) No person, with purpose to deprive the owner of property or services, shall knowingly obtain
or exert control over either the property or services in any of the following ways:
(1) Without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give consent;
(2) Beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of the owner or person authorized to
give consent;
(3) By deception;
(4) By threat; or
(5) By intimidation.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of theft. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
a violation of this section is petty theft, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If any of the following criteria
are met, then a violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law:
(1) If the value of the property or services is $1,000 or more;
(2) If the property stolen is any of the property listed in R.C. § 2913.71;
(3) If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled adult;
(4) If the property stolen is a firearm or dangerous ordnance;
(5) If the property stolen is a motor vehicle;
(6) If the property stolen is any dangerous drug, or if the offender previously has been
convicted of a felony drug abuse offense;
(7) If the property stolen is a police dog or horse or an assistance dog and the offender knows
or should know that the property stolen is a police dog or horse or an assistance dog;
(8) If the property stolen is anhydrous ammonia; or
(9) If the property stolen is a special purpose article as defined in R.C. § 4737.04 or is a bulk
merchandise container as defined in R.C. § 4737.012.
(C) In addition to the penalties described in division (B) of this section, if the offender committed
the violation by causing a motor vehicle to leave the premises of an establishment at which gasoline is
Offenses Against Property 61
offered for retail sale without the offender making full payment for gasoline that was dispensed into the
fuel tank of the motor vehicle or into another container, the court may do one of the following:
(1) Unless division (C)(2) of this section applies, suspend for not more than six months the
offenders driver’s license, probationary driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, or nonresident operating privilege;
(2) If the offender’s driver’s license, probationary driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, or nonresident operating privilege has previously been suspended pursuant
to division (C)(1) of this section, or any other substantially equivalent state or local law, impose a class
seven suspension of the offender’s license, permit, or privilege from the range specified in R.C.
§ 4510.02(A)(7), provided that the suspension shall be at least six months; or
(3) The court, in lieu of suspending the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license,
probationary driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, or nonresident operating privilege pursuant
to division (C)(1) or (C)(2) of this section, instead may require the offender to perform community
service for a number of hours determined by the court.
(D) In addition to the penalties described in division (B) of this section, if the offender committed
the violation by stealing rented property or rental services, the court may order that the offender make
restitution pursuant to R.C. § 2929.18 or R.C. § 2929.28. Restitution may include, but is not limited
to, the cost of repairing or replacing the stolen property, or the cost of repairing the stolen property and
any loss of revenue resulting from deprivation of the property due to theft of rental services that is less
than or equal to the actual value of the property at the time it was rented. Evidence of intent to commit
theft of rented property or rental services shall be determined pursuant to the provisions of R.C.
§ 2913.72.
(E) The sentencing court that suspends an offender’s license, permit, or nonresident operating
privilege under division (C) of this section may grant the offender limited driving privileges during the
period of the suspension in accordance with R.C. Chapter 4510.
(R.C. § 2913.02) (1985 Code, § 131.08)
§ 131.10 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF A VEHICLE.
(A) No person shall knowingly use or operate an aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat or
other motor-propelled vehicle without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give consent.
(B) No person shall knowingly use or operate an aircraft, motor vehicle, motorboat or other
motor-propelled vehicle without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give consent, and either
remove it from this state, or keep possession of it for more than 48 hours.
(C) The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this section.
62 Madeira - General Offenses
(1) At the time of the alleged offense, the actor, though mistaken, reasonably believed that he
or she was authorized to use or operate the property.
(2) At the time of the alleged offense, the actor reasonably believed that the owner or person
empowered to give consent would authorize the actor to use or operate the property.
(D) Whoever violates this section is guilty of unauthorized use of a vehicle.
(1) Except as otherwise provided in this division (D)(1), a violation of division (A) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled
adult and if the victim incurs a loss as a result of the violation, a violation of division (A) of this section
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(2) A violation of division (B) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(R.C. § 2913.03) (1985 Code, § 131.09)
§ 131.11 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PROPERTY; UNAUTHORIZED USE OF COMPUTER
OR TELECOMMUNICATION PROPERTY.
(A) No person shall knowingly use or operate the property of another without the consent of the
owner or person authorized to give consent.
(B) No person, in any manner and by any means, including but not limited to computer hacking,
shall knowingly gain access to, attempt to gain access to, or cause access to be gained to any computer,
computer system, computer network, cable service, cable system, telecommunications device,
telecommunications service or information service without the consent of, or beyond the scope of the
express or implied consent of, the owner of the computer, computer system, computer network, cable
service, cable system, telecommunications device, telecommunications service or information service
or other person authorized to give consent.
(C) No person shall knowingly gain access to, attempt to gain access to, cause access to be granted
to, or disseminate information gained from access to the law enforcement automated database system
created pursuant to R.C. § 5503.10 without the consent of, or beyond the scope of the express or implied
consent of, the chair of the Law Enforcement Automated Data System Steering Committee.
(D) No person shall knowingly gain access to, attempt to gain access to, cause access to be granted
to, or disseminate information gained from access to the Ohio law enforcement gateway established and
operated pursuant to R.C. § 109.57(C)(1) without the consent of, or beyond the scope of the express or
implied consent of, the Superintendent of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation.
(E) The affirmative defenses contained in R.C. § 2913.03(C) are affirmative defenses to a charge
under this section.
Offenses Against Property 63
(F) Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of unauthorized use of property. Except
as otherwise provided in this division (F), unauthorized use of property is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(1) If unauthorized use of property is committed for the purpose of devising or executing a
scheme to defraud or to obtain property or services, unauthorized use of property is whichever of the
following is applicable:
(a) Except as otherwise provided below, unauthorized use of property is a misdemeanor
of the first degree; and
(b) If the value of the property or services or the loss to the victim is $1,000 or more, it
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(2) If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled adult, unauthorized use of
property is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(G) Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of unauthorized use of computer, cable
or telecommunication property, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(H) Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of unauthorized use of the law
enforcement automated database system, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(I) Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty of unauthorized use of the Ohio law
enforcement gateway, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(J) As used in this section:
CABLE OPERATOR. Means any person or group of persons that does either of the following:
(a) Provides cable service over a cable system and directly through one or more affiliates
owns a significant interest in that cable system; or
(b) Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management
and operation of a cable system.
CABLE SERVICE. Means any of the following:
(a) The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or of information that
a cable operator makes available to all subscribers generally;
(b) Subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the selection or use of video
programming or of information that a cable operator makes available to all subscribers generally, both
as described in division (a) of this definition; or
64 Madeira - General Offenses
(c) Any cable television service.
CABLE SYSTEM. Means any facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and
associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service
that includes video programming and that is provided to multiple subscribers within a community. The
term does not include any of the following:
(a) Any facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more
television broadcast stations;
(b) Any facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-of-way;
(c) Any facility of a common carrier that, under 47 U.S.C. § 522(7)(c), is excluded from
the term CABLE SYSTEM as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(7);
(d) Any open video system that complies with 47 U.S.C. § 573; or
(e) Any facility of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility system.
(R.C. § 2913.04) (1985 Code, § 131.10) (Ord. 1169, passed 6-10-1974; Ord. 1306, passed 6-13-1977;
Ord. 87-44, passed 9-8-1987)
§ 131.12 PASSING BAD CHECKS.
(A) As used in this section:
CHECK. Includes any form of debit from a demand deposit account, including but not limited
to any of the following:
(a) A check, bill of exchange, draft, order of withdrawal or similar negotiable or
non-negotiable instrument; or
(b) An electronic check, electronic transaction, debit card transaction, check card
transaction, substitute check, web check or any form of automated clearing house transaction.
ISSUE A CHECK. Means causing any form of debit from a demand deposit account.
(B) No person, with purpose to defraud, shall issue or transfer or cause to be issued or transferred
a check or other negotiable instrument, knowing that it will be dishonored or knowing that a person has
ordered or will order stop payment on the check or other negotiable instrument.
(C) For purposes of this section, a person who issues or transfers a check or other negotiable
instrument is presumed to know that it will be dishonored if either of the following occurs:
Offenses Against Property 65
(1) The drawer has no account with the drawee at the time of issue or the stated date,
whichever is later; or
(2) The check or other negotiable instrument was properly refused payment for insufficient
funds upon presentment within 30 days after issue or the stated date, whichever is later, and the liability
of the drawer, indorser or any party who may be liable thereon is not discharged by payment or
satisfaction within ten days after receiving notice of dishonor.
(D) For purposes of this section, a person who issues or transfers a check, bill of exchange or other
draft is presumed to have the purpose to defraud if the drawer fails to comply with R.C. § 1349.16 by
doing any of the following when opening a checking account intended for personal, family or household
purposes at a financial institution:
(1) Falsely stating that he or she has not been issued a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or identification card issued under R.C. § 4507.50;
(2) Furnishing the license or card, or another identification document that contains false
information; and
(3) Making a false statement with respect to the drawer’s current address or any additional
relevant information reasonably required by the financial institution.
(E) In determining the value of the payment for purposes of division (F) of this section, the court
may aggregate all checks and other negotiable instruments that the offender issued or transferred or
caused to be issued or transferred in violation of division (B) of this section within a period of 180
consecutive days.
(F) Whoever violates this section is guilty of passing bad checks. Except as otherwise provided in
this division (F), passing bad checks is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the check or checks or other
negotiable instrument or instruments are issued or transferred to a single vendor or single other person
for the payment of $1,000 or more, or if the check or checks or other negotiable instrument or
instruments are issued or transferred to multiple vendors or persons for the payment of $1,500 or more,
passing bad checks is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.11) (1985 Code, § 131.11)
§ 131.13 MISUSE OF CREDIT CARDS.
(A) No person shall do any of the following:
(1) Practice deception for the purpose of procuring the issuance of a credit card, when a credit
card is issued in actual reliance thereon; or
(2) Knowingly buy or sell a credit card from or to a person other than the issuer.
66 Madeira - General Offenses
(B) No person, with purpose to defraud, shall do any of the following:
(1) Obtain control over a credit card as security for a debt;
(2) Obtain property or services by the use of a credit card, in one or more transactions,
knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the card has expired or been revoked, or was
obtained, is retained, or is being used in violation of law;
(3) Furnish property or services upon presentation of a credit card, knowing that the card is
being used in violation of law; or
(4) Represent or cause to be represented to the issuer of a credit card that property or services
have been furnished, knowing that the representation is false.
(C) No person, with purpose to violate this section, shall receive, possess, control or dispose of a
credit card.
(D) Whoever violates this section is guilty of misuse of credit cards.
(1) Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3) of this section, a violation of division (A),
(B)(1) or (C) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(2) Except as otherwise provided in this division (D)(2) or division (D)(3) of this section, a
violation of division (B)(2), (B)(3) or (B)(4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
cumulative retail value of the property and services involved in one or more violations of division (B)(2),
(B)(3) or (B)(4) of this section which violations involve one or more credit card accounts and occur
within a period of 90 consecutive days commencing on the date of the first violation, is $1,000 or more,
misuse of credit cards is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(3) If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled adult, and if the offense involves
a violation of division (B)(1) or (B)(2) of this section, misuse of credit cards is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.21) (1985 Code, § 131.12) (Ord. 1169, passed 6-10-1974; Ord. 1306, passed 6-13-1977;
Ord. 1632, passed 4-18-1983; Ord. 87-44, passed 9-8-1987)
§ 131.14 MAKING OR USING SLUGS.
(A) No person shall do any of the following:
(1) Insert or deposit a slug in a coin machine, with purpose to defraud; or
(2) Make, possess or dispose of a slug, with purpose of enabling another to defraud by
inserting or depositing it in a coin machine.
Offenses Against Property 67
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of making or using slugs, a misdemeanor of the second
degree.
(R.C. § 2913.33) (1985 Code, § 131.13) (Ord. 1306, passed 6-13-1977)
§ 131.15 PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF PURPOSE TO DEFRAUD.
In a prosecution of a person for a theft offense that alleges that the person, with purpose to defraud
or knowing that he or she was facilitating a fraud, hired or rented an aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle,
motorboat, sailboat, camper, trailer, horse, buggy or other property or equipment, kept or operated any
of the same that has been hired or rented, or engaged accommodations at a hotel, motel, inn,
campground or other hostelry, it is prima facie evidence of purpose to defraud if the person did any of
the following:
(A) Used deception to induce the rental agency to furnish the person with the aircraft, motor
vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat, sailboat, camper, trailer, horse, buggy or other property or equipment,
or used deception to induce the hostelry to furnish the person with accommodations;
(B) Hired or rented any aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat, sailboat, camper, trailer,
horse, buggy or other property or equipment, or engaged accommodations, knowing that he or she is
without sufficient means to pay the hire or rental;
(C) Absconded without paying the hire or rental;
(D) Knowingly failed to pay the hire or rental as required by the contract of hire or rental, without
reasonable excuse for the failure; or
(E) Knowingly failed to return hired or rented property as required by the contract of hire or rental,
without reasonable excuse for the failure.
(R.C. § 2913.41) (1985 Code, § 131.14)
§ 131.16 TAMPERING WITH RECORDS.
(A) No person, knowing that he or she has no privilege to do so, and with purpose to defraud or
knowing that he or she is facilitating a fraud, shall do any of the following:
(1) Falsify, destroy, remove, conceal, alter, deface or mutilate any writing, computer software,
data or record; or
(2) Utter any writing or record, knowing it to have been tampered with as provided in division
(A)(1) of this section.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of tampering with records.
68 Madeira - General Offenses
(1) Except as provided in division (B)(3) of this section, if the offense does not involve data
or computer software, tampering with records is whichever of the following is applicable:
(a) If division (B)(1)(b) of this section does not apply, it is a misdemeanor of the first
degree; or
(b) If the writing or record is a will unrevoked at the time of the offense, it is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(2) Except as provided in division (B)(3) of this section, if the offense involves a violation of
division (A) of this section involving data or computer software, tampering with records is whichever
of the following is applicable:
(a) Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2)(b) of this section, it is a misdemeanor
of the first degree; or
(b) If the value of the data or computer software involved in the offense or the loss to the
victim is $1,000 or more or if the offense is committed for the purpose of devising or executing a scheme
to defraud or to obtain property or services and the value of the property or services or the loss to the
victim is $7,500 or more, it is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(3) If the writing, data, computer software or record is kept by or belongs to a local, state or
federal governmental entity, it is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.42) (1985 Code, § 131.15) (Ord. 1169, passed 6-10-1974; Ord. 1306, passed 6-13-1977;
Ord. 87-44, passed 9-8-1987)
§ 131.17 SECURING WRITINGS BY DECEPTION.
(A) No person, by deception, shall cause another to execute any writing that disposes of or
encumbers property, or by which a pecuniary obligation is incurred.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of securing writings by deception. Except as otherwise
provided in this division (B), securing writings by deception is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
value of the property or the obligation involved is $1,000 or more, securing writings by deception is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate to state law. If the victim of the offense is an elderly person
or disabled adult, securing writings by deception is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.43) (1985 Code, § 131.16)
§ 131.18 DEFRAUDING CREDITORS.
(A) No person, with purpose to defraud one or more of his or her creditors, shall do any of the
following:
Offenses Against Property 69
(1) Remove, conceal, destroy, encumber, convey or otherwise deal with any of his or her
property; or
(2) Misrepresent or refuse to disclose to a fiduciary appointed to administer or manage his or
her affairs or estate, the existence, amount or location of any of his or her property, or any other
information regarding the property which he or she is legally required to furnish to the fiduciary.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of defrauding creditors. Except as otherwise provided
in this division (B), defrauding creditors is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the property
involved is $1,000 or more, defrauding creditors is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.45) (1985 Code, § 131.17)
§ 131.19 RECEIVING STOLEN PROPERTY.
(A) No person shall receive, retain or dispose of property of another knowing or having reasonable
cause to believe that the property has been obtained through commission of a theft offense.
(B) It is not a defense to a charge of receiving stolen property in violation of this section that the
property was obtained by means other than through the commission of a theft offense if the property was
explicitly represented to the accused person as being obtained through the commission of a theft offense.
(C) Whoever violates this section is guilty of receiving stolen property. Except as otherwise
provided in this division, receiving stolen property is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If any of the
following criteria are met, then a violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law:
(1) The value of the property involved is $1,000 or more;
(2) The property involved is any of the property listed in R.C. § 2913.71;
(3) The property involved is a firearm or dangerous ordnance, as defined in R.C. § 2923.11;
(4) The property involved is a motor vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4501.01;
(5) The property involved is any dangerous drug, as defined in R.C. § 4729.01; or
(6) The property involved in violation of this section is a special purchase article as defined in
R.C. § 4737.04 or a bulk merchandise container as defined in R.C. § 4737.012.
(R.C. § 2913.51) (1985 Code, § 131.18) (Ord. 1306, passed 6-13-1977; Ord. 1632, passed 4-18-1983;
Ord. 87-44, passed 9-8-1987)
70 Madeira - General Offenses
§ 131.20 VALUE OF STOLEN PROPERTY.
(A) If more than one item of property or services is involved in a theft offense or in a violation of
R.C. § 1716.14(A) involving a victim who is an elderly person or disabled adult, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the value of the property or services involved for the purpose of
determining the value as required by R.C. § 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value of all property or services
involved in the offense.
(B) (1) When a series of offenses under R.C. § 2913.02, or a series of violations of, attempts to
commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate or complicity in violations of R.C. § 1716.14(A), R.C.
§ 2913.02, 2913.03 or 2913.04, R.C. § 2913.21(B)(1) or (B)(2) or R.C. § 2913.31 or 2913.43 involving
a victim who is an elderly person or disabled adult, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance
to any of these offenses, is committed by the offender in the offender’s same employment, capacity or
relationship to another, all of those offenses shall be tried as a single offense. The value of the property
or services involved in the series of offenses for the purpose of determining the value as required by
R.C. § 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value of all property and services involved in all offenses in the
series.
(2) If an offender commits a series of offenses under R.C. § 2913.02 that involves a common
course of conduct to defraud multiple victims, all of the offenses may be tried as a single offense. If an
offender is being tried for the commission of a series of violations of, attempts to commit a violation of,
conspiracies to violate or complicity in violations of R.C. § 1716.14(A), R.C. § 2913.02, 2913.03, or
2913.04, R.C. § 2913.21(B)(1) or (B)(2), or R.C. § 2913.31 or 2913.43, whether committed against
one victim or more than one victim, involving a victim who is an elderly person or disabled adult, or
any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, pursuant to a scheme or course
of conduct, all of those offenses may be tried as a single offense. If the offenses are tried as a single
offense, the value of the property or services involved for the purpose of determining the value as
required by R.C. § 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value of all property and services involved in all of the
offenses in the course of conduct.
(3) When a series of two or more offenses under R.C. § 2913.40, 2913.48 or 2921.41 is
committed by the offender in the offender’s same employment, capacity or relationship to another, all
of those offenses may be tried as a single offense. If the offenses are tried as a single offense, the value
of the property or services involved for the purpose of determining the value as required by R.C.
§ 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value of all property and services involved in all of the offenses in the
series of two or more offenses.
(4) In prosecuting a single offense under division (B)(1), (B)(2) or (B)(3) of this section, it is
not necessary to separately allege and prove each offense in the series. Rather, it is sufficient to allege
and prove that the offender, within a given span of time, committed one or more theft offenses or
violations of R.C. § 2913.40, 2913.48 or 2921.41 in the offender’s same employment, capacity or
relationship to another as described in division (B)(1) or (B)(3) of this section, or committed one or more
theft offenses that involve a common course of conduct to defraud multiple victims or a scheme or course
of conduct as described in division (B)(2) of this section. While it is not necessary to separately allege
and prove each offense in the series in order to prosecute a single offense under division (B)(1), (B)(2)
Offenses Against Property 71
or (B)(3) of this section, it remains necessary in prosecuting them as a single offense to prove the
aggregate value of the property or services in order to meet the requisite statutory offense level sought
by the prosecution.
(C) The following criteria shall be used in determining the value of property or services involved
in a theft offense:
(1) The value of an heirloom, memento, collector’s item, antique, museum piece, manuscript,
document, record or other thing that has intrinsic worth to its owner and that either is irreplaceable or
is replaceable only on the expenditure of substantial time, effort or money, is the amount which would
compensate the owner for its loss;
(2) The value of personal effects and household goods, and of materials, supplies, equipment
and fixtures used in the profession, business, trade, occupation or avocation of its owner, which property
is not covered under division (C)(1) of this section, and which retains substantial utility for its purpose
regardless of its age or condition, is the cost of replacing such property with new property of like kind
and quality; and
(3) The value of any real or personal property that is not covered under division (C)(1) or
(C)(2) of this section, and the value of services, is the fair market value of the property or services. As
used in this section, FAIR MARKET VALUE is the money consideration which a buyer would give and
a seller would accept for property or services, assuming that the buyer is willing to buy and the seller
is willing to sell, that both are fully informed as to all facts material to the transaction, and that neither
is under any compulsion to act.
(D) Without limitation on the evidence which may be used to establish the value of property or
services involved in a theft offense:
(1) When the property involved is personal property held for sale at wholesale or retail, the
price at which the property was held for sale is prima facie evidence of its value;
(2) When the property involved is a security or commodity traded on an exchange, the closing
price or, if there is no closing price, the asked price, given in the latest marked quotation prior to the
offense, is prima facie evidence of the value of the security or commodity;
(3) When the property involved is livestock, poultry or raw agricultural products for which a
local market price is available, the latest local market price prior to the offense is prima facie evidence
of the value of the livestock, poultry or products;
(4) When the property involved is a negotiable instrument, the face value is prima facie
evidence of the value of the instrument;
(5) When the property involved is a warehouse receipt, bill of lading, pawn ticket, claim check
or other instrument entitling the holder or bearer to receive property, the face value or, if there is no face
72 Madeira - General Offenses
value, the value of the property covered by the instrument less any payment necessary to receive the
property, is prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument;
(6) When the property involved is a ticket of admission, ticket for transportation, coupon, token
or other instrument entitling the holder or bearer to receive property or services, the face value or, if
there is no face value, the value of the property or services which may be received by the instrument is
prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument;
(7) When the services involved are gas, electricity, water, telephone, transportation, shipping
or other services for which the rate is established by law, the duly established rate is prima facie evidence
of the value of the services; and
(8) When the services involved are services for which the rate is not established by law, and
the offender has been notified prior to the offense of the rate for the services, either in writing, or orally,
or by posting in a manner reasonably calculated to come to the attention of potential offenders, the rate
contained in the notice is prima facie evidence of the value of the services.
(R.C. § 2913.61(B) - (E)) (1985 Code, § 131.19)
§ 131.21 DEGREE OF OFFENSE WHEN CERTAIN PROPERTY INVOLVED.
Regardless of the value of the property involved, and regardless of whether the offender previously
has been convicted of a theft offense, a violation of § 131.08 or § 131.18 is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law if the property involved is any of the following:
(A) A credit card;
(B) A printed form for a check or other negotiable instrument, that on its face identifies the drawer
or maker for whose use it is designed or identifies the account on which it is to be drawn, and that has
not been executed by the drawer or maker or on which the amount is blank;
(C) A motor vehicle identification license plate as prescribed by R.C. § 4503.22, a temporary
license placard or windshield sticker as prescribed by R.C. § 4503.182 or any comparable license plate,
placard or sticker as prescribed by the applicable law of another state or the United States;
(D) A blank form for a certificate of title or a manufacturer’s or importer’s certificate to a motor
vehicle, as prescribed by R.C. § 4505.07; or
(E) A blank form for any license listed in R.C. § 4507.01.
(R.C. § 2913.71) (1985 Code, § 131.20)
Offenses Against Property 73
§ 131.22 INJURING VINES, BUSHES, TREES OR CROPS.
(A) No person, without privilege to do so, shall recklessly cut down, destroy, girdle or otherwise
injure a vine, bush, shrub, sapling, tree or crop standing or growing on the land of another or upon
public land.
(B) In addition to the penalty provided in division (C) of this section, whoever violates this section
is liable in treble damages for the injury caused.
(R.C. § 901.51)
(C) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 901.99(A)) (1985 Code, § 131.21) (Ord. 1306, passed 6-13-1977)
§ 131.23 TAMPERING WITH OR REMOVING MUNICIPAL PROPERTY.
(A) It shall be unlawful to maliciously tamper with, injure, destroy, steal or remove any lamp,
lantern, lamppost, pole, cable, electric line, tool, hose, pipe, conduit, road material, earth, stone,
ordinance or other posted notice, street sign or any other property or material owned or under the
supervision or control of this municipality or any department thereof.
(B) Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(1985 Code, § 131.22) (Ord. 1169, passed 6-10-1974; Ord. 1306, passed 6-13-1977)
§ 131.24 TAMPERING WITH HYDRANT, PIPE OR METER.
(A) No person shall maliciously open, adjust or interfere with a fire hydrant, valve, regulator,
gauge, gate, disc, curb cock, stopcock, meter or other regulator, operating or measuring device, or
appliance in or attached to the wells, tanks, reservoirs conduits, pipes, mains, service pipes, house pipes,
or other pipes or apparatus of a water company or furnisher of water, with intent to cause the escape of
water or to injure or destroy such property.
(B) No person shall tap, sever, open, or make unauthorized connections with a main or pipe used
or intended for the transmission of water. This section does not apply to the agent or employee, for that
purpose, of the owner or operator of the appliances referred to in this section, and does not apply to
anything done by or under authority of the fire department.
(C) Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of tampering with a hydrant, pipe
or meter, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4933.22) (1985 Code, § 131.23) (Ord. 1169, passed 6-10-1974; Ord. 1306, passed 6-13-1977)
74 Madeira - General Offenses
§ 131.25 POSSESSION OF PROPERTY BELONGING TO THE MUNICIPALITY.
Whoever, without being duly authorized, shall have in his or her control or possession any
equipment, tools, implements or other property belonging to the municipality shall be guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(1985 Code, § 131.24) (Ord. 1169, passed 6-10-1974; Ord. 1306, passed 6-13-1977)
§ 131.26 DAMAGING OR ENDANGERING AIRCRAFT, AIRPORT OPERATIONS.
(A) As used in this section:
AIR GUN. Means a hand pistol or rifle that propels its projectile by means of releasing
compressed air, carbon dioxide or other gas.
AIRPORT OPERATIONAL SURFACE. Means any surface of land or water that is developed,
posted or marked so as to give an observer reasonable notice that the surface is designed and developed
for the purpose of storing, parking, taxiing or operating aircraft, or any surface of land or water that is
actually being used for any of those purposes.
FIREARM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2923.11.
SPRING-OPERATED GUN. Means a hand pistol or rifle that propels a projectile not less than
four or more than five millimeters in diameter by means of a spring.
(B) No person shall do either of the following:
(1) Knowingly throw an object at, or drop an object upon, any moving aircraft; or
(2) Knowingly shoot with a bow and arrow, or knowingly discharge a firearm, air gun or
spring-operated gun, at or toward any aircraft.
(C) No person shall knowingly or recklessly shoot with a bow and arrow, or shall knowingly or
recklessly discharge a firearm, air gun or spring-operated gun, upon or over any airport operational
surface. This division (C) does not apply to the following:
(1) An officer, agent or employee of this or any other state or of the United States, or a law
enforcement officer, authorized to discharge firearms and acting within the scope of his or her duties;
or
(2) A person who, with the consent of the owner or operator of the airport operational surface
or the authorized agent of either, is lawfully engaged in any hunting or sporting activity or is otherwise
lawfully discharging a firearm.
Offenses Against Property 75
(D) Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of endangering aircraft, a misdemeanor
of the first degree. If the violation creates any risk of physical harm to any person, or if the aircraft that
is the subject of the violation is occupied, endangering aircraft is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(E) Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of endangering airport operations, a
misdemeanor of the second degree. If the violation creates a risk of physical harm to any person or
substantial risk of serious harm to any person, endangering airport operations is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law. In addition to any other penalty or sanction imposed for the violation, the
hunting license or permit of a person who violates division (C) of this section while hunting shall be
suspended or revoked pursuant to R.C. § 1533.68.
(R.C. § 2909.08(A) - (E)) (1985 Code, § 131.25)
§ 131.27 MOTION PICTURE PIRACY.
(A) As used in this section:
AUDIOVISUAL RECORDING FUNCTION. Means the capability of a device to record or
transmit a motion picture or any part of a motion picture by means of any technology existing on, or
developed after, March 9, 2004.
FACILITY. Means a movie theater.
(B) No person, without the written consent of the owner or lessee of the facility and of the licensor
of the motion picture, shall knowingly operate an audiovisual recording function of a device in a facility
in which the motion picture is being shown.
(C) Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of motion picture piracy, a misdemeanor
of the first degree on the first offense and a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law on each
subsequent offense.
(D) This section does not prohibit or restrict a lawfully authorized investigative, law enforcement,
protective or intelligence gathering employee or agent of the government of this state or a political
subdivision of this state, or of the federal government, when acting in an official capacity, from
operating an audiovisual recording function of a device in any facility in which a motion picture is being
shown.
(E) Division (B) of this section does not limit or affect the application of any other prohibition in
this code or the Ohio Revised Code. Any act that is a violation of both division (B) of this section and
another provision of this code or the Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under this section, under
the other provision of this code or the Ohio Revised Code, or under both this section and the other
provision of this code or the Ohio Revised Code.
(R.C. § 2913.07) (1985 Code, § 131.26)
76 Madeira - General Offenses
§ 131.28 DIMINISHING OR INTERFERING WITH FORFEITABLE PROPERTY.
(A) No person shall destroy, damage, remove or transfer property that is subject to forfeiture or
otherwise take any action in regard to property that is subject to forfeiture with purpose to do any of the
following:
(1) Prevent or impair the state’s or political subdivision’s lawful authority to take the property
into its custody or control under R.C. Chapter 2981 or to continue holding the property under its lawful
custody or control;
(2) Impair or defeat the court’s continuing jurisdiction over the person and property; or
(3) Devalue property that the person knows, or has reasonable cause to believe, is subject to
forfeiture proceedings under R.C. Chapter 2981.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of interference with or diminishing forfeitable property.
Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), interference with or diminishing forfeitable property
is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the property is $1,000 or more, interference with
or diminishing forfeitable property is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2981.07) (1985 Code, § 131.27)
§ 131.29 DETENTION AND ARREST OF SHOPLIFTERS AND THOSE COMMITTING
MOTION PICTURE PIRACY; PROTECTION OF INSTITUTIONAL PROPERTY.
(A) As used in this section:
ARCHIVAL INSTITUTION. Means any public or private building, structure or shelter in
which are stored historical documents, devices, records, manuscripts or items of public interest, which
historical materials are stored to preserve the materials or the information in the materials, to disseminate
the information contained in the materials, or to make the materials available for public inspection or for
inspection by certain persons who have a particular interest in, use for or knowledge concerning the
materials.
AUDIOVISUAL RECORDING FUNCTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.07.
FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.07.
MUSEUM. Means any public or private nonprofit institution that is permanently organized for
primarily educational or aesthetic purposes, owns or borrows objects or items of public interest, and
cares for and exhibits to the public the objects or items.
PRETRIAL DIVERSION PROGRAM. Means a rehabilitative, educational program designed
to reduce recidivism and promote personal responsibility that is at least four hours in length and that has
been approved by any court in this state.
Offenses Against Property 77
(B) A merchant, or an employee or agent of a merchant, who has probable cause to believe that
things offered for sale by a mercantile establishment have been unlawfully taken by a person, may, for
the purposes set forth in division (D) below, detain the person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable
length of time within the mercantile establishment or its immediate vicinity.
(C) Any officer, employee or agent of a library, museum or archival institution may, for the
purposes set forth in division (D) below or for the purpose of conducting a reasonable investigation of
a belief that the person has acted in a manner described in divisions (C)(1) and (C)(2) below, detain a
person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of time within, or in the immediate vicinity of,
the library, museum or archival institution, if the officer, employee or agent has probable cause to
believe that the person has:
(1) Without privilege to do so, knowingly moved, defaced, damaged, destroyed or otherwise
improperly tampered with property owned by or in the custody of the library, museum or archival
institution; or
(2) With purpose to deprive the library, museum or archival institution of property owned by
it or in its custody, knowingly obtained or exerted control over the property without the consent of the
owner or person authorized to give consent, beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of the
owner or person authorized to give consent, by deception or by threat.
(D) An officer, agent or employee of a library, museum or archival institution pursuant to division
(C) above or a merchant or an employee or agent of a merchant pursuant to division (B) above may
detain another person for any of the following purposes:
(1) To recover the property that is the subject of the unlawful taking, criminal mischief or theft;
(2) To cause an arrest to be made by a peace officer;
(3) To obtain a warrant of arrest; or
(4) To offer the person, if the person is suspected of the unlawful taking, criminal mischief or
theft and notwithstanding any other provision of this code or the Ohio Revised Code, an opportunity to
complete a pretrial diversion program and to inform the person of the other legal remedies available to
the library, museum, archival institution or merchant.
(E) The owner or lessee of a facility in which a motion picture is being shown, or the owner’s or
lessee’s employee or agent, who has probable cause to believe that a person is or has been operating an
audiovisual recording function of a device in violation of R.C. § 2917.07 may, for the purpose of
causing an arrest to be made by a peace officer or of obtaining an arrest warrant, detain the person in
a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of time within the facility or its immediate vicinity.
(F) The officer, agent or employee of the library, museum or archival institution, the merchant or
an employee or agent of a merchant, or the owner, lessee, employee or agent of the facility acting under
divisions (B), (C) or (E) above shall not search the person detained, search or seize any property
78 Madeira - General Offenses
belonging to the person detained without the person’s consent, or use undue restraint upon the person
detained.
(G) Any peace officer may arrest without a warrant any person that the officer has probable cause
to believe has committed any act described in divisions (C)(1) or (C)(2) above, that the officer has
probable cause to believe has committed an unlawful taking in a mercantile establishment, or that the
officer has reasonable cause to believe has committed an act prohibited by R.C. § 2913.07. An arrest
under this division (G) shall be made within a reasonable time after the commission of the act or
unlawful taking.
(R.C. § 2935.041)
Statutory reference:
Arrest without a warrant generally, see R.C. § 2935.03
Probable cause, see R.C. § 2933.22
§ 131.30 INSURANCE FRAUD; WORKERS’ COMPENSATION FRAUD; MEDICAID
FRAUD.
(A) Insurance fraud.
(1) No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is facilitating a fraud, shall
do either of the following:
(a) Present to, or cause to be presented to, an insurer any written or oral statement that
is part of, or in support of, an application for insurance, a claim for payment pursuant to a policy, or
a claim for any other benefit pursuant to a policy, knowing that the statement, or any part of the
statement, is false or deceptive; or
(b) Assist, aid, abet, solicit, procure or conspire with another to prepare or make any
written or oral statement that is intended to be presented to an insurer as part of, or in support of, an
application for insurance, a claim for payment pursuant to a policy, or a claim for any other benefit
pursuant to a policy, knowing that the statement, or any part of the statement, is false or deceptive.
(2) Whoever violates this division (A) is guilty of insurance fraud. Except as otherwise
provided in this division (A), insurance fraud is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the amount of the
claim that is false or deceptive is $1,000 or more, insurance fraud is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(3) This division (A) shall not be construed to abrogate, waive or modify R.C. § 2317.02(A).
(4) As used in this division (A):
DATA. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01 and additionally includes any other
representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts or instructions that are being or have been
prepared in a formalized manner.
Offenses Against Property 79
DECEPTIVE. Means that a statement, in whole or in part, would cause another to be
deceived because it contains a misleading representation, withholds information, prevents the acquisition
of information, or by any other conduct, act or omission creates, confirms or perpetuates a false
impression, including but not limited to a false impression as to law, value, state of mind or other
objective or subjective fact.
INSURER. Means any person that is authorized to engage in the business of insurance in
this state under R.C. Title 39, the Ohio Fair Plan Underwriting Association created under R.C.
§ 3929.43, any health insuring corporation, and any legal entity that is self-insured and provides benefits
to its employees or members.
POLICY. Means a policy, certificate, contract or plan that is issued by an insurer.
STATEMENT. Includes but is not limited to any notice, letter or memorandum; proof of
loss; bill of lading; receipt for payment; invoice, account or other financial statement; estimate of
property damage; bill for services; diagnosis or prognosis; prescription; hospital, medical or dental chart
or other record; x-ray, photograph, videotape or movie film; test result; other evidence of loss, injury
or expense; computer-generated document; and data in any form.
(R.C. § 2913.47)
(B) Workers’ compensation fraud.
(1) No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is facilitating a fraud shall
do any of the following:
(a) Receive workers’ compensation benefits to which the person is not entitled;
(b) Make or present or cause to be made or presented a false or misleading statement with
the purpose to secure payment for goods or services rendered under R.C. Chapter 4121, 4123, 4127 or
4131 or to secure workers’ compensation benefits;
(c) Alter, falsify, destroy, conceal or remove any record or document that is necessary to
fully establish the validity of any claim filed with, or necessary to establish the nature and validity of all
goods and services for which reimbursement or payment was received or is requested from the Bureau
of Workers’ Compensation, or a self-insuring employer under R.C. Chapter 4121, 4123, 4127 or 4131;
(d) Enter into an agreement or conspiracy to defraud the Bureau of Workers’
Compensation or a self-insuring employer by making or presenting or causing to be made or presented
a false claim for workers’ compensation benefits;
(e) Make or present or cause to be made or presented a false statement concerning manual
codes, classification or employees, payroll, paid compensation or number of personnel, when
information of that nature is necessary to determine the actual workers’ compensation premium or
assessment owed to the Bureau by an employer;
80 Madeira - General Offenses
(f) Alter, forge or create a workers’ compensation certificate or falsely show current or
correct workers’ compensation coverage; or
(g) Fail to secure or maintain workers’ compensation coverage as required by R.C.
Chapter 4123 with the intent to defraud the Bureau of Workers’ Compensation.
(2) Whoever violates this division (B) is guilty of workers’ compensation fraud. Except as
otherwise provided in this division (B), workers’ compensation fraud is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the value of premiums and assessments unpaid pursuant to actions described in divisions
(B)(1)(e), (B)(1)(f) or (B)(1)(g) of this section, or goods, services, property or money stolen is $1,000
or more, workers’ compensation fraud is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(3) Upon application of the governmental body that conducted the investigation and prosecution
of a violation of this division (B), the court shall order the person who is convicted of the violation to
pay the governmental body its costs of investigating and prosecuting the case. These costs are in addition
to any other costs or penalty provided under federal, state or local law.
(4) The remedies and penalties provided in this division (B) are not exclusive remedies and
penalties and do not preclude the use of any other criminal or civil remedy or penalty for any act that
is in violation of this division (B).
(5) As used in this division (B):
CLAIM. Means any attempt to cause the Bureau of Workers’ Compensation, an
independent third party with whom the administrator or an employer contracts under R.C. § 4121.44,
or a self-insuring employer to make payment or reimbursement for workers’ compensation benefits.
EMPLOYEE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4123.01.
EMPLOYER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4123.01.
EMPLOYMENT. Means participating in any trade, occupation, business, service or
profession for substantial gainful remuneration.
FALSE. Means wholly or partially untrue or deceptive.
GOODS. Includes but is not limited to medical supplies, appliances, rehabilitative
equipment and any other apparatus or furnishing provided or used in the care, treatment or rehabilitation
of a claimant for workers’ compensation benefits.
RECORDS. Means any medical, professional, financial or business record relating to the
treatment or care of any person, to goods or services provided to any person, or to rates paid for goods
or services provided to any person, or any record that the administrator of workers’ compensation
requires pursuant to rule.
Offenses Against Property 81
REMUNERATION. Includes but is not limited to wages, commissions, rebates and any
other reward or consideration.
SELF-INSURING EMPLOYER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4123.01.
SERVICES. Includes but is not limited to any service provided by any health care provider
to a claimant for workers’ compensation benefits and any and all services provided by the Bureau as part
of workers’ compensation insurance coverage.
STATEMENT. Includes but is not limited to any oral, written, electronic, electronic
impulse or magnetic communication notice, letter, memorandum, receipt for payment, invoice, account,
financial statement or bill for services; a diagnosis, prognosis, prescription, hospital, medical or dental
chart or other record; and a computer generated document.
WORKERS’ COMPENSATION BENEFITS. Means any compensation or benefits payable
under R.C. Chapter 4121, 4123, 4127 or 4131.
(R.C. § 2913.48)
(C) Medicaid fraud.
(1) No person shall knowingly make or cause to be made a false or misleading statement or
representation for use in obtaining reimbursement from the Medicaid program.
(2) No person, with purpose to commit fraud or knowing that the person is facilitating a fraud,
shall do either of the following:
(a) Contrary to the terms of the person’s provider agreement, charge, solicit, accept or
receive for goods or services that the person provides under the Medicaid program any property, money
or other consideration in addition to the amount of reimbursement under the Medicaid program and the
person’s provider agreement for the goods or services and any cost-sharing expenses authorized by R.C.
§ 5162.20 or rules adopted by the Medicaid Director regarding the Medicaid program; or
(b) Solicit, offer or receive any remuneration, other than any cost-sharing expenses
authorized by R.C. § 5162.20 or rules adopted by the Medicaid Director regarding the Medicaid
program, in cash or in kind, including but not limited to a kickback or rebate, in connection with the
furnishing of goods or services for which whole or partial reimbursement is or may be made under the
Medicaid program.
(3) No person, having submitted a claim for or provided goods or services under the Medicaid
program, shall do either of the following for a period of at least six years after a reimbursement pursuant
to that claim, or a reimbursement for those goods or services, is received under the Medicaid program:
(a) Knowingly alter, falsify, destroy, conceal or remove any records that are necessary to
fully disclose the nature of all goods or services for which the claim was submitted, or for which
reimbursement was received, by the person; or
82 Madeira - General Offenses
(b) Knowingly alter, falsify, destroy, conceal or remove any records that are necessary to
disclose fully all income and expenditures upon which rates of reimbursements were based for the
person.
(4) Whoever violates this division (C) is guilty of Medicaid fraud. Except as otherwise
provided in this division, Medicaid fraud is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the
property, services or funds obtained in violation of this section is $1,000 or more, Medicaid fraud is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate State law.
(5) Upon application of the governmental agency, office or other entity that conducted the
investigation and prosecution in a case under this section, the court shall order any person who is
convicted of a violation of this section for receiving any reimbursement for furnishing goods or services
under the Medicaid program to which the person is not entitled to pay to the applicant its cost of
investigating and prosecuting the case. The costs of investigation and prosecution that a defendant is
ordered to pay pursuant to this division shall be in addition to any other penalties for the receipt of that
reimbursement that are provided in this section, R.C. § 2913.40 or 5164.35, or any other provision of
law.
(6) The provisions of this section are not intended to be exclusive remedies and do not preclude
the use of any other criminal or civil remedy for any act that is in violation of this section.
(7) As used in this division (C):
PROVIDER. Means any person who has signed a provider agreement with the Department
of Medicaid to provide goods or services pursuant to the Medicaid program or any person who has
signed an agreement with a party to such a provider agreement under which the person agrees to provide
goods or services that are reimbursable under the Medicaid program.
PROVIDER AGREEMENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5164.01.
RECIPIENT. Means any individual who receives goods or services from a provider under
the Medicaid program.
RECORDS. Means any medical, professional, financial or business records relating to the
treatment or care of any recipient, to goods or services provided to any recipient, or to rates paid for
goods or services provided to any recipient, and any records that are required by the rules of the
Medicaid Director to be kept for the Medicaid program.
STATEMENT or REPRESENTATION. Means any oral, written, electronic, electronic
impulse or magnetic communication that is used to identify an item of goods or a service for which
reimbursement may be made under the Medicaid program or that states income and expense and is or
may be used to determine a rate of reimbursement under the Medicaid program.
(R.C. § 2913.40)
Offenses Against Property 83
(D) Medicaid eligibility fraud.
(1) No person shall knowingly do any of the following in an application for enrollment in the
Medicaid program or in a document that requires a disclosure of assets for the purpose of determining
eligibility for the Medicaid program:
(a) Make or cause to be made a false or misleading statement;
(b) Conceal an interest in property;
(c) 1. Except as provided in division (D)(1)(c)2. of this section, fail to disclose a transfer
of property that occurred during the period beginning 36 months before submission of the application
or document and ending on the date the application or document was submitted; or
2. Fail to disclose a transfer of property that occurred during the period beginning
60 months before submission of the application or document and ending on the date the application or
document was submitted and that was made to an irrevocable trust a portion of which is not distributable
to the applicant for or recipient of Medicaid or to a revocable trust.
(2) (a) Whoever violates this division (D) is guilty of Medicaid eligibility fraud. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, a violation of this division (D) is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
If the value of the Medicaid services paid as a result of the violation is $1,000 or more, a violation of
this division (D) is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(b) In addition to imposing a sentence under division (D)(2)(a) of this section, the court
shall order that a person who is guilty of Medicaid eligibility fraud make restitution in the full amount
of any Medicaid services paid on behalf of an applicant for or recipient of Medicaid for which the
applicant or recipient was not eligible, plus interest at the rate applicable to judgments on unreimbursed
amounts from the date on which the Medicaid services were paid to the date on which restitution is
made.
(c) The remedies and penalties provided in this division (D) are not exclusive and do not
preclude the use of any other criminal or civil remedy for any act that is in violation of this division (D).
(3) This division (D) does not apply to a person who fully disclosed in an application for
Medicaid or in a document that requires a disclosure of assets for the purpose of determining eligibility
for Medicaid all of the interests in property of the applicant for or recipient of Medicaid, all transfers
of property by the applicant for or recipient of Medicaid, and the circumstances of all those transfers.
(4) Any amounts of Medicaid services recovered as restitution under this division (D) and any
interest on those amounts shall be credited to the General Revenue Fund, and any applicable federal
share shall be returned to the appropriate agency or department of the United States.
84 Madeira - General Offenses
(5) As used in this division (D):
MEDICAID SERVICES. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5164.01.
PROPERTY. Means any real or personal property or other asset in which a person has any
legal title or interest.
(R.C. § 2913.401)
§ 131.31 EVIDENCE OF INTENT TO COMMIT THEFT OF RENTED PROPERTY OR
RENTAL SERVICES; EVIDENCE OF LACK OF CAPACITY TO CONSENT.
(A) Evidence of intent to commit theft of rented property or rental services.
(1) As used in this division (A):
RENTER. Means a person who owns rented property.
RENTEE. Means a person who pays consideration to a renter for the use of rented
property.
(2) Each of the following shall be considered evidence of intent to commit theft of rented
property or rental services:
(a) At the time of entering into the rental contract, the rentee presented the renter with
identification that was materially false, fictitious or not current with respect to name, address, place of
employment or other relevant information; and
(b) After receiving a notice demanding the return of the rented property as provided in
division (A)(3) of this section, the rentee neither returned the rented property nor made arrangements
acceptable with the renter to return the rented property.
(3) To establish that a rentee has an intent to commit theft of rented property or rental services
under division (A)(2)(b) above, a renter may issue a notice to a rentee demanding the return of the rented
property. The renter shall mail the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the rentee at the
address the rentee gave when the rental contract was executed, or to the rentee at the last address the
rentee or the rentee’s agent furnished in writing to the renter.
(4) A demand for the return of the rented property is not a prerequisite for the prosecution of
a rentee for theft of rented property or rental services. The evidence specified in division (A)(2) above
does not constitute the only evidence that may be considered as evidence of intent to commit theft of
rented property or rental services.
(R.C. § 2913.72)
Offenses Against Property 85
(B) Evidence of lack of capacity to consent.
(1) In a prosecution for any alleged violation of § 131.08 through 131.20, 131.23, 131.25
through 131.29 or 132.11, if the lack of consent of the victim is an element of the provision that
allegedly was violated, evidence that, at the time of the alleged violation, the victim lacked the capacity
to give consent is admissible to show that the victim did not give consent.
(2) As used in this section, LACKS THE CAPACITY TO CONSENT means being impaired
for any reason to the extent that the person lacks sufficient understanding or capacity to make and carry
out reasonable decisions concerning the person or the person’s resources.
(R.C. § 2913.73)
§ 131.32 FORGERY OF IDENTIFICATION CARDS.
(A) No person shall knowingly do either of the following:
(1) Forge an identification card; or
(2) Sell or otherwise distribute a card that purports to be an identification card, knowing it was
forged.
(B) As used in this section, IDENTIFICATION CARD means a card that includes personal
information or characteristics of an individual, a purpose of which is to establish the identity of the
bearer described on the card, whether the words “identity,” “identification,” “identification card,” or
other similar words appear on the card.
(C) Whoever violates this section is guilty of forging identification cards or selling or distributing
forged identification cards. Except as otherwise provided in this division (C), forging identification cards
or selling or distributing forged identification cards is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted of a violation of division (A) of this section or a substantially equivalent
state law or municipal ordinance, forging identification cards or selling or distributing forged
identification cards is a misdemeanor of the first degree and, in addition, the court shall impose upon the
offender a fine not less than $250.
(R.C. § 2913.31(B), (C)(2))
Statutory reference:
Forgery, felony provisions, see R.C. § 2913.31(A) and (C)(1)
Forgery of originating address or other routing information in connection with the transmission of
 an electronic mail advertisement, felony provisions, see R.C. § 2307.64
§ 131.33 CRIMINAL SIMULATION.
(A) No person, with purpose to defraud, or knowing that the person is facilitating a fraud, shall do
any of the following:
86 Madeira - General Offenses
(1) Make or alter any object so that it appears to have value because of antiquity, rarity,
curiosity, source or authorship, which it does not in fact possess;
(2) Practice deception in making, retouching, editing or reproducing any photograph, movie
film, video tape, phonograph record or recording tape;
(3) Falsely or fraudulently make, simulate, forge, alter or counterfeit any wrapper, label,
stamp, cork or cap prescribed by the Liquor Control Commission under R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303,
falsely or fraudulently cause to be made, simulated, forged, altered or counterfeited any wrapper, label,
stamp, cork or cap prescribed by the Liquor Control Commission under R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303,
or use more than once any wrapper, label, stamp, cork or cap prescribed by the Liquor Control
Commission under R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303; or
(4) Offer, or possess with the purpose to offer, any object that the person knows to have been
simulated as provided in divisions (A)(1), (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this section.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal simulation. Except as otherwise provided in
this division (B), criminal simulation is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the loss to the victim is
$1,000 or more, criminal simulation is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.32)
§ 131.34 TRADEMARK COUNTERFEITING.
(A) No person shall knowingly do any of the following:
(1) Attach, affix or otherwise use a counterfeit mark in connection with the manufacture of
goods or services, whether or not the goods or services are intended for sale or resale;
(2) Possess, sell or offer for sale tools, machines, instruments, materials, articles or other items
of personal property with the knowledge that they are designed for the production or reproduction of
counterfeit marks;
(3) Purchase or otherwise acquire goods, and keep or otherwise have the goods in the person’s
possession, with the knowledge that a counterfeit mark is attached to, affixed to or otherwise used in
connection with the goods and with the intent to sell or otherwise dispose of the goods;
(4) Sell, offer for sale or otherwise dispose of goods with the knowledge that a counterfeit mark
is attached to, affixed to or otherwise used in connection with the goods; or
(5) Sell, offer for sale or otherwise provide services with the knowledge that a counterfeit mark
is used in connection with that sale, offer for sale or other provision of the services.
Offenses Against Property 87
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of trademark counterfeiting.
(1) A violation of division (A)(1) of this section is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(2) Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), a violation of division (A)(2) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the circumstances of the violation indicate that the tools,
machines, instruments, materials, articles or other items of personal property involved in the violation
were intended for use in the commission of a felony, a violation of division (A)(2) is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(3) Except as otherwise provided in this division (B)(3), a violation of division (A)(3), (A)(4)
or (A)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the cumulative sales price of the goods
or services to which or in connection with which the counterfeit mark is attached, affixed or otherwise
used in the offense is $1,000 or more, a violation of division (A)(3), (A)(4) or (A)(5) is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(C) A defendant may assert as an affirmative defense to a charge of a violation of this section,
defenses, affirmative defenses and limitations on remedies that would be available in a civil, criminal
or administrative action or proceeding under the Lanham Act, being 15 U.S.C. §§ 1051 through 1127,
as amended, the Trademark Counterfeiting Act of 1984, being 18 U.S.C. § 2320, as amended, R.C.
Chapter 1329 or another section of the Ohio Revised Code, or common law.
(D) (1) Law enforcement officers may seize pursuant to Criminal Rule 41, R.C. Chapter 2933 or
R.C. Chapter 2981 either of the following:
(a) Goods to which or in connection with which a person attached, affixed, otherwise used
or intended to attach, affix or otherwise use a counterfeit mark in violation of this section; or
(b) Tools, machines, instruments, materials, articles, vehicles or other items of personal
property that are possessed, sold, offered for sale or used in a violation of this section or in an attempt
to commit or complicity in the commission of a violation of this section.
(2) Notwithstanding any contrary provision of R.C. Chapter 2981, if a person is convicted of
or pleads guilty to a violation of this section, an attempt to violate this section or complicity in a violation
of this section, the court involved shall declare that the goods described in division (D)(1)(a) of this
section and the personal property described in division (D)(1)(b) of this section are contraband and are
forfeited. Prior to the court’s entry of judgment under Criminal Rule 32, the owner of a registered
trademark or service mark that is the subject to the counterfeit mark may recommend a manner in which
the forfeited goods and forfeited personal property should be disposed of. If that owner makes a timely
recommendation of a manner of disposition, the court is not bound by the recommendation. If that owner
makes a timely recommendation of a manner of disposition, the court may include in its entry of
judgment an order that requires appropriate persons to dispose of the forfeited goods and forfeited
personal property in the recommended manner. If the owner fails to make a timely recommendation of
a manner of disposition or if that owner makes a timely recommendation of a manner of disposition but
88 Madeira - General Offenses
the court determines to not follow the recommendation, the court shall include in its entry of judgement
an order that requires the law enforcement agency that employs the law enforcement officer who seized
the forfeited goods or the forfeited personal property to destroy them or cause their destruction.
(E) This section does not affect the rights of an owner of a trademark or service mark, or the
enforcement in a civil action or in administrative proceedings of the rights of an owner or a trademark
or service mark under the Lanham Act, being 15 U.S.C. §§ 1051 through 1127, as amended, the
Trademark Counterfeiting Act of 1984, being 18 U.S.C. § 2320, as amended, R.C. Chapter 1329, or
another section of the Ohio Revised Code or common law.
(F) As used in this section:
COUNTERFEIT MARK.
(a) Except as provided in division (b) of this definition, the term means a spurious
trademark or a spurious service mark that satisfies both of the following:
1. It is identical with or substantially indistinguishable from a mark that is registered
on the principal register in the United States Patent and Trademark Office for the same goods or services
as the goods or services to which or in connection with which the spurious trademark or spurious service
mark is attached, affixed or otherwise used, or from a mark that is registered with the Secretary of State
pursuant to R.C. §§ 1329.54 through 1329.67 for the same goods or services as the goods or services
to which or in connection with which the spurious trademark or spurious service mark is attached,
affixed or otherwise used, and the owner of the registration uses that registered trademark, whether or
not the offender knows that the mark is registered in a manner described in this division (a)1.; and
2. Its use is likely to cause confusion or mistake or to deceive other persons.
(b) The term does not include a mark or other designation that is attached to, affixed to
or otherwise used in connection with goods or services if the holder of the right to use the mark or other
designation authorizes the manufacturer, producer or vendor of those goods or services to attach, affix
or otherwise use the mark or other designation in connection with those goods or services at the time of
their manufacture, production or sale.
CUMULATIVE SALES PRICE. Means the product of the lowest single unit sales price
charged or sought to be charged by an offender for goods to which or in connection with which a
counterfeit mark is attached, affixed or otherwise used or of the lowest single service transaction price
charged or sought to be charged by an offender for services in connection with which a counterfeit mark
is used, multiplied by the total number of those goods or services, whether or not units of goods are sold
or are in an offender’s possession, custody or control.
REGISTERED TRADEMARK OR SERVICE MARK. Means a trademark or service mark
that is registered in a manner described in division (a) of the definition of counterfeit mark.
SERVICE MARK. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1329.54.
Offenses Against Property 89
TRADEMARK. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1329.54.
(R.C. § 2913.34)
§ 131.35 RECORDING CREDIT CARD, TELEPHONE OR SOCIAL SECURITY
NUMBERS.
(A) No person shall record or cause to be recorded either of the following:
(1) A credit card account number of the other party to a transaction, when a check, bill of
exchange or other draft is presented for payment; or
(2) The telephone number or Social Security account number of the other party to a transaction,
when payment is made by credit card charge agreement, check, bill of exchange or other draft.
(B) Division (A) of this section does not apply to a transaction, if all of the following conditions are
met:
(1) The credit card account number, Social Security account number or telephone number is
recorded for a legitimate business purpose, including collection purposes;
(2) The other party to the transaction consents to the recording of the credit card account
number, Social Security account number or telephone number; and
(3) The credit card account number, Social Security account number or telephone number that
is recorded during the course of the transaction is not disclosed to any third party for any purposes other
than collection purposes and is not used to market goods or services unrelated to the goods or services
purchased in the transaction.
(C) Nothing in this section prohibits the recording of the number of a credit card account when
given in lieu of a deposit to secure payment in the event of default, loss, damage or other occurrence,
or requires a person to accept a check presented for payment, if the other party to the transaction refuses
to consent to the recording of the number of the party’s Social Security account or license to operate a
motor vehicle.
(R.C. § 1349.17)
(D) Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1349.99)
§ 131.36 PROSECUTIONS FOR THEFT OF UTILITIES.
(A) In a prosecution for a theft offense, as defined in R.C. § 2913.01, that involves alleged
tampering with a gas, electric, steam or water meter, conduit or attachment of a utility that has been
disconnected by the utility, proof that a meter, conduit or attachment of a utility has been tampered with
90 Madeira - General Offenses
is prima facie evidence that the person who is obligated to pay for the service rendered through the
meter, conduit or attachment, and who is in possession or control of the meter, conduit or attachment
at the time the tampering occurred has caused the tampering with intent to commit a theft offense.
(B) In a prosecution for a theft offense, as defined in R.C. § 2913.01, that involves the alleged
reconnection of a gas, electric, steam or water meter, conduit or attachment of a utility that has been
disconnected by the utility, proof that a meter, conduit or attachment disconnected by a utility has been
reconnected without the consent of the utility is prima facie evidence that the person in possession or
control of the meter, conduit or attachment at the time of the reconnection has reconnected the meter,
conduit or attachment with intent to commit a theft offense.
(C) As used in this section:
TAMPER. Means to interfere with, damage or bypass a utility meter, conduit or attachment
with the intent to impede the correct registration of a meter or the proper functions of a conduit or
attachment so as to reduce the amount of utility service that is registered on the meter.
UTILITY. Means any electric light company, gas company, natural gas company, pipe-line
company, waterworks company or heating or cooling company, as defined in R.C. § 4905.03(C), (D),
(E), (F), (G) or (H), its lessees, trustees or receivers, or any similar utility owned or operated by a
political subdivision.
(R.C. § 4933.18)
(D) Each electric light company, gas company, natural gas company, pipeline company, waterworks
company or heating or cooling company, as defined by R.C. § 4905.03(C), (D), (E), (F), (G) or (H),
or its lessees, trustees or receivers, and each similar utility owned or operated by a political subdivision,
shall notify its customers, on an annual basis, that tampering with or bypassing a meter constitutes a theft
offense that could result in the imposition of criminal sanctions.
(R.C. § 4933.19)
CHAPTER 132: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
Section
General Provisions
132.01 Riot
132.02 Failure to disperse
132.03 Justifiable use of force to suppress riot
132.04 Disorderly conduct
132.05 Disturbing a lawful meeting
132.06 Misconduct at an emergency
132.07 Telecommunications harassment
132.08 Inducing panic
132.09 Making false alarms
132.10 Improper activation of alarm system
132.11 Personating an officer
132.12 Unlawful display of law enforcement emblem
132.13 Impersonating a peace officer
132.14 Cordoning emergency areas
132.15 Disturbing church congregations or schools
132.16 Scattering itching powder and the like
132.17 Loud noises
132.18 Loud noises of locomotives
132.19 Begging prohibited
132.20 Limitation of hours of construction and development activities
132.21 Inciting to violence
132.22 Safety of crowds attending live entertainment performances
132.23 Misconduct involving a public transportation system
Offenses Involving Alcohol
132.35 Drunkenness
132.36 Illegal possession of intoxicating liquors prohibited
132.37 Limitation on purchase of liquor or beer
132.38 Open container prohibited
132.39 Consumption in motor vehicles prohibited
132.40 Sale to minors prohibited
91
92 Madeira - General Offenses
132.41 Limitations on possession of liquor or beer
132.42 Alcohol vaporizing devices prohibited
132.43 Misrepresentation to obtain alcoholic beverage by or for a minor
132.44 Consumption of alcohol on private property
132.45 General provisions
132.46 Posting of card
132.47 Good faith acceptances of spurious identification
132.48 Liquor transaction scans
132.49 Affirmative defenses
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 132.01 RIOT.
(A) No person shall participate with four or more others in a course of disorderly conduct in
violation of R.C. § 2917.11 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance:
(1) With purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of a misdemeanor, other than
disorderly conduct;
(2) With purpose to intimidate a public official or employee into taking or refraining from
official action, or with purpose to hinder, impede or obstruct a function of government; or
(3) With purpose to hinder, impede or obstruct the orderly process of administration or
instruction at an educational institution, or to interfere with or disrupt lawful activities carried on at the
institution.
(B) No person shall participate with four or more others with purpose to do an act with unlawful
force or violence, even though the act might otherwise be lawful.
(C) Whoever violates this section is guilty of riot, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2917.03)
(D) For the purposes of prosecuting violations of this section, the prosecution is not required to
allege or prove that the offender expressly agreed with four or more others to commit any act that
constitutes a violation this section prior to or while committing those acts.
(R.C. § 2917.031) (1985 Code, § 132.01)
Statutory reference:
Aggravated riot, felony provisions, see R.C. § 2917.02
Offenses Against Public Peace 93
§ 132.02 FAILURE TO DISPERSE.
(A) Where five or more persons are participating in a course of disorderly conduct in violation of
R.C. § 2917.11 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and there are other persons in the
vicinity whose presence creates the likelihood of physical harm to persons or property or of serious
public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm, a law enforcement officer or other public official may order
the participants and the other persons to disperse. No person shall knowingly fail to obey the order.
(B) Nothing in this section requires persons to disperse who are peaceably assembled for a lawful
purpose.
(C) (1) Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to disperse.
(2) Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(3) of this section, failure to disperse is a minor
misdemeanor.
(3) Failure to disperse is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if the failure to obey the order
described in division (A) of this section creates the likelihood of physical harm to persons or is
committed at the scene of a fire, accident, disaster, riot or emergency of any kind.
(R.C. § 2917.04) (1985 Code, § 132.02)
§ 132.03 JUSTIFIABLE USE OF FORCE TO SUPPRESS RIOT.
A law enforcement officer or firefighter engaged in suppressing a riot or in protecting persons or
property during a riot:
(A) Is justified in using force, other than deadly force, when and to the extent he or she has probable
cause to believe such force is necessary to disperse or apprehend rioters; and
(B) Is justified in using force, including deadly force, when and to the extent he or she has probable
cause to believe such force is necessary to disperse or apprehend rioters whose conduct is creating a
substantial risk of serious physical harm to persons.
(R.C. § 2917.05) (1985 Code, § 132.03)
§ 132.04 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
(A) No person shall recklessly cause inconvenience, annoyance or alarm to another, by doing any
of the following:
(1) Engaging in fighting, in threatening harm to persons or property, or in violent or turbulent
behavior;
94 Madeira - General Offenses
(2) Making unreasonable noise or an offensively coarse utterance, gesture or display, or
communicating unwarranted and grossly abusive language to any person;
(3) Insulting, taunting or challenging another, under circumstances in which that conduct is
likely to provoke a violent response;
(4) Hindering or preventing the movement of persons on a public street, road, highway or
right-of-way, or to, from, within or upon public or private property, so as to interfere with the rights
of others, and by any act that serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender; or
(5) Creating a condition that is physically offensive to persons or that presents a risk of physical
harm to persons or property, by any act that serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender.
(B) No person while voluntarily intoxicated shall do either of the following:
(1) In a public place or in the presence of two or more persons, engage in conduct likely to be
offensive or to cause inconvenience, annoyance or alarm to persons of ordinary sensibilities, which
conduct the offender, if he or she were not intoxicated, should know is likely to have such effect on
others; or
(2) Engage in conduct or create a condition that presents a risk of physical harm to himself,
herself or another, or to the property of another.
(C) Violation of any statute or ordinance of which an element is operating a motor vehicle,
locomotive, watercraft, aircraft or other vehicle while under the influence of alcohol or any drug of
abuse is not a violation of division (B) of this section.
(D) If a person appears to an ordinary observer to be intoxicated, it is probable cause to believe that
the person is voluntarily intoxicated for purposes of division (B) of this section.
(E) Whoever violates this section is guilty of disorderly conduct.
(1) Except as otherwise provided in division (E)(2) of this section, disorderly conduct is a
minor misdemeanor.
(2) Disorderly conduct is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if any of the following applies:
(a) The offender persists in disorderly conduct after reasonable warning or request to
desist;
(b) The offense is committed in the vicinity of a school or in a school safety zone;
(c) The offense is committed in the presence of any law enforcement officer, firefighter,
rescuer, medical person, emergency medical services person or other authorized person who is engaged
in the person’s duties at the scene of a fire, accident, disaster, riot or emergency of any kind; or
Offenses Against Public Peace 95
(d) The offense is committed in the presence of any emergency facility person who is
engaged in the person’s duties in an emergency facility.
(F) As used in this section:
COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A SCHOOL. Has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 2925.01.
EMERGENCY FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.04.
EMERGENCY FACILITY PERSON. Is the singular of “emergency facility personnel” as
defined in R.C. § 2909.04.
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSON. Is the singular of “emergency medical
services personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2133.21.
(R.C. § 2917.11) (1985 Code, § 132.04) (Ord. 1169, passed 6-10-1974)
§ 132.05 DISTURBING A LAWFUL MEETING.
(A) No person, with purpose to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting, procession or gathering, shall
do either of the following:
(1) Do any act which obstructs or interferes with the due conduct of the meeting, procession
or gathering; or
(2) Make any utterance, gesture or display which outrages the sensibilities of the group.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of disturbing a lawful meeting, a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
(R.C. § 2917.12) (1985 Code, § 132.05) (Ord. 1169, passed 6-10-1974)
§ 132.06 MISCONDUCT AT AN EMERGENCY.
(A) No person shall knowingly do any of the following:
(1) Hamper the lawful operations of any law enforcement officer, firefighter, rescuer, medical
person, emergency medical services person or other authorized person engaged in the person’s duties
at the scene of a fire, accident, disaster, riot or emergency of any kind;
(2) Hamper the lawful activities of any emergency facility person who is engaged in the
person’s duties in an emergency facility; or
96 Madeira - General Offenses
(3) Fail to obey the lawful order of any law enforcement officer engaged in the law
enforcement officer’s duties at the scene of or in connection with a fire, accident, disaster, riot or
emergency of any kind.
(B) Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit access or deny information to any news media
representative in the lawful exercise of the news media representative’s duties.
(C) Whoever violates this section is guilty of misconduct at an emergency. Except as otherwise
provided in this division (C), misconduct at an emergency is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If
violation of this section creates a risk of physical harm to persons or property, misconduct at an
emergency is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(D) As used in this section:
EMERGENCY FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.04.
EMERGENCY FACILITY PERSON. Is the singular of “emergency facility personnel” as
defined in R.C. § 2909.04.
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSON. Is the singular of “emergency medical
services personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2133.21.
(R.C. § 2917.13) (1985 Code, § 132.06)
§ 132.07 TELECOMMUNICATIONS HARASSMENT.
(A) No person shall knowingly make or cause to be made a telecommunication, or knowingly permit
a telecommunication to be made from a telecommunications device under the person’s control, to
another, if the caller does any of the following:
(1) Fails to identify the caller to the recipient of the telecommunication and makes the
telecommunication with purpose to harass or abuse any person at the premises to which the
telecommunication is made, whether or not actual communication takes place between the caller and a
recipient;
(2) Describes, suggests, requests or proposes that the caller, the recipient of the
telecommunication, or any other person engage in sexual activity, and the recipient or another person
at the premises to which the telecommunication is made has requested, in a previous telecommunication
or in the immediate telecommunication, that the caller not make a telecommunication to the recipient or
to the premises to which the telecommunication is made;
(3) During the telecommunication, violates R.C. § 2903.21 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance;
Offenses Against Public Peace 97
(4) Knowingly states to the recipient of the telecommunication that the caller intends to cause
damage to or destroy public or private property, and the recipient, any member of the recipient’s family,
or any other person who resides at the premises to which the telecommunication is made owns, leases,
resides or works in, will at the time of the destruction or damaging be near or in, has the responsibility
of protecting or ensures the property that will be destroyed or damaged; or
(5) Knowingly makes the telecommunication to the recipient of the telecommunication, to
another person at the premises to which the telecommunication is made, or to those premises, and the
recipient or another person at those premises previously has told the caller not to make a
telecommunication to those premises or to any persons at those premises.
(B) No person shall make or cause to be made a telecommunication or permit a telecommunication
to be made from a telecommunications device under the person’s control, with purpose to abuse, threaten
or harass another person.
(C) (1) Whoever violates divisions (A) or (B) of this section is guilty of telecommunications
harassment.
(2) A violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3) or (A)(5) or (B) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree on a first offense and a felony on each subsequent offense, which shall
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(3) Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(3), a violation of division (A)(4) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree on a first offense and a felony on each subsequent offense,
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. If a violation of division (A)(4) of this section results in
economic harm of $1,000 or more, telecommunications harassment is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(D) No cause of action may be assessed in any court of this municipality against any provider of a
telecommunications service or information service, or against any officer, employee or agent of a
telecommunications service or information service, for any injury, death or loss to person or property
that allegedly arises out of the provider’s, officer’s, employee’s or agent’s provision of information,
facilities or assistance in accordance with the terms of a court order that is issued in relation to the
investigation or prosecution of an alleged violation of this section. A provider of a telecommunications
service or information service, or an officer, employee or agent of a telecommunications service or
information service, is immune from any civil or criminal liability for injury, death or loss to person or
property that allegedly arises out of the provider’s, officer’s, employee’s or agent’s provision of
information, facilities or assistance in accordance with the terms of a court order that is issued in relation
to the investigation or prosecution of an alleged violation of this section.
(E) As used in divisions (A) through (D) of this section:
CALLER. Means the person described in division (A) of this section who makes or causes to
be made a telecommunication or who permits a telecommunication to be made from a
telecommunications device under that person’s control.
98 Madeira - General Offenses
ECONOMIC HARM. Means all direct, incidental and consequential pecuniary harm suffered
by a victim as a result of the criminal conduct. The term includes but is not limited to all of the
following:
(a) All wages, salaries or other compensation lost as a result of the criminal conduct;
(b) The cost of all wages, salaries or other compensation paid to employees for time those
employees are prevented from working as a result of the criminal conduct;
(c) The overhead costs incurred from the time that a business is shut down as a result of
the criminal conduct; and
(d) The loss of value to tangible or intangible property that was damaged as a result of the
criminal conduct.
SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.01.
TELECOMMUNICATION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
(F) Nothing in this section prohibits a person from making a telecommunication to a debtor that is
in compliance with the Fair Debt Collection Practices Act, 15 U.S.C. § 1692, as amended, or the
Telephone Consumer Protection Act, 47 U.S.C. § 227, as amended.
(R.C. § 2917.21) (1985 Code, § 132.07)
§ 132.08 INDUCING PANIC.
(A) No person shall cause the evacuation of any public place, or otherwise cause serious public
inconvenience or alarm, by doing any of the following:
(1) Initiating or circulating a report or warning of an alleged or impending fire, explosion,
crime or other catastrophe, knowing that the report or warning is false;
(2) Threatening to commit any offense of violence; or
(3) Committing any offense, with reckless disregard of the likelihood that its commission will
cause serious public inconvenience or alarm.
(B) Division (A)(1) of this section does not apply to any person conducting an authorized fire or
emergency drill.
(C) (1) Whoever violates this section is guilty of inducing panic.
Offenses Against Public Peace 99
(2) Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(3), inducing panic is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(3) If a violation of this section results in physical harm to any person, inducing panic is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. If a violation of this section results in economic
harm of $1,000 or more, inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the
public place involved in a violation of division (A)(1) is a school or an institution of higher education,
inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. If a violation of this section
pertains to a purported, threatened or actual use of a weapon of mass destruction, inducing panic is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(D) (1) It is not a defense to a charge under this section that pertains to a purported or threatened
use of a weapon of mass destruction that the offender did not possess or have the ability to use a weapon
of mass destruction or that what was represented to be a weapon of mass destruction was not a weapon
of mass destruction.
(2) Any act that is a violation of this section and any other section of the Ohio Revised Code
or this code may be prosecuted under this section, the other section, or both sections.
(E) As used in this section:
BIOLOGICAL AGENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2917.33.
ECONOMIC HARM. Means any of the following:
(a) All direct, incidental and consequential pecuniary harm suffered by a victim as a result
of the criminal conduct. ECONOMIC HARM as described in this definition includes but is not limited
to all of the following:
1. All wages, salaries or other compensation lost as a result of the criminal conduct;
2. The cost of all wages, salaries or other compensation paid to employees for time
those employees are prevented from working as a result of the criminal conduct;
3. The overhead costs incurred from the time that a business is shut down as a result
of the criminal conduct; and
4. The loss of value to tangible or intangible property that was damaged as a result
of the criminal conduct.
(b) All costs incurred by the state or any political subdivision as a result of, or in making
any response to, the criminal conduct that constituted the violation of this section or R.C. § 2917.32,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, including but not limited to all costs so incurred by
any law enforcement officers, firefighters, rescue personnel or emergency medical services personnel
of the state or the political subdivision.
100 Madeira - General Offenses
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSONNEL. Has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 2133.21.
INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION. Means any of the following:
(a) A state university or college as defined in R.C. § 3345.12(A)(1), community college,
state community college, university branch or technical college;
(b) A private, nonprofit college, university or other post-secondary institution located in
this state that possesses a certificate of authorization issued by the Ohio Board of Regents pursuant to
R.C. Chapter 1713; or
(c) A post-secondary institution with a certificate of registration issued by the State Board
of Career Colleges and Schools pursuant to R.C. Chapter 3332.
SCHOOL. Means any school operated by a board of education or any school for which the
State Board of Education prescribes minimum standards under R.C. § 3301.07, whether or not any
instruction, extracurricular activities or training provided by the school is being conducted at the time
a violation of this section is committed.
WEAPON OF MASS DESTRUCTION. Means any of the following:
(a) Any weapon that is designed or intended to cause death or serious physical harm
through the release, dissemination or impact of toxic or poisonous chemicals, or other precursors;
(b) Any weapon involving a disease organism or biological agent;
(c) Any weapon that is designed to release radiation or radioactivity at a level dangerous
to human life; or
(d) Any of the following, except to the extent that the item or device in question is
expressly excepted from the definition of destructive device pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 921(a)(4) and
regulations issued under that section:
1. Any explosive, incendiary or poison gas bomb, grenade, rocket having a propellant
charge of more than four ounces, missile having an explosive or incendiary charge of more than
one-quarter ounce, mine or similar device; and
2. Any combination of parts either designed or intended for use in converting any
item or device into any item or device described in division (d)1. of this definition and from which an
item or device described in that division may be readily assembled.
(R.C. § 2917.31) (1985 Code, § 132.08)
Offenses Against Public Peace 101
§ 132.09 MAKING FALSE ALARMS.
(A) No person shall do any of the following:
(1) Initiate or circulate a report or warning of an alleged or impending fire, explosion, crime
or other catastrophe, knowing that the report or warning is false and likely to cause public inconvenience
or alarm;
(2) Knowingly cause a false alarm of fire or other emergency to be transmitted to or within any
organization, public or private, for dealing with emergencies involving a risk of physical harm to persons
or property; or
(3) Report to any law enforcement agency an alleged offense or other incident within its
concern, knowing that the offense did not occur.
(B) This section does not apply to any person conducting an authorized fire or emergency drill.
(C) Whoever violates this section is guilty of making false alarms. Except as otherwise provided
in this division (C), making false alarms is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If a violation of this
section results in economic harm of $1,000 or more, making false alarms is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law. If a violation of this section pertains to a purported, threatened or actual use
of a weapon of mass destruction, making false alarms is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
(D) (1) It is not a defense to a charge under this section that pertains to a purported or threatened
use of a weapon of mass destruction that the offender did not possess or have the ability to use a weapon
of mass destruction or that what was represented to be a weapon of mass destruction was not a weapon
of mass destruction.
(2) Any act that is a violation of this section and any other section of the Ohio Revised Code
or this code may be prosecuted under this section, the other section, or both sections.
(E) As used in this section, ECONOMIC HARM and WEAPON OF MASS DESTRUCTION have
the same meaning as in R.C. § 2917.31.
(R.C. § 2917.32) (1985 Code, § 132.09) (Ord. 1169, passed 6-10-1974)
§ 132.10 IMPROPER ACTIVATION OF ALARM SYSTEM.
(A) No person, firm or corporation, being the owner or person in charge, shall allow an alarm
system to become a public nuisance by doing any of the following:
(1) Permit conditions to exist that allow an alarm system to activate more than two false alarms
in a calendar month;
102 Madeira - General Offenses
(2) Permit conditions to exist that allow an alarm system to activate more than 12 false alarms
in a calendar year; or
(3) Fail to notify the Police Department, the Fire Department or the Hamilton County
Communication Center prior to any service, test, repair, maintenance, adjustment, alteration or
installation which might activate a false alarm.
(B) It is prima facie evidence that a violation of this offense has occurred if the system activates for
reasons other than its intended purpose.
(C) It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that, when the system was activated
there appeared to be a need for assistance.
(D) Whoever violates this section is guilty of allowing an alarm system to become a public nuisance,
a minor misdemeanor.
(1985 Code, § 132.091) (Ord. 90-65, passed 9-17-1990)
§ 132.11 PERSONATING AN OFFICER.
(A) No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she is facilitating a fraud, or with
purpose to induce another to purchase property or services, shall personate a law enforcement officer,
or an inspector, investigator or agent of any governmental agency.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of personating an officer, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 2913.44) (1985 Code, § 132.10)
Cross-reference:
Impersonating an officer (non-fraud offense), see § 132.13
§ 132.12 UNLAWFUL DISPLAY OF LAW ENFORCEMENT EMBLEM.
(A) No person who is not entitled to do so shall knowingly display on a motor vehicle the emblem
of a law enforcement agency or an organization of law enforcement officers.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of the unlawful display of the emblem of a law
enforcement agency or an organization of law enforcement officers, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 2913.441) (1985 Code, § 132.11)
§ 132.13 IMPERSONATING A PEACE OFFICER.
(A) As used in this section:
Offenses Against Public Peace 103
FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Means an employee of the United States who
serves in a position the duties of which are primarily the investigation, apprehension or detention of
individuals suspected or convicted of offenses under the criminal laws of the United States.
IMPERSONATE. Means to act the part of, assume the identity of, wear the uniform or any
part of the uniform of, or display the identification of a particular person or of a member of a class of
persons with purpose to make another person believe that the actor is that particular person or is a
member of that class of persons.
INVESTIGATOR OF THE BUREAU OF CRIMINAL IDENTIFICATION AND
INVESTIGATION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2903.11.
PEACE OFFICER. A Sheriff, Deputy Sheriff, Marshal, Deputy Marshal, member of the
organized Police Department of a municipal corporation or township constable, who is employed by a
political subdivision of this state; a member of a police force employed by a metropolitan housing
authority under R.C. § 3735.31(D); a member of a police force employed by a regional transit authority
under R.C. § 306.35(Y); a state university law enforcement officer appointed under R.C. § 3345.04;
a veterans’ home police officer appointed under R.C. § 5907.02; a special police officer employed by
a port authority under R.C. § 4582.04 or 4582.28; an officer, agent or employee of the state or any of
its agencies, instrumentalities or political subdivisions, upon whom, by statute, a duty to conserve the
peace or to enforce all or certain laws is imposed and the authority to arrest violators is conferred, within
limits of that statutory duty and authority; or a state highway patrol trooper whose primary duties are
to preserve the peace, to protect life and property, and to enforce the laws, ordinances or rules of the
state or any of its political subdivisions.
PRIVATE POLICE OFFICER. Means any security guard, special police officer, private
detective or other person who is privately employed in a police capacity.
(B) No person shall impersonate a peace officer, private police officer, investigator of the Bureau
of Criminal Identification and Investigation or federal law enforcement officer.
(C) No person, by impersonating a peace officer, private police officer, investigator of the Bureau
of Criminal Identification and Investigation, or federal law enforcement officer, shall arrest or detain any
person, search any person or search the property of any person.
(D) No person, with purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of an offense, shall impersonate
a peace officer, private police officer, federal law enforcement officer, an officer, agent or employee of
the municipality or the state or investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation.
(E) No person shall commit a felony while impersonating a peace officer, private police officer,
federal law enforcement officer, an officer, agent or employee of the municipality or of the state or
investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation.
104 Madeira - General Offenses
(F) It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (B) of this section that the impersonation
of the peace officer, private police officer, federal law enforcement officer, an officer, agent or employee
of the municipality or of the state, or investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation was for a lawful purpose.
(G) Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
Whoever violates division (C) or (D) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
purpose of a violation of division (D) of this section is to commit or facilitate the commission of a felony,
a violation of division (D) is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. Whoever violates
division (E) of this section is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.51) (1985 Code, § 132.12)
Cross-reference:
Personating an officer (fraud offense), see § 132.11
§ 132.14 CORDONING EMERGENCY AREAS.
(A) The Manager, Mayor or Vice-Mayor of the city, when engaged in suppressing riot or civil
commotion in the city, or when there is a clear and present danger of riot or civil commotion occurring
within the city, or in case of fire, accident, disaster or emergency of any kind, shall have the authority
to cordon the area or areas within the city in which any such riot or civil commotion is taking place or
in which any such fire or other emergency exists, and any area or areas within the city relative to which
such danger or riot or civil commotion exists or in which any such accident or disaster has occurred; to
prohibit persons from entering or leaving any such cordoned area except persons seeking to enter or
leave for the purpose of carrying on necessary and lawful pursuits; and to prohibit the selling, offering
for sale, dispensing, carrying or transporting of firearms or other dangerous weapons, or of ammunition,
dynamite or dangerous explosives of any kind, or of intoxicating beverages, into, within or from any
such cordoned area. They may exercise such authority through any Sheriff, police officer, deputy or
other law enforcement officer on duty in the city.
(B) No person shall willfully fail promptly to obey a lawful order of the Manager, Mayor or ViceMayor, or of any Sheriff, police officer, deputy or other law enforcement officer, given under the
authority of or pursuant to this section.
(C) Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(1985 Code, § 132.13) (Ord. 1169, passed 6-10-1974; Ord. 1306, passed 6-13-1977)
§ 132.15 DISTURBING CHURCH CONGREGATIONS OR SCHOOLS.
Whoever shall sell or offer for sale, or give or offer to give, or attempt in any manner to distribute
any pamphlets, circulars, dodgers or printed matter of any kind at any entrance or exit of any church or
Offenses Against Public Peace 105
schoolhouse or upon any public street within 100 feet of any such church or schoolhouse, during any
services in or during the hour preceding or an hour following any such services in any such church, or
during hours of instruction or recess in any such school, or during an hour preceding or an hour
following such hours of instruction, shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(1985 Code, § 132.14) (Ord. 1169, passed 6-10-1974; Ord. 1306, passed 6-13-1977)
§ 132.16 SCATTERING ITCHING POWDER AND THE LIKE.
Any person who shall distribute, spread, scatter or set free in any theater, hall or other place of
public assemblage, any one or more of the articles known as itching powders, sneezing powders, stink
bombs or any article used for the purpose of producing itching, sneezing by irritation or nauseous or
annoying smells or odors, shall on conviction thereof, be guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(1985 Code, § 132.15) (Ord. 1169, passed 6-10-1974; Ord. 1306, passed 6-13-1977)
§ 132.17 LOUD NOISES.
(A) No person shall operate or cause to be operated any whistle, rattle, bell, gong, clapper,
hammer, drum, horn, player piano, calliope, radio, phonograph or other sound producing or sound
amplifying instrument, or in any other way create noise or sound in such manner and to such extent as
to disturb the peace and quiet of two or more separate residences between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and
11:00 p.m.
(B) It shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section for any such person to permit or
for any such person to engage in any such creation of noise or sound on or about any premises during
the night hours beginning at 11:00 p.m. and ending at 6:00 a.m.
(Ord. 1551, passed 9-21-1981)
(C) In every charge of violation of this section the affidavit shall state the hour at which the offense
is alleged to have occurred.
(D) Any person, association, firm or corporation violating this section shall be guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(Ord. 1169, passed 6-10-1974; Ord. 1306, passed 6-13-1977)
(1985 Code, § 132.16)
§ 132.18 LOUD NOISES OF LOCOMOTIVES.
(A) No person shall make or cause an unnecessary noise with any whistle, bell or signal device upon
any locomotive passing through the city limits.
106 Madeira - General Offenses
(B) Whoever shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(1985 Code, § 132.17) (Ord. 1169, passed 6-10-1974; Ord. 1306, passed 6-13-1977)
§ 132.19 BEGGING PROHIBITED.
Whoever shall solicit alms or charity, either in person or by letter, shall be guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(1985 Code, § 132.18) (Ord. 1306, passed 6-13-1977)
§ 132.20 LIMITATION OF HOURS OF CONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
ACTIVITIES.
(A) Background, purpose and intent. Certain construction and development activities such as
clearing, excavation, loading and unloading of construction materials, equipment and supplies, machine
tools, construction, repair and demolition create traffic, noise and other related impacts within the city
and upon residents of the city. The city believes it is in the best interest of this community to regulate
the hours of performance of certain construction and development activities in order to protect the health,
safety and welfare of residents of the city. The purpose and intent of this section is to limit excessive
construction noise that interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life, property, recreation or conduct
of business within the city. The requirements contained herein are designed to encourage managed
development and construction. The city regulates noise pollution pursuant to Chapter 132 of the code
of ordinances. It has been determined that Chapter 132 does not contain clearly defined language to
regulate construction times or noise. Excessive noise is a serious hazard to the public health and welfare
and the quality of life in any residential community. Each resident of the city has the right to an
environment reasonably free from noise which jeopardizes health, welfare or which unduly interferes
with a property owner’s right to the use or enjoyment of their property. It is recognized that residential
land uses are more noise sensitive than commercial land uses. The city also recognizes that continued
development and construction are essential to economic vitality of our community and that certain noise
producing equipment, including those for construction activities, are essential to the quality of life and
should be allowed to continue at reasonable levels with moderate regulation. Therefore, the Council has
determined that it is in the best interests of the residents of our community to promote an environment
free from excessive noise, otherwise properly called “noise pollution,” which unnecessarily jeopardizes
the health and welfare and degrades the quality of lives of our residents, without unduly prohibiting,
limiting or otherwise regulating the function of certain noise-producing equipment used in construction
activities. The City Council finds that limiting the hours within which certain construction noise may
originate will benefit the city’s residential neighborhoods by ensuring tranquility and calm during
sensitive hours, while simultaneously preserving a sufficient opportunity for necessary construction
activities to occur.
(B) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Offenses Against Public Peace 107
CITY MANAGER. The City Manager of the City of Madeira, or his or her designee.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES. Activities such as excavation;
clearing; earth moving; construction; repair; maintenance; demolition; loading or unloading of
construction materials; equipment and supplies; operation of construction tools, vehicles and equipment;
and operation of power tools; where said activities have a total estimated cost exceeding $250,000.
(C) Limitation on hours of construction and development activities.
(1) Except as otherwise provided in this section, construction and development activities as
defined in division (B) of this section shall be undertaken within the city only during the following hours:
(a) Monday through Friday: 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.; and
(b) Saturdays: 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m
(2) No construction and development activities as defined in division (B) of this section shall
be permitted on Sundays, New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving and Christmas Day.
(D) Exceptions. The limitations stated in division (C) shall not apply to the following:
(1) Construction and development activities to remedy or avoid a problem related to the health
or safety of persons or property, or related to sewer, water, power utility or telephone interruptions;
(2) Construction and development activities undertaken by or on behalf of any public body
(including the city) or agency for the benefit of the public. The City Manager may attach to any such
waiver, all conditions he or she deems necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare; and
(3) Construction and development activities as defined in division (B) of this section approved
in writing by the City Manager to be conducted at times and/or days other than those permitted in
division (C) of this section after consideration of factors including but not limited to the following:
(a) Whether construction noise in the vicinity of the proposed work site would be less
objectionable at hours other than those specified in division (C) of this section because of the unique
nature of the population levels, population distribution and surrounding neighborhood activities;
(b) Whether obstruction and interference with traffic, particularly on streets of major
importance, would be less objectionable at hours other than those specified in division (C) of this section;
(c) Whether the kind of work to be performed emits noises at such a low level as to not
cause significant disturbance of the peaceful enjoyment of their property by the neighbors in the vicinity
of the work site;
108 Madeira - General Offenses
(d) Whether the neighborhood of the proposed work site is primarily residential in
character such that the sleep of the residents would be disturbed;
(e) Whether great economic hardship would occur if the work were spread over a longer
time;
(f) Whether the work will abate or prevent hazards to life or property, or whether the
work provides a unique benefit to the public at large or is in the general public interest; and
(g) Any other similar relevant factors.
(E) Enforcement.
(1) Warning. Upon receipt of a complaint, or upon observation of construction and
development activities that are conducted other than as permitted in this section, the City Manager, any
police officer and any city building official may investigate the matter and inform the property owner
or persons doing construction on the site regarding the permitted hours for such construction and
development activities. However, actual notice of the alleged violation is not necessary to invoke the
enforcement of this section.
(2) Enforcement.
(a) The City Manager or the building official may issue a stop work order regarding all
construction on a site where construction and development activities are being conducted in violation of
this section.
(b) Each separate occurrence of a violation of this section shall constitute a separate
violation.
(c) The city reserves the right to enforce violations of this section by all means available
pursuant to the civil and criminal codes. The city may enforce such violation by initiating one or more
of the following actions:
1. Issuance of a citation, subject to applicable fines as set forth in this section; and
2. Initiation of a civil court proceeding, including but not limited to a demand for
injunctive relief, or any other lawful process pursuant to the Ohio Revised Code.
(d) Any person violating any of the provisions of this section for a second time during any
30-day period shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree and subject to a fine of not more
than $250 for each violation.
Offenses Against Public Peace 109
(e) Any person violating any of the provisions of this section for three or more times
during any 60-day period shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree and subject to a fine of
not more than $500 for each violation.
(1985 Code, § 132.19) (Ord. 08-31, passed 10-27-2008)
§ 132.21 INCITING TO VIOLENCE.
(A) No person shall knowingly engage in conduct designed to urge or incite another to commit any
offense of violence when either of the following apply:
(1) The conduct takes place under circumstances that create a clear and present danger that any
offense of violence will be committed; or
(2) The conduct proximately results in the commission of any offense of violence.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of inciting to violence. If the offense of violence that the
other person is being urged or incited to commit is a misdemeanor, inciting to violence is a misdemeanor
of the first degree. If the offense of violence that the other person is being urged or incited to commit
is a felony, inciting to violence is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2917.01)
§ 132.22 SAFETY OF CROWDS ATTENDING LIVE ENTERTAINMENT
PERFORMANCES.
(A) As used in this section:
CONCERT. Means a musical performance of which the primary component is a presentation
by persons singing or playing musical instruments, that is intended by its sponsors mainly, but not
necessarily exclusively, for the listening enjoyment of the audience, and that is held in a facility. The
term does not include any performance in which music is a part of the presentation and the primary
component of which is acting, dancing, a motion picture, a demonstration of skills or talent other than
singing or playing an instrument, an athletic event, an exhibition or a speech.
FACILITY. Means any structure that has a roof or partial roof and that has walls that wholly
surround the area on all sides, including but not limited to a stadium, hall, arena, armory, auditorium,
ballroom, exhibition hall, convention center or music hall.
LIVE ENTERTAINMENT PERFORMANCE. Means any live speech; any live musical
performance, including a concert; any live dramatic performance; any live variety show; and any other
live performance with respect to which the primary intent of the audience can be construed to be viewing
the performers. The term does not include any form of entertainment with respect to which the person
purchasing a ticket routinely participates in amusements as well as views performers.
110 Madeira - General Offenses
PERSON. Includes, in addition to an individual or entity specified in R.C. § 1.59(C), any
governmental entity.
RESTRICTED ENTERTAINMENT AREA. Means any wholly or partially enclosed area,
whether indoors or outdoors, that has limited access through established entrances or established
turnstiles or similar devices.
(B) (1) No person shall sell, offer to sell or offer in return for a donation, any ticket that is not
numbered and that does not correspond to a specific seat for admission to either of the following:
(a) A live entertainment performance that is not exempted under division (D) of this
section, that is held in a restricted entertainment area, and for which more than 8,000 tickets are offered
to the public; or
(b) A concert that is not exempted under division (D) of this section and for which more
than 3,000 tickets are offered to the public.
(2) No person shall advertise any live entertainment performance as described in division
(B)(1)(a) of this section or any concert as described in division (B)(1)(b) of this section, unless the
advertisement contains the words “Reserved Seats Only.”
(C) Unless exempted by division (D)(1) of this section, no person who owns or operates any
restricted entertainment area shall fail to open, maintain and properly staff at least the number of
entrances designated under division (E) of this section for a minimum of 90 minutes prior to the
scheduled start of any live entertainment performance that is held in the restricted entertainment area and
for which more than 3,000 tickets are sold, offered for sale or offered in return for a donation.
(D) (1) A live entertainment performance, other than a concert, is exempted from the provisions
of divisions (B) and (C) of this section if both of the following apply:
(a) The restricted entertainment area in which the performance is held has at least eight
entrances or, if both entrances and separate admission turnstiles or similar devices are used, has at least
eight turnstiles or similar devices; and
(b) The eight entrances or, if applicable, the eight turnstiles or similar devices, are opened,
maintained and properly staffed at least one hour prior to the scheduled start of the performance.
(2) (a) The officer responsible for public safety in the municipality may, upon application of
the sponsor of a concert covered by division (B) of this section, exempt the concert from the provisions
of that division if such officer finds that the health, safety and welfare of the participants and spectators
would not be substantially affected by failure to comply with the provisions of that division. In
determining whether to grant an exemption, the officer shall consider the following factors: the size and
design of the facility in which the concert is scheduled; the size, age and anticipated conduct of the crowd
expected to attend the concert; and the ability of the sponsor to manage and control the expected crowd.
If the sponsor of any concert desires to obtain an exemption under this division (D), the sponsor shall
Offenses Against Public Peace 111
apply to the appropriate official on a form prescribed by that official. The official shall issue an order
that grants or denies the exemption within five days after receipt of the application. The sponsor may
appeal any order that denies an exemption to the court of common pleas of the county in which the
facility is located.
(b) If an official grants an exemption under division (D)(2)(a) of this section, the official
shall designate an on-duty law enforcement officer to be present at the concert. The designated officer
has authority to issue orders to all security personnel at the concert to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the participants and spectators.
(3) Notwithstanding division (D)(2) of this section, in the case of a concert held in a facility
located on the campus of an educational institution covered by R.C. § 3345.04, a state university law
enforcement officer appointed pursuant to R.C. §§ 3345.04 and 3345.21 shall do both of the following:
(a) Exercise the authority to grant exemptions provided by division (D)(2)(a) of this section
in lieu of an official designated in that division; and
(b) If the officer grants an exemption under division (D)(3)(a) of this section, designate
an on-duty state university law enforcement officer to be present at the concert. The designated officer
has authority to issue orders to all security personnel at the concert to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the participants and spectators.
(E) (1) Unless a live entertainment performance is exempted by division (D)(1) of this section, the
officer responsible for public safety within the municipality shall designate, for purposes of division (C)
of this section, the minimum number of entrances required to be opened, maintained and staffed at each
live entertainment performance so as to permit crowd control and reduce congestion at the entrances.
The designation shall be based on such factors as the size and nature of the crowd expected to attend the
live entertainment performance, the length of time prior to the live entertainment performance that
crowds are expected to congregate at the entrances and the amount of security provided at the restricted
entertainment area.
(2) Notwithstanding division (E)(1) of this section, a state university law enforcement officer
appointed pursuant to R.C. §§ 3345.04 and 3345.21 shall designate the number of entrances required
to be opened, maintained and staffed in the case of a live entertainment performance that is held at a
restricted entertainment area located on the campus of an educational institution covered by R.C.
§ 3345.04.
(F) No person shall enter into any contract for a live entertainment performance that does not permit
or require compliance with this section.
(G) (1) This section does not apply to a live entertainment performance held in a restricted
entertainment area if one admission ticket entitles the holder to view or participate in three or more
different games, rides, activities or live entertainment performances occurring simultaneously at different
sites within the restricted entertainment area and if the initial admittance entrance to the restricted
entertainment area, for which the ticket is required, is separate from the entrance to any specific live
112 Madeira - General Offenses
entertainment performance and an additional ticket is not required for admission to the particular live
entertainment performance.
(2) This section does not apply to a symphony orchestra performance, a ballet performance,
horse races, dances or fairs.
(H) This section does not prohibit the legislative authority from imposing additional requirements,
not in conflict with the section, for the promotion or holding of live entertainment performances.
(I) Whoever violates division (B), (C) or (F) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If any individual suffers physical harm to the individual’s person as a result of a violation of this
section, the sentencing court shall consider this factor in favor of imposing a term of imprisonment upon
the offender.
(R.C. § 2917.40)
§ 132.23 MISCONDUCT INVOLVING A PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM.
(A) As used in this section, PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM means a county transit system
operated in accordance with R.C. §§ 306.01 through 306.13, a regional transit authority operated in
accordance with R.C. §§ 306.30 through 306.71 or a regional transit commission operated in accordance
with R.C. §§ 306.80 through 306.90.
(B) No person shall evade the payment of the known fares of a public transportation system.
(C) No person shall alter any transfer, pass, ticket or token of a public transportation system with
the purpose of evading the payment of fares or of defrauding the system.
(D) No person shall do any of the following while in any facility or on any vehicle of a public
transportation system:
(1) Play sound equipment without the proper use of a private earphone;
(2) Smoke, eat or drink in any area where the activity is clearly marked as being prohibited;
or
(3) Expectorate upon a person, facility or vehicle.
(E) No person shall write, deface, draw or otherwise mark on any facility or vehicle of a public
transportation system.
(F) No person shall fail to comply with a lawful order of a public transportation system police
officer, and no person shall resist, obstruct or abuse a public transportation police officer in the
performance of the officer’s duties.
Offenses Against Public Peace 113
(G) Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of misconduct involving a public
transportation system.
(1) A violation of division (B), (C) or (F) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(2) A violation of division (D) of this section is a minor misdemeanor on a first offense. If a
person previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of any division of this section
or of a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any division of this section, a violation of
division (D) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(3) A violation of division (E) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(H) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, 75% of each fine paid to satisfy a sentence imposed
for a violation of any of the provisions of this section shall be deposited into the treasury of the county
and 25% shall be deposited with the county transit board, regional transit authority or regional transit
commission that operates the public transportation system involved in the violation, unless the Board of
County Commissioners operates the public transportation system, in which case 100% of each fine shall
be deposited into the treasury of the county.
(R.C. § 2917.41)
OFFENSES INVOLVING ALCOHOL
§ 132.35 DRUNKENNESS.
Whoever shall disturb the good order and quiet of the municipality by intoxication and drunkenness,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(1985 Code, § 132.20) (Ord. 1169, passed 6-10-1974; Ord. 1306, passed 6-13-1977)
§ 132.36 ILLEGAL POSSESSION OF INTOXICATING LIQUORS PROHIBITED.
(A) No person, who is not the holder of a permit issued by the Department of Liquor Control, in
force at the time and authorizing the same, shall have in his or her possession any intoxicating liquor in
one or more containers if the containers do not have thereon the seal prescribed by the Board of Liquor
Control, pursuant to R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303, unless such intoxicating liquor was lawfully acquired
by him or her.
(B) The possession of such intoxicating liquor in such containers is prima facie evidence that it was
not lawfully acquired by the defendant.
114 Madeira - General Offenses
(C) Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(1985 Code, § 132.21) (Ord. 1169, passed 6-10-1974)
§ 132.37 LIMITATION ON PURCHASE OF LIQUOR OR BEER.
(A) Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C. Chapter 4301, no person under the age
of 21 years shall purchase beer or intoxicating liquor.
(R.C. § 4301.63)
(B) Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $100. The court
imposing a fine for a violation of this section may order that the fine be paid by the performance of
public work at a reasonable hour rate established by the court. The court shall designate the time within
which the public work shall be completed.
(R.C. § 4301.99(E))
(1985 Code, § 132.22) (Ord. 1598, passed 7-19-1982; Ord. 88-39, passed 10-3-1988; Ord. 07-10,
passed 4-9-2007)
§ 132.38 OPEN CONTAINER PROHIBITED.
(A) As used in this section:
CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINE. Means a vehicle registered under R.C. § 4503.24.
HIGHWAY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
STREET. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
(B) No person shall have in the person’s possession an opened container of beer or intoxicating
liquor in any of the following circumstances:
(1) Except as provided in division (C)(1)(e) of this section, in a state liquor store;
(2) Except as provided in division (C) of this section, on the premises of the holder of any
permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control;
(3) In any other public place;
(4) Except as provided in division (D) or (E) of this section, while operating or being a
passenger in or on a motor vehicle on any street, highway, or other public or private property open to
the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking; or
Offenses Against Public Peace 115
(5) Except as provided in division (D) or (E) of this section, while being in or on a stationary
motor vehicle on any street, highway, or other public or private property open to the public for purposes
of vehicular travel or parking.
(C) (1) A person may have in the person’s possession an opened container of any of the following:
(a) Beer or intoxicating liquor that has been lawfully purchased for consumption on the
premises where bought from the holder of an A-1-A, A-2, A-3a, D-1, D-2, D-3, D-3a, D-4, D-4a, D-5,
D-5a, D-5b, D-5c, D-5d, D-5e, D-5f, D-5g, D-5h, D-5i, D-5j, D-5k, D-5l, D-5m, D-5n, D-5o, D-7,
D-8, E, F, F-2, F-5, F-7, or F-8 permit;
(b) Beer, wine or mixed beverages served for consumption on the premises by the holder
of an F-3 permit or wine served for consumption on the premises by the holder of an F-4 or F-6 permit;
(c) Beer or intoxicating liquor consumed on the premises of a convention facility as
provided in R.C. § 4303.201;
(d) Beer or intoxicating liquor to be consumed during tastings and samplings approved by
rule of the Liquor Control Commission; or
(e) Spiritous liquor to be consumed for purposes of a tasting sample, as defined in R.C.
§ 4301.171.
(2) A person may have in the person’s possession on an F liquor permit premises an opened
container of beer or intoxicating liquor that was not purchased from the holder of the F permit if the
premises for which the F permit is issued is a music festival and the holder of the F permit grants
permission for that possession on the premises during the period for which the F permit is issued. As
used in this division (C)(2), MUSIC FESTIVAL means a series of outdoor live musical performances
extending for a period of at least three consecutive days and located on an area of land of at least 40
acres.
(3) (a) A person may have in the person’s possession on a D-2 liquor permit premises an
opened or unopened container of wine that was not purchased from the holder of the D-2 permit if the
premises for which the D-2 permit is issued is an outdoor performing arts center, the person is attending
an orchestral performance, and the holder of the D-2 permit grants permission for the possession and
consumption of wine in certain predesignated areas of the premises during the period for which the D-2
permit is issued.
(b) As used in division (C)(3)(a) of this section:
ORCHESTRAL PERFORMANCE. Means a concert comprised of a group of not
fewer than 40 musicians playing various musical instruments.
116 Madeira - General Offenses
OUTDOOR PERFORMING ARTS CENTER. Means an outdoor performing arts
center that is located on not less than 150 acres of land and that is open for performances from the first
day of April to the last day of October of each year.
(4) A person may have in the person’s possession an opened or unopened container of beer or
intoxicating liquor at an outdoor location at which the person is attending an orchestral performance as
defined in division (C)(3)(b) of this section if the person with supervision and control over the
performance grants permission for the possession and consumption of beer or intoxicating liquor in
certain predesignated areas of that outdoor location.
(5) (a) A person may have in the person’s possession on an F-9 liquor permit premises an
opened or unopened container of beer or intoxicating liquor that was not purchased from the holder of
the F-9 permit if the person is attending an orchestral performance and the holder of the F-9 permit
grants permission for the possession and consumption of beer or intoxicating liquor in certain
predesignated areas of the premises during the period for which the F-9 permit is issued.
(b) As used in division (C)(5) of this section, ORCHESTRAL PERFORMANCE has the
same meaning as in division (C)(3)(b) of this section.
(6) (a) A person may have in the person’s possession on the property of an outdoor
motorsports facility an opened or unopened container of beer or intoxicating liquor that was not
purchased from the owner of the facility if both of the following apply:
1. The person is attending a racing event at the facility; and
2. The owner of the facility grants permission for the possession and consumption
of beer or intoxicating liquor on the property of the facility.
(b) As used in division (C)(6)(a) of this section:
OUTDOOR MOTORSPORTS FACILITY. An outdoor racetrack to which all of the
following apply:
a. It is 2.4 miles or more in length;
b. It is located on 200 acres or more of land;
c. The primary business of the owner of the facility is the hosting and promoting
of racing events; and
d. The holder of a D-1, D-2 or D-3 permit is located on the property of the
facility.
RACING EVENT. A motor vehicle racing event sanctioned by one or more motor
racing sanctioning organizations.
Offenses Against Public Peace 117
(D) This section does not apply to a person who pays all or a portion of the fee imposed for use of
a chauffeured limousine pursuant to a prearranged contract or the guest of the person, when all of the
following apply:
(1) The person or guest is a passenger in the limousine;
(2) The person or guest is located in the limousine, but is not occupying a seat in the front
compartment of the limousine where the operator of the limousine is located; and
(3) The limousine is located on any street, highway, or other public or private property open
to the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking.
(E) An opened bottle of wine that was purchased from the holder of a permit that authorizes the sale
of wine for consumption on the premises where sold is not an opened container for the purposes of this
section if both of the following apply:
(1) The opened bottle of wine is securely resealed by the permit holder or an employee of the
permit holder before the bottle is removed from the premises. The bottle shall be secured in such a
manner that it is visibly apparent if the bottle has been subsequently opened or tampered with; and
(2) The opened bottle of wine that is resealed in accordance with division (E)(1) of this section
is stored in the trunk of a motor vehicle or, if the motor vehicle does not have a trunk, behind the last
upright seat or in an area not normally occupied by the driver or passengers and not easily accessible by
the driver.
(R.C. § 4301.62)
(F) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4301.99(A))
(1985 Code, § 132.23)
§ 132.39 CONSUMPTION IN MOTOR VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
(A) No person shall consume any beer or intoxicating liquor in a motor vehicle.
(B) Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(1985 Code, § 132.24) (Ord. 1169, passed 6-10-1974)
§ 132.40 SALE TO MINORS PROHIBITED.
(A) No person shall sell intoxicating liquor, beer, malt liquor or malt beverages to a person under
the age of 21 years, or buy intoxicating liquor for, or furnish it to, a minor unless given by a physician
in the regular line of his or her practice, or by a parent or legal guardian.
118 Madeira - General Offenses
(B) Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(1985 Code, § 132.25) (Ord. 1598, passed 7-19-1982; Ord. 97-05, passed 2-10-1997)
§ 132.41 LIMITATIONS ON POSSESSION OF LIQUOR OR BEER.
(A) No person under the age of 21 years shall possess intoxicating liquor, beer, malt liquor or malt
beverages.
(B) Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(1985 Code, § 132.26) (Ord. 1598, passed 7-19-1982; Ord. 97-05, passed 2-10-1997; Ord. 07-10,
passed 4-9-2007)
§ 132.42 ALCOHOL VAPORIZING DEVICES PROHIBITED.
(A) As used in this section, ALCOHOL VAPORIZING DEVICE means a machine or other device
that mixes beer or intoxicating liquor with pure oxygen or any other gas to produce a vaporized product
for the purpose of consumption by inhalation.
(B) No person shall sell or offer for sale an alcohol vaporizing device.
(C) No person shall purchase or use an alcohol vaporizing device.
(R.C. § 4301.65)
(D) (1) Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of misdemeanor of the third degree.
For a second or subsequent violation occurring within a period of five consecutive years after the first
violation, a person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(J))
(2) Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4301.99(A))
(1985 Code, § 132.27)
§ 132.43 MISREPRESENTATION TO OBTAIN ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE BY OR FOR A
MINOR.
(A) Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C. Chapter 4301, no person shall
knowingly furnish any false information as to the name, age or other identification of any person under
Offenses Against Public Peace 119
21 years of age, for the purpose of obtaining, or with the intent to obtain, beer or intoxicating liquor for
a person under 21 years of age, by purchase, or as a gift.
(R.C. § 4301.633)
(B) Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C. Chapter 4301, no person under the age
of 21 years shall knowingly show or give false information concerning his or her name, age or other
identification for the purpose of purchasing or otherwise obtaining beer or intoxicating liquor in any
place in this municipality where beer or intoxicating liquor is sold under a permit issued by the Division
of Liquor Control, or sold by the Division of Liquor Control.
(R.C. § 4301.634)
(C) Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(C))
(D) (1) Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
If, in committing a first violation of division (B), the offender presented to the permit holder or his or
her employee or agent a false, fictitious or altered identification card, a false or fictitious driver’s license
purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s license issued by any state that has been altered, the
offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than $250 and not more
than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than six months.
(2) On a second violation in which, for the second time, the offender presented to the permit
holder or his or her employee or agent a false, fictitious or altered identification card, a false or fictitious
driver’s license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s license issued by any state that has been
altered, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than $500
nor more than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than six months.
The court also may impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or permit or nonresident operation privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
(3) On a third or subsequent violation in which, for the third or subsequent time, the offender
presented to the permit holder or his or her employee or agent a false, fictitious or altered identification
card, a false or fictitious driver’s license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s license issued by
any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be
fined not less than $500 nor more than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not
more than six months. Except as provided in this division (B)(3), the court also may impose a class six
suspension of the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating
privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(6), and the court may order that the suspension
or denial remain in effect until the offender attains the age of 21 years. The court, in lieu of suspending
the offender’s temporary instruction permit, probationary driver’s license or driver’s license, instead may
order the offender to perform a determinate number of hours of community service, with the court
determining the actual number of hours and the nature of the community service the offender shall
perform.
(R.C. § 4301.99(F))
(1985 Code, § 132.28) (Ord. 87-30, passed 9-8-1987)
120 Madeira - General Offenses
§ 132.44 CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
(A) No person being the owner, occupier or otherwise in possession of any real property located
within the city, shall do any of the following:
(1) Allow a minor, under 21 years of age, who is not the child, relative or ward of the owner,
occupier or possessor, to possess or consume intoxicating liquor or beer while on the premises; and
(2) Permit circumstances to exist in or upon the real property which would result in a violation
of this division (A).
(B) A person will be held to possess intoxicating liquor or beer where such alcoholic beverage is
within the immediate control, care or management of that person.
(C) Where a person is investigated or charged under division (A) of this section, the police and/or
court shall consider the following factors in favor of such person in determining whether a violation has
occurred:
(1) Where the owner, occupier or possessor, prior to leaving the city for a period in excess of
24 hours, notified the Police Department of the dates of the departure and return and the identity of those
persons who will remain on the premises during the absence; and/or
(2) Where the owner, occupier or possessor enlisted the aid of the Police Department in
controlling the situation involving any of the offenses enumerated in division (A) of this section prior
to the police taking action based on their observations or receiving a complaint relating to the situation
from another resident of the city.
(D) Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor for the first
offense. Any subsequent violation of division (A) of this section within two years of the date of the first
conviction shall be a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(1985 Code, § 132.29) (Ord. 88-02, passed 2-1-1988; Ord. 87-30, passed 9-8-1987)
§ 132.45 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
(A) All terms used in §§ 132.42 through 132.44 shall be as defined in the Ohio Revised Code.
(B) Should any clause of §§ 132.42 through 132.44 be held unconstitutional, that clause shall be
deemed null and void without affecting the enforceability of the remainder of those sections.
(1985 Code, § 132.30) (Ord. 87-30, passed 9-8-1987)
Offenses Against Public Peace 121
§ 132.46 POSTING OF CARD.
(A) (1) Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 4301.691, every place in this municipality where
beer, intoxicating liquor or any low-alcohol beverage is sold for beverage purposes shall display at all
times, in a prominent place on the premises thereof, a printed card, which shall be furnished by the
Division of Liquor Control and which shall read substantially as follows:
WARNING TO PERSONS UNDER AGE
If you are under the age of 21
Under the statutes of the State of Ohio, if you order, pay for, share the cost of, or attempt to
purchase, or possess or consume beer or intoxicating liquor in any public place, or furnish false
information as to name, age or other identification, you are subject to a fine of up to $1,000,
or imprisonment up to six months, or both.
If you are under the age of 18
Under the statutes of the State of Ohio, if you order, pay for, share the cost of, or attempt to
purchase, or posses or consume, any type of beer or wine that contains either no alcohol or less
than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume in any public place, or furnish false
information as to the name, age, or other identification, you are subject to a fine of up to $250
or to imprisonment up to 30 days, or both.
(2) No person shall be subject to any criminal prosecution or any proceedings before the
Department or the Liquor Control Commission for failing to display this card. No permit issued by the
Department shall be suspended, revoked or canceled because of the failure of the permit holder to display
this card.
(B) (1) Every place in this municipality for which a D permit has been issued under R.C. Chapter
4303 shall be issued a printed card by the Division of Liquor Control that shall read substantially as
follows:
WARNING
If you are carrying a firearm
Under the statutes of Ohio, if you possess a firearm in any room in which liquor is being
dispensed in premises for which a D permit has been issued under Chapter 4303 of the Revised
Code, you may be guilty of a felony and may be subjected to a prison term of up to one year.
(2) No person shall be subject to any criminal prosecution or any proceedings before the
Division of Liquor Control or the Liquor Control Commission for failing to display this card. No permit
issued by the Department shall be suspended, revoked or canceled because of the failure of the permit
holder to display this card.
(R.C. § 4301.637) (1985 Code, § 132.31)
Statutory reference:
Carrying concealed weapon, felony, see R.C. § 2923.12
Possessing firearm in liquor permit premises, exceptions, defenses, see R.C. § 2923.121
122 Madeira - General Offenses
§ 132.47 GOOD FAITH ACCEPTANCES OF SPURIOUS IDENTIFICATION.
(A) No permit holder, agent or employee of a permit holder, or any other person may be found
guilty of a violation of any section of this chapter in which age is any element of the offense, if any court
of record finds all of the following:
(1) That the person buying, at the time of so doing, exhibited to the permit holder, the agent
or employee of the permit holder, or the other person a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an
identification card issued under R.C. §§ 4507.50 through 4507.52, or a military identification card
issued by the United States Department of Defense, that displays a picture of the individual for whom
the license or card was issued and shows that the person buying was then at least 21 years of age if the
person was buying beer as defined in R.C. § 4301.01 or intoxicating liquor, or that the person was then
at least 18 years of age if the person was buying any low-alcohol beverage;
(2) That the permit holder, the agent or employee of the permit holder, or the other person
made a bona fide effort to ascertain the true age of the person buying by checking the identification
presented at the time of the purchase to ascertain that the description on the identification compared with
the appearance of the buyer and that the identification presented had not been altered in any way; and
(3) That the permit holder, the agent or employee of the permit holder, or the other person had
reason to believe that the person buying was of legal age.
(B) The defense provided by division (A) of this section is in addition to the affirmative defense
provided by § 132.49.
(R.C. § 4301.639(A), (C)) (1985 Code, § 132.32)
§ 132.48 LIQUOR TRANSACTION SCANS.
(A) As used in this section and § 132.49:
CARD HOLDER. Means any person who presents a driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or an identification card to a permit holder, or an agent or employee of a permit holder, for either of the
purposes listed in under divisions (a) or (b) of the definition for “transaction scan” in this section.
IDENTIFICATION CARD. Means an identification card issued under R.C. §§ 4507.50
through 4507.52.
PERMIT HOLDER. Means the holder of a permit issued under R.C. Chapter 4303.
TRANSACTION SCAN. Means the process by which a permit holder or an agent or employee
of a permit holder checks, by means of a transaction scan device, the validity of a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or an identification card that is presented as a condition for doing either of the following:
Offenses Against Public Peace 123
(a) Purchasing any beer, intoxicating liquor or low-alcohol beverage; or
(b) Gaining admission to a premises that has been issued a liquor permit authorizing the
sale of beer or intoxicating liquor for consumption on the premises where sold, and where admission is
restricted to persons 21 years of age or older.
TRANSACTION SCAN DEVICE. Means any commercial device or combination of devices
used at a point of sale that is capable of deciphering in an electronically readable format the information
encoded on the magnetic strip or bar code of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification
card.
(B) (1) A permit holder or an agent or employee of a permit holder may perform a transaction scan
by means of a transaction scan device to check the validity of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or identification card presented by a card holder for either of the purposes listed in divisions (a) or (b)
of the definition for “transaction scan” in this section.
(2) If the information deciphered by the transaction scan performed under division (B)(1) of
this section fails to match the information printed on the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
identification card presented by the card holder, or if the transaction scan indicates that the information
so printed is false or fraudulent, neither the permit holder nor any agent or employee of the permit holder
shall sell any beer, intoxicating liquor or low-alcohol beverage to the card holder.
(3) Division (B)(1) of this section does not preclude a permit holder or an agent or employee
of a permit holder from using a transaction scan device to check the validity of a document other than
a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card, if the document includes a bar code or
magnetic strip that may be scanned by the device, as a condition of a sale beer, intoxicating liquor or a
low-alcohol beverage or of granting admission to a premises described in the definition for “transaction
scan” in this section.
(C) The Registrar of Motor Vehicles, with the approval of the Liquor Control Commission, shall
adopt, and may amend or rescind, rules in accordance with R.C. Chapter 119 that do both of the
following:
(1) Govern the recording and maintenance of information described in R.C. § 4301.61(D)(1)(a)
and (D)(1)(b), R.C. § 2925.57(D)(1)(a) and (D)(1)(b), and R.C. § 2927.021(D)(1)(a) and (D)(1)(b); and
(2) Ensure quality control in the use of transaction scan devices under R.C. §§ 2925.57,
2925.58, 2927.021, 2927.022, 4301.61 and 4301.611.
(D) (1) No permit holder or agent or employee of a permit holder shall electronically or
mechanically record or maintain any information derived from a transaction scan, except for the
following:
(a) The name and date of birth of the person listed on the driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or identification card presented by the card holder; and
124 Madeira - General Offenses
(b) The expiration date and identification number of the driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or identification card presented by the card holder.
(2) No permit holder or agent or employee of a permit holder shall use the information that is
derived from a transaction scan or that is permitted to be recorded and maintained under division (D)(1)
of this section, except for purposes of R.C. § 4301.611, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
(3) No permit holder or agent or employee of a permit holder shall use a transaction scan
device for a purpose other than a purpose listed in divisions (a) or (b) of the definition for “transaction
scan” in this section.
(4) No permit holder or agent or employee of a permit holder shall sell or otherwise
disseminate the information derived from a transaction scan to any third party, including but not limited
to selling or otherwise disseminating that information for any marketing, advertising or promotional
activities, but a seller or agent or employee of a seller may release that information pursuant to a court
order or as specifically authorized by R.C. § 4301.611, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, or another section of this code or the Ohio Revised Code.
(E) Nothing in this section or R.C. § 4301.611, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
relieves a permit holder or an agent or employee of a permit holder of any responsibility to comply with
any other applicable local, state or federal laws or rules governing the sale of beer, intoxicating liquor
or low-alcohol beverages.
(F) Whoever violates division (B)(2) or (D) of this section is guilty of an illegal liquor transaction
scan, and the court may impose upon the offender a civil penalty of up to $1,000 for each violation. The
Clerk of the court shall pay each collected civil penalty to the County Treasurer for deposit into the
county treasury.
(R.C. § 4301.61)
(1985 Code, § 132.33)
§ 132.49 AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES.
(A) A permit holder or an agent or employee of a permit holder may not be found guilty of a charge
of a violation of this chapter or any rule of the Liquor Control Commission in which the age of the
purchaser of any beer, intoxicating liquor or low-alcohol beverage is an element of the alleged violation,
if the permit holder, agent or employee raises and proves as an affirmative defense that all of the
following occurred:
(1) A card holder attempting to purchase any beer, intoxicating liquor or low-alcohol beverage
presented a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification card;
(2) A transaction scan of the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card that
the card holder presented indicated that the license or card was valid; and
Offenses Against Public Peace 125
(3) The beer, intoxicating liquor or low-alcohol beverage was sold to the card holder in
reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and the completed transaction scan.
(B) In determining whether a permit holder or an agent or employee of a permit holder has proven
the affirmative defense provided by division (A) of this section, the Liquor Control Commission or the
trier of fact in a court of record shall consider any written policy that the permit holder has adopted and
implemented and that is intended to prevent violations of R.C. §§ 4301.22(A)(1) or (A)(2), 4301.63
through 4301.636, 4301.69 and 4301.691, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances. For
purposes of division (A)(3) of this section, the Commission or trier of fact shall consider that reasonable
reliance upon the identification presented and the completed transaction scan may require a permit holder
or an agent or employee of a permit holder to exercise reasonable diligence to determine, and that the
use of a transaction scan device does not excuse a permit holder or an agent or employee of a permit
holder from exercising reasonable diligence to determine, the following:
(1) Whether a person to whom the permit holder or agent or employee of a permit holder sells
any beer or intoxicating liquor is 21 years of age or older or sells low-alcohol beverage is 18 years of
age or older;
(2) Whether the description and picture appearing on the driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or identification card presented by a card holder is that of the card holder.
(C) The affirmative defense provided by division (A) of this section is in addition to the defense
provided by R.C. § 4301.639, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(D) In any hearing before the Liquor Control Commission and in any criminal action in which the
affirmative defense provided by division (A) of this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles
or a Deputy Registrar who issued an identification card under R.C. §§ 4507.50 through 4507.52 shall
be permitted to submit certified copies of the records of that issuance in lieu of the testimony of the
personnel of or contractors with the Bureau of Motor Vehicles in the hearing or action.
(R.C. § 4301.611) (1985 Code, § 132.34)
126 Madeira - General Offenses
CHAPTER 133: OFFENSES AGAINST MORALS
Section
133.01 Definitions
133.02 Unlawful sexual conduct with a minor
133.03 Sexual imposition
133.04 Public indecency
133.05 Voyeurism
133.06 Polygraph examinations for victims: restrictions on use
133.07 Procuring
133.08 Soliciting; loitering to engage in
133.09 Prostitution
133.10 Disseminating matter harmful to juveniles
133.11 Displaying matter harmful to juveniles
133.12 Deception to obtain matter harmful to juveniles
133.13 Notices concerning habitual sex offenders
133.14 Rules of evidence
133.15 Declaratory judgment
133.16 Injunction; abatement of nuisance
133.17 Unlawful operation of viewing booths depicting sexual conduct
133.18 Juveniles on the premises of adult entertainment establishments prohibited
133.19 Sexually oriented businesses; illegal operation and activity
133.99 Sentencing for sexually oriented offenses; sexual predators; registration
§ 133.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings
ascribed to them respectively.
HARMFUL TO JUVENILES. That quality of any material or performance describing or
representing nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement or sado-masochistic abuse in any form to which
all of the following apply:
(1) The material or performance, when considered as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest
of juveniles in sex;
127
128 Madeira - General Offenses
(2) The material or performance is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult
community as a whole with respect to what is suitable for juveniles; and
(3) The material or performance, when considered as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic,
political and scientific value for juveniles.
JUVENILE. Any unmarried person under 18 years of age.
MATERIAL. Any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, poster, print, picture, figure, image,
description, motion picture film, video cassette, laser disc, phonograph record, cassette tape, compact
disc or other tangible thing capable of arousing interest through sight, sound or touch and includes an
image or text appearing on a computer monitor, television screen, liquid crystal display or similar display
device or an image or text recorded on a computer hard disk, computer floppy disk, compact disk,
magnetic tape or similar data storage device.
MENTAL HEALTH CLIENT OR PATIENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2305.51.
MENTAL HEALTH PROFESSIONAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2305.115.
MINOR. A person under the age of 18.
NUDITY. The showing, representation or depiction of human male or female genitals, pubic area
or buttocks with less than a full, opaque covering or of a female breast with less than a full, opaque
covering of any portion thereof below the top of the nipple, or of covered male genitals in a discernibly
turgid state.
OBSCENE. When considered as a whole, and judged with reference to ordinary adults or, if it is
designed for sexual deviates or other specially susceptible group, judged with reference to that group,
any material or performance is OBSCENE if any of the following apply:
(1) Its dominant appeal is to prurient interest;
(2) Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or depicting sexual activity,
masturbation, sexual excitement or nudity in a way that tends to represent human beings as mere objects
of sexual appetite;
(3) Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or depicting bestiality or extreme or
bizarre violence, cruelty or brutality;
(4) Its dominant tendency is to appeal to scatological interest by displaying or depicting human
bodily functions of elimination in a way that inspires disgust or revulsion in persons with ordinary
sensibilities, without serving any genuine scientific, educational, sociological, moral or artistic purpose;
or
Offenses Against Morals 129
(5) It contains a series of displays or descriptions of sexual activity, masturbation, sexual
excitement, nudity, bestiality, extreme or bizarre violence, cruelty or brutality, or human bodily
functions of elimination, the cumulative effect of which is a dominant tendency to appeal to prurient or
scatological interest, when the appeal to such an interest is primarily for its own sake or for commercial
exploitation, rather than primarily for a genuine scientific, educational, sociological, moral or artistic
purpose.
PERFORMANCE. Any motion picture, preview, trailer, play, show, skit, dance or other exhibition
performed before an audience.
PROSTITUTE. A male or female who promiscuously engages in sexual activity for hire, regardless
of whether the hire is paid to the prostitute or to another.
SADO-MASOCHISTIC ABUSE. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person or the condition of
being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained.
SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Sexual conduct or sexual contact, or both.
SEXUAL CONDUCT. Vaginal intercourse between a male and female; anal intercourse, fellatio
and cunnilingus between persons regardless of sex; and, without privilege to do so, the insertion,
however slight, of any part of the body or any instrument, apparatus or other object into the vaginal or
anal opening of another. Penetration, however slight, is sufficient to complete vaginal or anal
intercourse.
SEXUAL CONTACT. Any touching of an erogenous zone of another, including without limitation
the thigh, genitals, buttock, pubic region, or, if the person is a female, a breast, for the purpose of
sexually arousing or gratifying either person.
SEXUAL EXCITEMENT. The condition of human male or female genitals when in a state of
sexual stimulation or arousal.
SPOUSE. A person married to an offender at the time of an alleged offense, except that such
person shall not be considered the spouse when any of the following apply:
(1) When the parties have entered into a written separation agreement pursuant to R.C.
§ 3103.06;
(2) When an action is pending between the parties for annulment, divorce, dissolution of
marriage or legal separation; or
(3) In the case of an action for legal separation, after the effective date of the judgment for legal
separation.
(R.C. § 2907.01) (1985 Code, § 133.01) (Ord. 1169, passed 6-10-1974; Ord. 1306, passed 6-13-1977)
130 Madeira - General Offenses
§ 133.02 UNLAWFUL SEXUAL CONDUCT WITH A MINOR.
(A) No person who is 18 years of age or older shall engage in sexual conduct with another who is
not the spouse of the offender, when the offender knows the other person is 13 years of age or older but
less than 16 years of age, or the offender is reckless in that regard.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful sexual conduct with a minor.
(1) Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2), unlawful sexual conduct with a minor is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(2) Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(3) of this section, if the offender is less than
four years older than the other person, unlawful sexual conduct with a minor is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(3) If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of R.C.
§ 2907.02, 2907.03 or 2907.04, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or a violation of
former R.C. § 2907.12, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, unlawful sexual conduct
with a minor is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.04) (1985 Code, § 133.02)
§ 133.03 SEXUAL IMPOSITION.
(A) No person shall have sexual contact with another, not the spouse of the offender; cause another,
not the spouse of the offender, to have sexual contact with the offender; or cause two or more other
persons to have sexual contact when any of the following applies:
(1) The offender knows that the sexual contact is offensive to the other person, or one of the
other persons, or is reckless in that regard;
(2) The offender knows that the other person’s, or one of the other person’s ability to appraise
the nature of or control the offender’s or touching person’s conduct is substantially impaired;
(3) The offender knows that the other person, or one of the other persons, submits because of
being unaware of the sexual contact;
(4) The other person, or one of the other persons, is 13 years of age or older but less than 16
years of age, whether or not the offender knows the age of the person, and the offender is at least 18
years of age and four or more years older than the other person; and
(5) The offender is a mental health professional, the other person or one of the other persons
is a mental health client or patient of the offender, and the offender induces the other person who is the
client or patient to submit by falsely representing to the other person who is the client or patient that the
sexual contact is necessary for mental health treatment purposes.
Offenses Against Morals 131
(B) No person shall be convicted of a violation of this section solely upon the victim’s testimony
unsupported by other evidence.
(C) Whoever violates this section is guilty of sexual imposition, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
If the offender has been convicted previously of a violation of this section, R.C. § 2907.02, 2907.03,
2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.06, former R.C. § 2907.12, or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, a violation of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2907.06) (1985 Code, § 133.03)
Statutory reference:
Gross sexual imposition, felony, see R.C. § 2907.05
Notice to licensing board or agency upon indictment, conviction or guilty plea of mental health
 professional, see R.C. §§ 2907.17 and 2907.18
§ 133.04 PUBLIC INDECENCY.
(A) No person shall recklessly do any of the following, under circumstances in which the person’s
conduct is likely to be viewed by and affront others who are in the person’s physical proximity and who
are not members of the person’s household:
(1) Expose the persons’s private parts;
(2) Engage in sexual conduct or masturbation; or
(3) Engage in conduct that to an ordinary observer would appear to be sexual conduct or
masturbation.
(B) No person shall knowingly do any of the following, under circumstances in which the person’s
conduct is likely to be viewed by and affront another person who is a minor, who is not the spouse of
the offender, and who resides in the person’s household:
(1) Engage in masturbation;
(2) Engage in sexual conduct;
(3) Engage in conduct that to an ordinary observer would appear to be sexual conduct or
masturbation; or
(4) Expose the person’s private parts with the purpose of personal sexual arousal or
gratification or to lure the minor into sexual activity.
(C) (1) Whoever violates this section is guilty of public indecency and shall be punished as
provided in divisions (C)(2), (C)(3), (C)(4) and (C)(5) of this section.
132 Madeira - General Offenses
(2) Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(2), a violation of division (A)(1) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to one violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, a violation of division (A)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third degree or, if any
person who was likely to view and be affronted by the offender’s conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor
of the second degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations
of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of division
(A)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second degree or, if any person who was likely to view
and be affronted by the offender’s conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of this section
or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of division (A)(1) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted
by the offender’s conduct was a minor, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(3) Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(3), a violation of division (A)(2) or (A)(3)
of this section is a misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to one violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, a violation of division (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second degree
or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by the offender’s conduct was a minor, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
two or more violations of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a
violation of division (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if any person
who was likely to view and be affronted by the offender’s conduct was a minor, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(4) Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(4), a violation of division (B)(1), (B)(2)
or (B)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a violation of division (B)(1), (B)(2) or (B)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more
violations of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of
division (B)(1), (B)(2) or (B)(3) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(5) Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(5), a violation of division (B)(4) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to any violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a
violation of division (B)(4) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.09)
(D) A mother is entitled to breast-feed her baby in any location of a place of public accommodation,
as defined in R.C. § 4112.01, wherein the mother otherwise is permitted.
(R.C. § 3781.55)
(1985 Code, § 133.04)
Statutory reference:
Bail considerations for persons charged, see R.C. § 2907.41
Offenses Against Morals 133
§ 133.05 VOYEURISM.
(A) No person, for the purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying himself or herself, shall commit
trespass or otherwise surreptitiously invade the privacy of another, to spy or eavesdrop upon another.
(B) No person, for the purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying himself or herself, shall commit
trespass or otherwise surreptitiously invade the privacy of another to videotape, film, photograph or
otherwise record the other person in a state of nudity.
(C) No person, for the purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying himself or herself, shall commit
trespass or otherwise surreptitiously invade the privacy of another to videotape, film, photograph,
otherwise record, or spy or eavesdrop upon the other person in a state of nudity if the other person is
a minor.
(D) No person shall secretly or surreptitiously videotape, film, photograph or otherwise record
another person under or through the clothing being worn by that person for the purpose of viewing the
body of, or the undergarments worn by, that other person.
(E) Whoever violates this section is guilty of voyeurism.
(1) A violation of division (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(2) A violation of division (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(3) A violation of division (D) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(4) A violation of division (C) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(R.C. § 2907.08) (1985 Code, § 133.05) (Ord. 1169, passed 6-10-1974; Ord. 1306, passed 6-13-1977)
§ 133.06 POLYGRAPH EXAMINATIONS FOR VICTIMS: RESTRICTIONS ON USE.
(A) (1) A peace officer, prosecutor or other public official shall not ask or require a victim of an
alleged sex offense to submit to a polygraph examination as a condition for proceeding with the
investigation of the alleged sex offense.
(2) The refusal of the victim of an alleged sex offense to submit to a polygraph examination
shall not prevent the investigation of the alleged sex offense, the filing of criminal charges with respect
to the alleged sex offense or the prosecution of the alleged perpetrator of the alleged sex offense.
(B) As used in this section:
PEACE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.51.
134 Madeira - General Offenses
POLYGRAPH EXAMINATION. Means any mechanical or electrical instrument or device of
any type used or allegedly used to examine, test or question an individual for the purpose of determining
the individual’s truthfulness.
PROSECUTION. Means the prosecution of criminal charges in a criminal prosecution or the
prosecution of a delinquent child complaint in a delinquency proceeding.
PROSECUTOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01.
PUBLIC OFFICIAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 117.01.
SEX OFFENSE. Means a violation of any provision of §§ 133.02 to 133.05 or R.C.
§§ 2907.02 to 2907.09.
(R.C. § 2907.10) (1985 Code, § 133.06)
§ 133.07 PROCURING.
(A) No person, knowingly and for gain, shall do either of the following:
(1) Entice or solicit another to patronize a prostitute or brothel; or
(2) Procure a prostitute for another to patronize, or take or direct another at the other’s request
to any place for the purpose of patronizing a prostitute.
(B) No person, having authority or responsibility over the use of premises, shall knowingly permit
the premises to be used for the purpose of engaging in sexual activity for hire.
(C) Whoever violates this section is guilty of procuring. Except as otherwise provided in this
division (C), procuring is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the prostitute who is procured, patronized
or otherwise involved in a violation of division (A)(2) of this section is under 18 years of age at the time
of the violation, regardless of whether the offender who violates division (A)(2) of this section knows
the prostitute’s age, or if a prostitute who engages in sexual activity for hire in premises used in violation
of division (B) of this section is under 18 years of age at the time of the violation, regardless of whether
the offender who violates division (B) of this section knows the prostitute’s age, procuring is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.23) (1985 Code, § 133.07) (Ord. 1169, passed 6-10-1974; Ord. 1306, passed 6-13-1977)
§ 133.08 SOLICITING; LOITERING TO ENGAGE IN.
(A) No person shall solicit another to engage with the other person in sexual activity for hire.
Offenses Against Morals 135
(B) (1) Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of soliciting, a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
(2) If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of division (A) of this section or
an attempt to commit a violation of division (A) of this section and if the person, in committing or
attempting to commit the violation, was in, was on or used a motor vehicle, the court, in addition to or
independent of all other penalties imposed for the violation, may impose upon the offender a class six
suspension of the person’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit,
probationary license or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C.
§ 4510.02(A)(6). In lieu of imposing upon the offender the class six suspension, the court instead may
require the offender to perform community service for a number of hours determined by the court.
(R.C. § 2907.24)
(C) No person, with purpose to solicit another to engage in sexual activity for hire and while in or
near a public place, shall do any of the following:
(1) Beckon to, stop or attempt to stop another;
(2) Engage or attempt to engage another in conversation;
(3) Stop or attempt to stop the operator of a vehicle or approach a stationary vehicle;
(4) If the offender is the operator of or a passenger in a vehicle, stop, attempt to stop, beckon
to, attempt to beckon to or entice another to approach or enter the vehicle of which the offender is the
operator or in which the offender is the passenger; or
(5) Interfere with the free passage of another.
(D) As used in division (C) of this section:
PUBLIC PLACE. Means any of the following:
(a) A street, road, highway, thoroughfare, bikeway, walkway, sidewalk, bridge, alley,
alleyway, plaza, park, driveway, parking lot or transportation facility;
(b) A doorway or entrance way to a building that fronts on a place described in division
(a) of this definition; or
(c) A place not described in division (a) or (b) of this definition that is open to the public.
VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
136 Madeira - General Offenses
(E) Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of loitering to engage in solicitation, a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 2907.241)
(1985 Code, § 133.08) (Ord. 1169, passed 6-10-1974; Ord. 1306, passed 6-13-1977)
Statutory reference:
Offenders with knowledge that they test HIV positive, felony, see R.C. §§ 2907.24(B) and
 2907.241(B)
Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see R.C. § 2907.27
§ 133.09 PROSTITUTION.
(A) No person shall engage in sexual activity for hire.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of prostitution, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 2907.25) (1985 Code, § 133.09) (Ord. 1169, passed 6-10-1974; Ord. 1306, passed 6-13-1977)
Statutory reference:
Offenders with knowledge that they test HIV positive, felony, see R.C. § 2907.25(B)
Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see R.C. § 2907.27
§ 133.10 DISSEMINATING MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
(A) No person, with knowledge of its character or content, shall recklessly do any of following:
(1) Directly sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent or present to a juvenile,
a group of juveniles, a law enforcement officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement
officers posing as juveniles any material or performance that is obscene or harmful to juveniles;
(2) Directly offer or agree to sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent or
present to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement officer posing as a juvenile, or a group
of law enforcement officers posing as juveniles any material or performance that is obscene or harmful
to juveniles; or
(3) While in the physical proximity of the juvenile or law enforcement officer posing as a
juvenile, allow any juvenile or law enforcement officer posing as a juvenile to review or peruse any
material or view any live performance that is harmful to juveniles.
(B) The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this section that involves material or
a performance that is harmful to juveniles but not obscene:
(1) The defendant is the parent, guardian or spouse of the juvenile involved;
Offenses Against Morals 137
(2) The juvenile involved, at the time of the conduct in question, was accompanied by his or
her parent or guardian who, with knowledge of its character, consented to the material or performance
being furnished or presented to the juvenile; and
(3) The juvenile exhibited to the defendant or his or her agent or employee a draft card,
driver’s license, birth record, marriage license or other official or apparently official document
purporting to show that the juvenile was 18 years of age or over or married, and the person to whom
the document was exhibited did not otherwise have reasonable cause to believe that the juvenile was
under the age of 18 and unmarried.
(C) (1) It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section, involving material or a
performance that is obscene or harmful to juveniles, that the material or performance was furnished or
presented for a bona fide medical, scientific, educational, governmental, judicial or other proper
purpose, by a physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist, teacher, librarian, clergy, prosecutor, judge
or other proper person.
(2) Except as provided in division (B)(3) of this section, mistake of age is not a defense to a
charge under this section.
(D) (1) A person directly sells, delivers, furnishes, disseminates, provides, exhibits, rents or
presents or directly offers or agrees to sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent or
present material or a performance to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement officer posing
as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as juveniles in violation of this section by
means of an electronic method of remotely transmitting information if the person knows or has reason
to believe that the person receiving the information is a juvenile or the group of persons receiving the
information are juveniles.
(2) A person remotely transmitting information by means of a method of mass distribution does
not directly sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent or present or directly offer or agree
to sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent or present the material or performance in
question to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement officer posing as a juvenile, or a group
of law enforcement officers posing as juveniles in violation of this section if either of the following
applies:
(a) The person has inadequate information to know or have reason to believe that a
particular recipient of the information or offer is a juvenile; or
(b) The method of mass distribution does not provide the person the ability to prevent a
particular recipient from receiving the information.
(E) Whoever violates this section is guilty of disseminating matter harmful to juveniles. If the
material or performance involved is harmful to juveniles except as otherwise provided in this division
(E), a violation of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the material or performance
involved is obscene, violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.31)
138 Madeira - General Offenses
(F) Presumptions, notice and defense.
(1) An owner or manager, or agent or employee of an owner or manager, of a bookstore,
newsstand, theater or other commercial establishment engaged in selling material or exhibiting
performances, who, in the course of business does any of the acts prohibited by this section is presumed
to have knowledge of the character of the material or performance involved if the owner, manager or
agent or employee of the owner or manager has actual notice of the nature of such material or
performance, whether or not the owner, manager or agent or employee of the owner or manager has
precise knowledge of its contents.
(2) Without limitation on the manner in which such notice may be given, actual notice of the
character of material or a performance may be given in writing by the chief legal officer of the
municipality. Such notice, regardless of the manner in which it is given, shall identify the sender,
identify the material or performance involved, state whether it is obscene or harmful to juveniles, and
bear the date of such notice.
(3) This § 133.10 does not apply to a motion picture operator or projectionist acting within the
scope of employment as an employee of the owner or manager of the theater or other place for the
showing of motion pictures to the general public, and having no managerial responsibility or financial
interest in the operator’s or projectionist’s place of employment, other than wages.
(4) (a) The provisions of §§ 133.10, 133.11 and 133.12(A) do not apply to a person solely
because the person provided access or connection to or from an electronic method of remotely
transferring information not under that person’s control, including having provided capabilities that are
incidental to providing access or connection to or from the electronic method of remotely transferring
the information, and that do not include the creation of the content of the material that is the subject of
the access or connection.
(b) Division (F)(4)(a) of this section does not apply to a person who conspires with an
entity actively involved in the creation or knowing distribution of material in violation of § 133.10,
133.11 or 133.12 or who knowingly advertises the availability of material of that nature.
(c) Division (F)(4)(a) of this section does not apply to a person who provides access or
connection to an electronic method of remotely transferring information that is engaged in the violation
of § 133.10, 133.11 or 133.12 and that contain content that person has selected and introduced into the
electronic method of remotely transferring information or content over which that person exercises
editorial control.
(5) An employer is not guilty of a violation of § 133.10, 133.11 or 133.12 based on the actions
of an employee or agent of the employer unless the employee’s or agent’s conduct is within the scope
of the employee’s or agent’s employment or agency, and the employer does either of the following:
(a) With knowledge of the employee’s or agent’s conduct, the employer authorizes or
ratifies the conduct; or
Offenses Against Morals 139
(b) The employer recklessly disregards the employee’s or agent’s conduct.
(6) It is an affirmative defense to a charge under § 133.10 or 133.11 as the section applies to
an image transmitted through the internet or other electronic method of remotely transmitting information
that the person charged with violating the section has taken, in good faith, reasonable, effective, and
appropriate actions under the circumstances to restrict or prevent access by juveniles to material that is
harmful to juveniles, including any method that is feasible under available technology.
(R.C. § 2907.35)
(1985 Code, § 133.10) (Ord. 1169, passed 6-10-1974; Ord. 1306, passed 6-13-1977; Ord. 91-12,
passed 3-4-1991)
§ 133.11 DISPLAYING MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
(A) No person who has custody, control or supervision of a commercial establishment, with
knowledge of the character or content of the material involved, shall display at the establishment any
material that is harmful to juveniles and that is open to view by juveniles as part of the invited general
public.
(B) It is not a violation of division (A) of this section if the material in question is displayed by
placing it behind “blinder racks” or similar devices that cover at least the lower two-thirds of the
material, if the material in question is wrapped or placed behind the counter, or if the material in
question otherwise is covered or located so that the portion that is harmful to juveniles is not open to the
view of juveniles.
(C) Whoever violates this section is guilty of displaying matter harmful to juveniles, a misdemeanor
of the first degree. Each day during which the offender is in violation of this section constitutes a
separate offense.
(R.C. § 2907.311) (1985 Code, § 133.11)
§ 133.12 DECEPTION TO OBTAIN MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
(A) No person, for the purpose of enabling a juvenile to obtain any material or gain admission to
any performance which is harmful to juveniles, shall do either of the following:
(1) Falsely represent that he or she is the parent, guardian or spouse of the juvenile; or
(2) Furnish the juvenile with any identification or document purporting to show that the
juvenile is 18 years of age or over or married.
(B) No juvenile, for the purpose of obtaining any material or gaining admission to any performance
which is harmful to juveniles, shall do either of the following:
140 Madeira - General Offenses
(1) Falsely represent that he or she is 18 years of age or over or married; or
(2) Exhibit any identification or document purporting to show that he or she is 18 years of age
or over or married.
(C) Whoever violates this section is guilty of deception to obtain matter harmful to juveniles, a
misdemeanor of the second degree. A juvenile who violates division (B) of this section shall be adjudged
an unruly child, with the disposition of the case as may be appropriate under R.C. Chapter 2151.
(R.C. § 2907.33) (1985 Code, § 133.12) (Ord. 1169, passed 6-10-1974; Ord. 1306, passed 6-13-1977)
§ 133.13 NOTICES CONCERNING HABITUAL SEX OFFENDERS.
(A) (1) The Chief of Police, upon receipt of the notice from the County Sheriff or the Ohio
Attorney General pursuant to R.C. § 2950.11, or the administrative regulations adopted under authority
of R.C. § 2950.13 (hereinafter “2950 Notice”) in addition to any notice required under R.C. Chapter
2950 and any regulations adopted thereunder, shall provide a copy of the 2950 Notice to all residences
located within a radius of 600 feet of the address listed within the 2950 Notice of the residence of the
sexual predator or habitual sex offender. The Chief of Police shall send such notice within 72 hours of
the receipt of the 2950 Notice from the County Sheriff or Ohio Attorney General. The delivery of this
notice may be accomplished by personal delivery to a principal adult occupant of the residences in the
area described above, or by mailing a copy of the notice by ordinary United States mail, addressed to
the owner or principal occupant of the residences in the affected areas as such owner or principal
occupant is identified within the records maintained by the city.
(2) As a public record, the Chief of Police is also authorized to release a copy of the 2950
Notice to a newspaper in general circulation within the Madeira community which regularly receives
crime reports or statistics from the Police Department.
(B) The procedure set forth herein is not intended to create a cause of action against any official,
administrative officer, employee or agent of the city, nor is the procedure adopted herein intended in any
way to impact the immunity extended to such persons pursuant to R.C. § 2950.12. Such statutory
immunity is reserved to all protected individuals and organizations as outlined in R.C. § 2950.12 or
successor statute. As a public record subject to publication and disclosure, this section is intended to
provide a procedure for effectively disseminating the public information provided to the Police
Department concerning sexual predators or habitual sex offenders residing within the community. The
procedure adopted herein is intended to ensure appropriate public safety, and it is not intended to create
any obligation upon the Police Department nor any official or employee of the city to disseminate such
information or to create liability for the failure to disseminate such information in a timely and complete
manner.
(1985 Code, § 133.14) (Ord. 01-22, passed 9-10-2001)
Offenses Against Morals 141
§ 133.14 RULES OF EVIDENCE.
(A) In any case in which it is necessary to prove that a place is a brothel, evidence as to the
reputation of such place and as to the reputation of the persons who inhabit or frequent it is admissible
on the question of whether such place is or is not a brothel.
(B) In any case in which it is necessary to prove that a person is a prostitute, evidence as to the
reputation of such person is admissible on the question of whether such person is or is not a prostitute.
(C) In any prosecution for a violation of §§ 133.07 through 133.09, proof of a prior conviction of
the accused of any such offense or substantially equivalent offense is admissible in support of the charge.
(D) The prohibition contained in R.C. § 2317.02(D) against testimony by a husband or wife
concerning communications between them does not apply, and the accused’s spouse may testify
concerning any such communication in any of the following cases:
(1) When the husband or wife is charged with a violation of § 133.07 and the spouse testifying
was the prostitute involved in the offense or the person who used the offender’s premises to engage in
sexual activity for hire;
(2) When the husband or wife is charged with a violation of § 133.08(A) or § 133.09.
(R.C. § 2907.26) (1985 Code, § 133.15)
§ 133.15 DECLARATORY JUDGMENT.
(A) Without limitation on the persons otherwise entitled to bring an action for a declaratory
judgment pursuant to R.C. Chapter 2721, involving the same issue, the following persons have standing
to bring a declaratory judgment action to determine whether particular materials or performances are
obscene or harmful to juveniles:
(1) The chief legal officer of the municipality if and when there is reasonable cause to believe
that R.C. § 2907.31 or R.C. § 2907.32, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, is being or
is about to be violated; and
(2) Any person who, pursuant to R.C. § 2907.35(B) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, has received notice in writing from the chief legal officer stating that particular materials or
performances are obscene or harmful to juveniles.
(B) Any party to an action for a declaratory judgment pursuant to division (A) of this section is
entitled, upon the party’s request, to trial on the merits within five days after joinder of the issues, and
the court shall render judgment within five days after trial is concluded.
(C) An action for a declaratory judgement pursuant to division (A) of this section shall not be
brought during the pendency of any civil action or criminal prosecution when the character of the
142 Madeira - General Offenses
particular materials or performances involved is at issue in the pending case, and either of the following
applies:
(1) Either of the parties to the action for a declaratory judgment is a party to the pending case;
or
(2) A judgment in the pending case will necessarily constitute res judicata as to the character
of the materials or performances involved.
(D) A civil action or criminal prosecution in which the character of particular materials or
performances is at issue, brought during the pendency of an action for a declaratory judgment involving
the same issue, shall be stayed during the pendency of the action for a declaratory judgment.
(E) The fact that a violation of R.C. § 2907.31 or R.C. § 2907.32, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, occurs prior to a judicial determination of the character of the material or
performance involved in the violation does not relieve the offender of criminal liability for the violation,
even though prosecution may be stayed pending the judicial determination.
(R.C. § 2907.36) (1985 Code, § 133.16)
§ 133.16 INJUNCTION; ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.
(A) Where it appears that R.C. § 2907.31 or R.C. § 2907.32, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, is being or is about to be violated, the chief legal officer of the municipality may
bring an action to enjoin the violation. The defendant, upon his or her request, is entitled to trial on the
merits within five days after the joinder of the issues, and the court shall render judgment within five
days after the trial is concluded.
(B) Premises used or occupied for repeated violations of R.C. § 2907.31 or R.C. § 2907.32, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, constitute a nuisance subject to abatement pursuant to R.C.
Chapter 3767.
(R.C. § 2907.37) (1985 Code, § 133.17)
Statutory reference:
Disseminating matter harmful to juveniles, felony, see R.C. § 2907.31
Pandering obscenity, felony, see R.C. § 2907.32
§ 133.17 UNLAWFUL OPERATION OF VIEWING BOOTHS DEPICTING SEXUAL
CONDUCT.
(A) As used in this section:
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT. Means an entity that is open to the public and to which
either of the following applies:
Offenses Against Morals 143
(a) It has a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade of the sale, rental or
viewing of visual materials or performances depicting sexual conduct; or
(b) It has as a principal business purpose the sale, rental or viewing of visual materials or
performances depicting sexual conduct.
VISUAL MATERIALS OR PERFORMANCES. Means films, videos, CD-ROM discs,
streaming video or other motion pictures.
(B) No person who has custody, control or supervision of a commercial establishment, with
knowledge of the character of the visual material or performance involved, shall knowingly permit the
use of, or offer the use of, viewing booths, stalls or partitioned portions of a room located in the
commercial establishment for the purpose of viewing visual materials or performances depicting sexual
conduct unless both of the following apply:
(1) The inside of each booth, stall or partitioned room is visible from, and at least one side of
each booth, stall or partitioned room is open to, a continuous and contiguous main aisle or hallway that
is open to the public areas of the commercial establishment and is not obscured by any curtain, door or
other covering or enclosure; and
(2) No booth, stall or partitioned room is designed, constructed, pandered or allowed to be used
for the purpose of encouraging or facilitating nudity or sexual activity on the part of or between patrons
or members of the public, and no booth, stall or partitioned room has any aperture, hole or opening for
the purpose of encouraging or facilitating nudity or sexual activity.
(C) It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that either of the following applies to
the involved visual materials or performances:
(1) The visual materials or performances depicting sexual conduct are disseminated or
presented for a bona fide medical, scientific, educational, religious, governmental, judicial or other
proper purpose and by or to a physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist, teacher, person pursuing
bona fide studies or research, librarian, member of the clergy, prosecutor, judge or other person having
a proper interest in the visual materials or performances; or
(2) The visual materials or performances depicting sexual conduct, taken as a whole, would
be found by a reasonable person to have serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value or are
presented or disseminated in good faith for a serious literary, artistic, political or scientific purpose and
are not pandered for their prurient appeal.
(D) Whoever violates this section is guilty of permitting unlawful operation of viewing booths
depicting sexual conduct, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2907.38) (1985 Code, § 133.18)
144 Madeira - General Offenses
§ 133.18 JUVENILES ON THE PREMISES OF ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED.
(A) As used in this section:
ADULT ARCADE. Means any place to which the public is permitted or invited in which
coin-operated, slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion
picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are regularly maintained to show images
to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and in which the images so displayed are
distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon matter exhibiting or describing specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE.
(a) Means a commercial establishment that, for any form of consideration, has as a
significant or substantial portion of its stock-in-trade in, derives a significant or substantial portion of its
revenues from, devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business or advertising to, or
maintains a substantial section of its sales or display space for the sale or rental of any of the following:
1. Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films,
motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides or other visual representations, that are
characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas; or
2. Instruments, devices or paraphernalia that are designed for use or marketed
primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of self or others.
(b) Includes a commercial establishment as defined in R.C. § 2907.38. An establishment
may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale, rental or viewing
of materials exhibiting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and still be
categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store. The existence of other
principal business purposes does not exempt an establishment from being categorized as an adult
bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store so long as one of its principal business purposes is
offering for sale or rental, for some form of consideration, such materials that exhibit or describe
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT CABARET. Means a nightclub, bar, juice bar, restaurant, bottle club or similar
commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served, that regularly features any of
the following:
(a) Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity;
(b) Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas
or specified sexual activities; and
Offenses Against Morals 145
(c) Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions that
are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT. Means the sale, rental or exhibition, for any form of
consideration, of books, films, video cassettes, magazines, periodicals or live performances that are
characterized by an emphasis on the exposure or display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual
activity.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT. Means an adult arcade, adult bookstore,
adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, nude or
seminude model studio or sexual encounter establishment. An establishment in which a medical
practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in
medically approved and recognized therapy, including but not limited to massage therapy, as regulated
pursuant to R.C. § 4731.15, is not an ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. Means a commercial establishment where films,
motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions that are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas are regularly shown for any form of consideration.
ADULT THEATER. Means a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial
establishment that, for any form of consideration, regularly features persons who appear in a state of
nudity or seminudity or live performances that are characterized by their emphasis upon the exposure
of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.
DISTINGUISHED OR CHARACTERIZED BY THEIR EMPHASIS UPON. Means the
dominant or principal character and theme of the object described by this phrase. For instance, when the
phrase refers to films “that are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas,” the films so described are those
whose dominant or principal character and theme are the exhibition or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
NUDE OR SEMINUDE MODEL STUDIO. Means any place where a person, who regularly
appears in a state of nudity or seminudity, is provided for money or any other form of consideration to
be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons.
A modeling class or studio is not a nude or seminude model studio and is not subject to this chapter if
it is operated in any of the following ways:
(a) By a college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
146 Madeira - General Offenses
(b) By a private college or university that maintains and operates educational programs,
the credits for which are transferable to a college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
or
(c) In a structure that has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other
advertising indicating that a person appearing in a state of nudity or seminudity is available for viewing,
if in order to participate in a class in the structure, a student must enroll at least three days in advance
of the class and if not more than one nude or seminude model is on the premises at any one time.
NUDITY, NUDE or STATE OF NUDITY. Means the showing of the human male or female
genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering; or the
showing of the female breasts with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple.
REGULARLY FEATURES or REGULARLY SHOWN. Means a consistent or substantial
course of conduct, such that the films or performances exhibited constitute a substantial portion of the
films or performances offered as a part of the ongoing business of the adult entertainment establishment.
SEMINUDE or STATE OF SEMINUDITY. Means a state of dress in which opaque clothing
covers not more than the genitals, pubic region and nipple of the female breast, as well as portions of
the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER ESTABLISHMENT.
(a) Means a business or commercial establishment that, as one of its principal business
purposes, offers for any form of consideration a place where either of the following occur:
1. Two or more persons may congregate, associate or consort for the purpose of
engaging in specified sexual activities; or
2. Two or more persons appear nude or seminude for the purpose of displaying their
nude or seminude bodies for their receipt of consideration or compensation in any type or form.
(b) An establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist or similar
professional person licensed by the state engages in medically approved and recognized therapy,
including but not limited to massage therapy, as regulated pursuant to R.C. § 4731.15, is not a SEXUAL
ENCOUNTER ESTABLISHMENT.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Means the cleft of the buttocks, anus, male or female
genitals or the female breast.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Means any of the following:
(a) Sex acts, normal or perverted or actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral
copulation, masturbation or sodomy; or
Offenses Against Morals 147
(b) Excretory functions as a part of or in connection with any of the activities described
in division (a) of this definition.
(B) No person knowingly shall allow an individual, including but not limited to a patron, customer
or employee, who is under 18 years of age on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment.
(C) No individual who is under 18 years of age knowingly shall show or give false information
concerning the individual’s name or age, or other false identification, for the purpose of gaining entrance
to an adult entertainment establishment.
(D) A person shall not be found guilty of a violation of division (B) of this section if the person
raises as an affirmative defense and if the jury or, in a nonjury trial, the court finds the person has
established by a preponderance of the evidence, all of the following.
(1) The individual gaining entrance to the adult entertainment establishment exhibited to an
operator, employee, agent or independent contractor of the adult entertainment establishment a driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or an identification card issued under R.C. §§ 4507.50 and 4507.52
showing that the individual was then at least 18 years of age.
(2) The operator, employee, agent or independent contractor made a bona fide effort to
ascertain the true age of the individual gaining entrance to the adult entertainment establishment by
checking the identification presented, at the time of entrance, to ascertain that the description on the
identification compared with the appearance of the individual and that the identification had not been
altered in any way.
(3) The operator, employee, agent or independent contractor had reason to believe that the
individual gaining entrance to the adult entertainment establishment was at least 18 years of age.
(E) In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense described in division (D) of this section
is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or the Deputy Registrar who issued a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or an identification card under R.C. §§ 4507.50 and 4507.52 shall be permitted to submit
certified copies of the records, in the Registrar’s or Deputy Registrar’s possession, of the issuance of the
license or identification card in question, in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of the Bureau of Motor
Vehicles in the action.
(F) (1) Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of permitting a juvenile on the
premises of an adult entertainment establishment, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day a person
violates this division (F) constitutes a separate offense.
(2) Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of use by a juvenile of false
information to enter an adult entertainment establishment, a delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor
of the fourth degree if committed by an adult.
(R.C. § 2907.39) (1985 Code, § 133.19)
148 Madeira - General Offenses
§ 133.19 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES; ILLEGAL OPERATION AND ACTIVITY.
(A) As used in this section:
ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE. Means a commercial establishment that
has as a significant or substantial portion of its stock in trade or inventory in, derives a significant or
substantial portion of its revenues from, devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business
or advertising to, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or display space for the sale or rental, for
any form of consideration, of books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides or other visual representations, that are
characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
ADULT CABARET. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.39.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. Means a commercial establishment where films,
motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions that are characterized by
their emphasis upon the display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas are regularly
shown to more than five individuals for any form of consideration.
CHARACTERIZED BY. Describing the essential character or quality of an item.
EMPLOYEE. Means any individual who performs any service on the premises of a sexually
oriented business on a full-time, part-time or contract basis, regardless of whether the individual is
denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent or otherwise, but does not include an individual
exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the
premises.
NUDE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.39.
NUDITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.39.
OPERATOR. Means any individual on the premises of a sexually oriented business who causes
the business to function or who puts or keeps in operation the business or who is authorized to manage
the business or exercise overall operational control of the business premises.
PATRON. Means any individual on the premises of a sexually oriented business except for any
of the following:
(a) An operator or an employee of the sexually oriented business;
(b) An individual who is on the premises exclusively for repair or maintenance of the
premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises; or
Offenses Against Morals 149
(c) A public employee or a volunteer firefighter emergency medical services worker acting
within the scope of the public employee’s or volunteer’s duties as a public employee or volunteer.
PREMISES. Means the real property on which the sexually oriented business is located and
all appurtenances to the real property, including, but not limited, to the sexually oriented business, the
grounds, private walkways and parking lots or parking garages adjacent to the real property under the
ownership, control or supervision of the owner or operator of the sexually oriented business.
REGULARLY. Means consistently or repeatedly.
SEMINUDE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.39.
SEXUAL DEVICE. Means any three-dimensional object designed and marketed for stimulation
of the male or female human genitals or anus or female breasts or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of
oneself or others, including but not limited to dildos, vibrators, penis pumps and physical representations
of the human genital organs, but not including devices primarily intended for protection against sexually
transmitted diseases or for preventing pregnancy.
SEXUAL DEVICE SHOP. Means a commercial establishment that regularly features sexual
devices, but not including any pharmacy, drug store, medical clinic or establishment primarily dedicated
to providing medical or healthcare products or services, and not including any commercial establishment
that does not restrict access to its premises by reason of age.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER. Means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one
of its principal business purposes, purports to offer for any form of consideration physical contact in the
form of wrestling or tumbling between individuals of the opposite sex when one or more of the
individuals is nude or seminude.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. Means an adult bookstore, adult video store, adult
cabaret, adult motion picture theater, sexual device shop or sexual encounter center, but does not include
a business solely by reason of its showing, selling or renting materials that may depict sex.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Includes human genitals, pubic region and buttocks and
the human female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Means sexual intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation
or sodomy or excretory functions as a part of or in connection with any of these activities.
STATE OF NUDITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.39.
STATE OF SEMINUDITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.39.
(B) No sexually oriented business shall be or remain open for business between 12:00 midnight and
6:00 a.m. on any day, except that a sexually oriented business that holds a liquor permit pursuant to R.C.
150 Madeira - General Offenses
Chapter 4303 may remain open until the hour specified in that permit if it does not conduct, offer or
allow sexually oriented entertainment activity in which the performers appear nude.
(C) (1) No patron who is not a member of the employee’s immediate family shall knowingly touch
any employee while that employee is nude or seminude or touch the clothing of any employee while that
employee is nude or seminude.
(2) No employee who regularly appears nude or seminude on the premises of a sexually
oriented business, while on the premises of that sexually oriented business and while nude or seminude,
shall knowingly touch a patron who is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or another
employee who is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or the clothing of a patron who is
not a member of the employee’s immediate family or another employee who is not a member of the
employee’s immediate family or allow a patron who is not a member of the employee’s immediate family
or another employee who is not a member of the employee’s immediate family to touch the employee
or the clothing of the employee.
(D) Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of illegally operating a sexually oriented
business, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(E) Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of illegal sexually oriented activity in a
sexually oriented business. If the offender touches a specified anatomical area of the patron or employee,
or the clothing covering a specified anatomical area, a violation of division (C) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender does not touch a specified anatomical area of the patron
or employee, or the clothing covering a specified anatomical area, a violation of division (C) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 2907.40) (1985 Code, § 133.20)
Statutory reference:
State indemnification for certain municipal liability stemming from local adult business regulations,
 see R.C. § 715.55
§ 133.99 SENTENCING FOR SEXUALLY ORIENTED OFFENSES; SEXUAL PREDATORS;
REGISTRATION.
(A) If an offender is being sentenced for a sexually oriented offense or child-victim oriented offense
that is a misdemeanor committed on or after January 1, 1997, and the offender is a tier III sex
offender/child-victim offender relative to the offense or the offense is any offense listed in R.C.
§ 2901.07(D)(1) to (D)(3), the judge shall include in the offender’s sentence a statement that the offender
is a tier III sex offender/child-victim offender, shall comply with the requirements of R.C. § 2950.03,
and shall require the offender to submit to a DNA specimen collection procedure pursuant to R.C.
§ 2901.07.
(B) If an offender is being sentenced for a sexually oriented offense or a child-victim oriented
offense that is a misdemeanor committed on or after January 1, 1997, the judge shall include in the
sentence a summary of the offender’s duties imposed under R.C. §§ 2950.04, 2950.041, 2950.05 and
Offenses Against Morals 151
2950.06, and the duration of the duties. The judge shall inform the offender, at the time of sentencing,
of those duties and of their duration. If required under R.C. § 2950.03(A)(2), the judge shall perform
the duties specified in that section or, if required under R.C. § 2950.03(A)(6), the judge shall perform
the duties specified in that division.
(R.C. § 2929.23) (1985 Code, § 133.99)
Cross-reference:
Sentencing generally, see Chapter 130
152 Madeira - General Offenses
CHAPTER 134: GAMBLING
Section
134.01 Definitions
134.02 Prohibitions against gambling
134.03 Operating a gambling house
134.04 Public gaming
134.05 Cheating
134.06 Regulations concerning operation
134.07 Records to be kept
134.08 Requirements for bingo game operators
134.09 Bingo games for amusement only
134.10 Prohibitions where instant bingo game is conducted
134.11 Raffle drawings
134.12 Instant bingo other than at bingo sessions
134.13 Restrictions on owner or lessor of location at instant bingo
134.14 Skill-based amusement machines; prohibited conduct
§ 134.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
BET. The hazarding of anything of value upon the result of an event, undertaking or contingency,
but does not include a bona fide business risk.
BINGO. Either of the following:
(1) A game with all of the following characteristics:
(a) The participants use bingo cards or sheets, including paper formats and electronic
representation or image formats, that are divided into 25 spaces arranged in five horizontal and five
vertical rows of spaces, with each space, except the central space, being designated by a combination
of a letter and a number and with the central space being designated as a free space;
(b) The participants cover the spaces on the bingo cards or sheets that correspond to
combinations of letters and numbers that are announced by a bingo game operator;
153
154 Madeira - General Offenses
(c) A bingo game operator announces combinations of letters and numbers that appear on
objects that a bingo game operator selects by chance, either manually or mechanically, from a receptacle
that contains 75 objects at the beginning of each game, each object marked by a different combination
of a letter and a number that corresponds to one of the 75 possible combinations of a letter and a number
that can appear on the bingo cards or sheets; and
(d) The winner of the bingo game includes any participant who properly announces during
the interval between the announcements of letters and numbers, as described in division (1)(c) of this
definition, that a predetermined and pre-announced pattern of spaces has been covered on a bingo card
or sheet being used by the participant.
(2) Instant bingo, punch boards and raffles.
BINGO GAME OPERATOR. Any person, except security personnel, who performs work or labor
at the site of bingo including but not limited to collecting money from participants, handing out bingo
cards or sheets or objects to cover spaces on bingo cards or sheets, selecting from a receptacle the objects
that contain the combination of letters and numbers that appear on bingo cards or sheets, calling out the
combinations of letters and numbers, distributing prizes, selling or redeeming instant bingo tickets or
cards, supervising the operation of a punch board, selling raffle tickets, selecting raffle tickets from a
receptacle and announcing the winning numbers in a raffle, and preparing, selling, and serving food or
beverages.
BINGO SESSION. A period that includes both of the following:
(1) Not to exceed five continuous hours for the conduct of one or more games described in
division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in this section, instant bingo and seal cards; and
(2) A period for the conduct of instant bingo and seal cards for not more than two hours before
and not more than two hours after the period described in division (1) of this definition.
BINGO SUPPLIES. Bingo cards or sheets; instant bingo tickets or cards; electronic bingo aids;
raffle tickets; punch boards; seal cards; instant bingo ticket dispensers; and devices for selecting or
displaying the combination of bingo letters and numbers or raffle tickets. Items that are “bingo supplies”
are not gambling devices if sold or otherwise provided, and used, in accordance with this chapter or
R.C. Chapter 2915. For purposes of this chapter, “bingo supplies” are not to be considered equipment
used to conduct a bingo game.
BOOKMAKING. The business of receiving or paying off bets.
CHAMBER OF COMMERCE. Any organization of individuals, professionals, and businesses that
has the purpose to advance the commercial, financial, industrial and civic interests of the community and
that is, and has received from the Internal Revenue Service a determination letter that currently is in
effect stating that the organization is, exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and
described in IRC § 501(c)(6).
Gambling 155
CHARITABLE BINGO GAME. Any bingo game described in divisions (1) or (2) of the definition
of “bingo” in this section that is conducted by a charitable organization that has obtained a license
pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08 and the proceeds of which are used for a charitable purpose.
CHARITABLE INSTANT BINGO ORGANIZATION. An organization that is exempt from federal
income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3) and is a charitable organization
as defined in this section. The term does not include a charitable organization that is exempt from federal
income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3) and that is created by a veteran’s
organization, a fraternal organization, or a sporting organization in regards to bingo conducted or
assisted by a veteran’s organization, a fraternal organization, or a sporting organization pursuant to R.C.
§ 2915.13, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION.
(1) Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, “charitable organization” means either of the
following:
(a) An organization that is and has received from the Internal Revenue Service a
determination letter that is currently in effect, stating that the organization is exempt from federal income
taxation under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3); or
(b) A volunteer rescue service organization, volunteer firefighter’s organization, veteran’s
organization, fraternal organization, or sporting organization that is exempt from federal income taxation
under IRC §§ 501(c)(4), 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10) or 501(c)(19).
(2) To qualify as a charitable organization, an organization shall have been in continuous
existence as such in this state for a period of two years immediately preceding either the making of an
application for a bingo license under R.C. § 2915.08 or the conducting of any game of chance as
provided in R.C. § 2915.02(D), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
CHARITABLE PURPOSE. Means that the net profit of bingo, other than instant bingo, is used by,
or is given, donated, or otherwise transferred to, any of the following:
(1) Any organization that is described in IRC §§ 509(a)(1), 509(a)(2), or 509(a)(3) and is either
a governmental unit or an organization that is tax exempt under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC
§ 501(c)(3);
(2) A veteran’s organization that is a post, chapter, or organization of veterans, or an auxiliary
unit or society of, or a trust or foundation for, any such post, chapter, or organization organized in the
United States or any of its possessions, at least 75% of the members of which are veterans and
substantially all of the other members of which are individuals who are spouses, widows, or widowers
of veterans, or such individuals, provided that no part of the net earnings of such post, chapter, or
organization inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual, and further provided that the
net profit is used by the post, chapter, or organization for the charitable purposes set forth in R.C.
§ 5739.02(B)(12), is used for awarding scholarships to or for attendance at an institution mentioned in
156 Madeira - General Offenses
that division of the Ohio Revised Code, is donated to a governmental agency, or is used for nonprofit
youth activities, the purchase of United States or Ohio flags that are donated to schools, youth groups,
or other bona fide nonprofit organizations, promotion of patriotism, or disaster relief;
(3) A fraternal organization that has been in continuous existence in this state for 15 years and
that uses the net profit exclusively for religious, charitable, scientific, literary, or educational purposes,
or for the prevention of cruelty to children or animals, if contributions for such use would qualify as a
deductible charitable contribution under IRC § 170; or
(4) A volunteer firefighter’s organization that uses the net profit for the purposes set forth in
the definition of “volunteer firefighter’s organization” in this section.
COMMUNITY ACTION AGENCY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 122.66.
CONDUCT. To back, promote, organize, manage, carry on, sponsor or prepare for the operation
of bingo or a game of chance, a scheme of chance, or a sweepstakes.
DEAL OF INSTANT BINGO TICKETS. A single game of instant bingo tickets all with the same
serial number.
DISTRIBUTOR. Any person who purchases or obtains bingo supplies and who does either of the
following:
(1) Sells, offers for sale, or otherwise provides or offers to provide the bingo supplies to
another person for use in this state; or
(2) Modifies, converts, adds to, or removes parts from the bingo supplies to further their
promotion or sale for use in this state.
ELECTRONIC BINGO AID.
(1) An electronic device used by a participant to monitor bingo cards or sheets purchased at
the time and place of a bingo session and that does all of the following:
(a) It provides a means for a participant to input numbers and letters announced by a bingo
caller;
(b) It compares the numbers and letters entered by the participant to the bingo faces
previously stored in the memory of the device; and
(c) It identifies a winning bingo pattern.
(2) The term does not include any device into which a coin, currency, token or an equivalent
is inserted to activate play.
Gambling 157
EXPENSES. The reasonable amount of gross profit actually expended for all of the following:
(1) The purchase or lease of bingo supplies;
(2) The annual license fee required under R.C. § 2915.08;
(3) Bank fees and service charges for a bingo session or game account described in R.C.
§ 2915.10;
(4) Audits and accounting services;
(5) Safes;
(6) Cash registers;
(7) Hiring security personnel;
(8) Advertising bingo;
(9) Renting premises in which to conduct a bingo session;
(10) Tables and chairs;
(11) Expenses for maintaining and operating a charitable organization’s facilities, including but
not limited to a post home, club house, lounge, tavern or canteen and any grounds attached to the post
home, club house, lounge, tavern or canteen;
(12) Payment of real property taxes and assessments that are levied on a premises on which
bingo is conducted; and
(13) Any other product or service directly related to the conduct of bingo that is authorized in
rules adopted by the Attorney General under R.C. § 2915.08(B)(1).
FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION. Any society, order, state headquarters or association within this
state, except a college or high school fraternity, that is not organized for profit, that is a branch, lodge
or chapter of a national or state organization, that exists exclusively for the common business or sodality
of its members.
GAMBLING DEVICE. Any of the following:
(1) A book, totalizer or other equipment used for recording bets;
(2) A ticket, token or other device representing a chance, share, or interest in a scheme of
chance or evidencing a bet;
158 Madeira - General Offenses
(3) A deck of cards, dice, gaming table, roulette wheel, slot machine or other apparatus
designed for use in connection with a game of chance;
(4) Any equipment, device, apparatus or paraphernalia specially designed for gambling
purposes; and
(5) Bingo supplies sold or otherwise provided, or used, in violation of this chapter or R.C.
Chapter 2915.
GAMBLING OFFENSE. Any of the following:
(1) A violation of R.C. § 2915.02, 2915.03, 2915.04, 2915.05, 2915.06, 2915.07, 2915.08,
2915.081, 2915.082, 2915.09, 2915.091, 2915.092, 2915.10 or 2915.11;
(2) A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state
or of the United States substantially equivalent to any section listed in division (1) of this definition or
a violation of R.C. § 2915.06 as it existed prior to July 1, 1996;
(3) An offense under an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state
or of the United States, of which gambling is an element; or
(4) A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing, any offense under division
(1), (2), or (3) of this definition.
GAME FLARE. The board or placard that accompanies each deal of instant bingo tickets and that
has printed on or affixed to it the following information for the game:
(1) The name of the game;
(2) The manufacturer’s name or distinctive logo;
(3) The form number;
(4) The ticket count;
(5) The prize structure, including the number of winning instant bingo tickets by denomination
and the respective winning symbol or number combinations for the winning instant bingo tickets;
(6) The cost per play; and
(7) The serial number of the game.
GAME OF CHANCE. Poker, craps, roulette or other game in which a player gives anything of
value in the hope of gain, the outcome of which is determined largely by chance, but does not include
bingo.
Gambling 159
GAME OF CHANCE CONDUCTED FOR PROFIT. Any game of chance designed to produce
income for the person who conducts or operates the game of chance, but does not include bingo.
GROSS ANNUAL REVENUES. The annual gross receipts derived from the conduct of bingo
described in division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in this section plus the annual net profit derived
from the conduct of bingo described in division (2) of the definition of “bingo” in this section.
GROSS PROFIT. Gross receipts minus the amount actually expended for the payment of prize
awards.
GROSS RECEIPTS. All money or assets, including admission fees, that a person receives from
bingo without the deduction of any amounts for prizes paid out or for the expenses of conducting bingo.
The term does not include any money directly taken in from the sale of food or beverages by a charitable
organization conducting bingo, or by a bona fide auxiliary unit or society of a charitable organization
conducting bingo, provided all of the following apply:
(1) The auxiliary unit or society has been in existence as a bona fide auxiliary unit or society
of the charitable organization for at least two years prior to conducting bingo;
(2) The person who purchases the food or beverage receives nothing of value except the food
or beverage and items customarily received with the purchase of that food or beverage; and
(3) The food and beverages are sold at customary and reasonable prices.
HISTORIC RAILROAD. All or a portion of the tracks and right-of-way of a railroad that was
owned and operated by a for profit common carrier in this state at any time prior to January 1, 1950.
INSTANT BINGO. A form of bingo that shall use folded or banded tickets or paper cards with
perforated break-open tabs, a face of which is covered or otherwise hidden from view to conceal a
number, letter, or symbol, or set of numbers, letters, or symbols, some of which have been designated
in advance as prize winners, and may also include games in which some winners are determined by the
random selection of one or more bingo numbers by the use of a seal card or bingo blower. In all “instant
bingo” the prize amount and structure shall be predetermined. The term does not include any device that
is activated by the insertion of a coin, currency, token, or an equivalent, and that contains as one of its
components a video display monitor that is capable of displaying numbers, letters, symbols, or characters
in winning or losing combinations.
INSTANT BINGO TICKET DISPENSER. A mechanical device that dispenses an instant bingo
ticket or card as the sole item of value dispensed and that has the following characteristics:
(1) It is activated upon the insertion of United States currency;
(2) It performs no gaming functions;
(3) It does not contain a video display monitor or generate noise;
160 Madeira - General Offenses
(4) It is not capable of displaying any numbers, letters, symbols, or characters in winning or
losing combinations;
(5) It does not simulate or display rolling or spinning reels;
(6) It is incapable of determining whether a dispensed bingo ticket or card is a winning or
non-winning ticket or card and requires a winning ticket or card to be paid by a bingo game operator;
(7) It may provide accounting and security features to aid in accounting for the instant bingo
tickets or cards it dispenses; and
(8) It is not part of an electronic network and is not interactive.
INTERNAL REVENUE CODE (IRC). The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, 100 Stat. 2085, 26
U.S.C. §§ 1 et seq., as now or hereafter amended.
MANUFACTURER. Any person who assembles completed bingo supplies from raw materials, other
items, or subparts or who modifies, converts, adds to, or removes parts from bingo supplies to further
their promotion or sale.
MERCHANDISE PRIZE. Any item of value, but shall not include any of the following:
(1) Cash, gift cards, or any equivalent thereof;
(2) Plays on games of chance, state lottery tickets, bingo or instant bingo;
(3) Firearms, tobacco, or alcoholic beverages; or
(4) A redeemable voucher that is redeemable for any of the items listed in division (1), (2), or
(3) of this definition.
NET PROFIT. Gross profit minus expenses.
NET PROFIT FROM THE PROCEEDS OF THE SALE OF INSTANT BINGO. Gross profit
minus the ordinary, necessary, and reasonable expense expended for the purchase of instant bingo
supplies, and, in the case of instant bingo conducted by a veteran’s, fraternal, or sporting organization,
minus the payment by that organization of real property taxes and assessments levied on a premises on
which instant bingo is conducted.
PARTICIPANT. Any person who plays bingo.
PERSON. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1.59 and includes any firm or any other legal entity,
however organized.
Gambling 161
POOL NOT CONDUCTED FOR PROFIT. A scheme in which a participant gives a valuable
consideration for a chance to win a prize and the total amount of consideration wagered is distributed
to a participant or participants.
PUNCH BOARD. A board containing a number of holes or receptacles of uniform size in which
are placed, mechanically and randomly, serially numbered slips of paper that may be punched or drawn
from the hole or receptacle when used in conjunction with instant bingo. A player may punch or draw
the numbered slips of paper from the holes or receptacles and obtain the prize established for the game
if the number drawn corresponds to a winning number or, if the punch board includes the use of a seal
card, a potential winning number.
RAFFLE. A form of bingo in which the one or more prizes are won by one or more persons who
have purchased a raffle ticket. The one or more winners of the raffle are determined by drawing a ticket
stub or other detachable section from a receptacle containing ticket stubs or detachable sections
corresponding to all tickets sold for the raffle. The term does not include the drawing of a ticket stub or
other detachable section of a ticket purchased to attend a professional sporting event if both of the
following apply:
(1) The ticket stub or other detachable section is used to select the winner of a free prize given
away at the professional sporting event; and
(2) The cost of the ticket is the same as the cost of a ticket to the professional sporting event
on days when no free prize is given away.
REDEEMABLE VOUCHER. Any ticket, token, coupon, receipt or other noncash representation
of value.
RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION. Any church, body of communicants, or group that is not organized
or operated for profit and that gathers in common membership for regular worship and religious
observances.
REVOKE. To void permanently all rights and privileges of the holder of a license issued under R.C.
§ 2915.08, 2915.081, or 2915.082 or a charitable gaming license issued by another jurisdiction.
SCHEME OF CHANCE.
(1) A slot machine unless authorized under R.C. Chapter 3772, lottery unless authorized under
R.C. Chapter 3770, numbers game, pool conducted for profit or other scheme in which a participant
gives a valuable consideration for a chance to win a prize, but does not include bingo, a skill-based
amusement machine, or a pool not conducted for profit. “Scheme of chance” includes the use of an
electronic device to reveal the results of a game entry if valuable consideration is paid, directly or
indirectly, for a chance to win a prize. Valuable consideration is deemed to be paid for a chance to win
a prize in the following instances:
162 Madeira - General Offenses
(a) Less than 50% of the goods or services sold by a scheme of chance operator in
exchange for game entries are used or redeemed by participants at any one location;
(b) Less than 50% of participants who purchase goods or services at any one location do
not accept, use, or redeem the goods or services sold or purportedly sold;
(c) More than 50% of prizes at any one location are revealed to participants through an
electronic device simulating a game of chance or a “casino game” as defined in R.C. § 3772.01;
(d) The good or service sold by a scheme of chance operator in exchange for a game entry
cannot be used or redeemed in the manner advertised;
(e) A participant pays more than fair market value for goods or services offered by a
scheme of chance operator in order to receive one or more game entries;
(f) A participant may use the electronic device to purchase additional game entries;
(g) A participant may purchase additional game entries by using points or credits won as
prizes while using the electronic device;
(h) A scheme of chance operator pays out in prize money more than 20% of the gross
revenue received at one location; or
(i) A participant makes a purchase or exchange in order to obtain any good or service that
may be used to facilitate play on the electronic device.
(2) As used in this division, “electronic device” means a mechanical, video, digital, or
electronic machine or device that is capable of displaying information on a screen or other mechanism
and that is owned, leased, or otherwise possessed by any person conducting a scheme of chance, or by
that person’s partners, affiliates, subsidiaries, or contractors.
SEAL CARD. A form of instant bingo that uses instant bingo tickets in conjunction with a board or
placard that contains one or more seals that, when removed or opened, reveal predesignated winning
numbers, letters or symbols.
SECURITY PERSONNEL. Includes any person who either is a Sheriff, deputy sheriff, Marshal,
deputy marshal, township constable or member of an organized police department of a municipal
corporation or has successfully completed a peace officer’s training course pursuant to R.C. §§ 109.71
through 109.79 and who is hired to provide security for the premises on which bingo is conducted.
SKILL-BASED AMUSEMENT MACHINE.
(1) (a) A mechanical, video, digital or electronic device that rewards the player or players,
if at all, only with merchandise prizes or with redeemable vouchers redeemable only for merchandise
prizes, provided that with respect to rewards for playing the game all of the following apply:
Gambling 163
1. The wholesale value of a merchandise prize awarded as a result of the single play
of a machine does not exceed $10;
2. Redeemable vouchers awarded for any single play of a machine are not redeemable
for a merchandise prize with a wholesale value of more than $10;
3. Redeemable vouchers are not redeemable for a merchandise prize that has a
wholesale value of more than $10 times the fewest number of single plays necessary to accrue the
redeemable vouchers required to obtain that prize; and
4. Any redeemable vouchers or merchandise prizes are distributed at the site of the
skill-based amusement machine at the time of play.
(b) A card for the purchase of gasoline is a redeemable voucher for purposes of division
(1) of this definition even if the skill-based amusement machine for the play of which the card is awarded
is located at a place where gasoline may not be legally distributed to the public or the card is not
redeemable at the location of, or at the time of playing, the skill-based amusement machine.
(2) A device shall not be considered a skill-based amusement machine and shall be considered
a slot machine if it pays cash or one or more of the following apply:
(a) The ability of a player to succeed at the game is impacted by the number or ratio of
prior wins to prior losses of players playing the game;
(b) Any reward of redeemable vouchers is not based solely on the player achieving the
object of the game or the player’s score;
(c) The outcome of the game, or the value of the redeemable voucher or merchandise prize
awarded for winning the game, can be controlled by a source other than any player playing the game;
(d) The success of any player is or may be determined by a chance event that cannot be
altered by player actions;
(e) The ability of any player to succeed at the game is determined by game features not
visible or known to the player; and/or
(f) The ability of the player to succeed at the game is impacted by the exercise of a skill
that no reasonable player could exercise.
(3) All of the following apply to any machine that is operated as described in division (1) of
this definition.
(a) As used in this definition of “skill-based amusement machine”, GAME and PLAY
mean one event from the initial activation of the machine until the results of play are determined without
payment of additional consideration. An individual utilizing a machine that involves a single game, play,
164 Madeira - General Offenses
contest, competition, or tournament may be awarded redeemable vouchers or merchandise prizes based
on the results of play.
(b) Advance play for a single game, play, contest, competition, or tournament participation
may be purchased. The cost of the contest, competition, or tournament participation may be greater than
a single non-contest, competition, or tournament play.
(c) To the extent that the machine is used in a contest, competition, or tournament, that
contest, competition, or tournament has a defined starting and ending date and is open to participants in
competition for scoring and ranking results toward the awarding of redeemable vouchers or merchandise
prizes that are stated prior to the start of the contest, competition, or tournament.
(4) For purposes of division (1) of this definition, the mere presence of a device, such as a
pin-setting, ball-releasing, or scoring mechanism, that does not contribute to or affect the outcome of
the play of the game does not make the device a skill-based amusement machine.
SLOT MACHINE.
(1) Either of the following:
(a) Any mechanical, electronic, video or digital device that is capable of accepting anything
of value, directly or indirectly, from or on behalf of a player who gives the thing of value in the hope
of gain; or
(b) Any mechanical, electronic, video or digital device that is capable of accepting anything
of value, directly or indirectly, from or on behalf of a player to conduct bingo or a scheme or game of
chance.
(2) The term does not include a skill-based amusement machine or an instant bingo ticket
dispenser.
SPORTING ORGANIZATION. A hunting, fishing or trapping organization, other than a college
or high school fraternity or sorority, that is not organized for profit, that is affiliated with a state or
national sporting organization, including but not limited to the League of Ohio Sportsmen, and that has
been in continuous existence in this state for a period of three years.
SUSPEND. To interrupt temporarily all rights and privileges of the holder of a license issued under
R.C. § 2915.08, 2915.081 or 2915.082 or a charitable gaming license issued by another jurisdiction.
SWEEPSTAKES. Any game, contest, advertising scheme or plan, or other promotion where
consideration is not required for a person to enter to win or become eligible to receive any prize, the
determination of which is based upon chance. “Sweepstakes” does not include bingo as authorized under
R.C. Chapter 2915, pari-mutuel wagering as authorized by R.C. Chapter 3769, lotteries conducted by
the State Lottery Commission as authorized by R.C. Chapter 3770, and casino gaming as authorized by
R.C. Chapter 3772.
Gambling 165
SWEEPSTAKES TERMINAL DEVICE.
(1) A mechanical, video, digital or electronic machine or device that is owned, leased, or
otherwise possessed by any person conducting a sweepstakes, or by that person’s partners, affiliates,
subsidiaries, or contractors, that is intended to be used by a sweepstakes participant, and that is capable
of displaying information on a screen or other mechanism. A device is a sweepstakes terminal device
if any of the following apply:
(a) The device uses a simulated game terminal as a representation of the prizes associated
with the results of the sweepstakes entries;
(b) The device utilizes software such that the simulated game influences or determines the
winning of or value of the prize;
(c) The device selects prizes from a predetermined finite pool of entries;
(d) The device utilizes a mechanism that reveals the content of a predetermined
sweepstakes entry;
(e) The device predetermines the prize results and stores those results for delivery at the
time the sweepstakes entry results are revealed;
(f) The device utilizes software to create a game result;
(g) The device reveals the prize incrementally, even though the device does not influence
the awarding of the prize or the value of any prize awarded; or
(h) The device determines and associates the prize with an entry or entries at the time the
sweepstakes is entered.
(2) As used in this definition and in § 134.02:
ENTER. The act by which a person becomes eligible to receive any prize offered in a
sweepstakes.
ENTRY. One event from the initial activation of the sweepstakes terminal device until all
the sweepstakes prize results from that activation are revealed.
PRIZE. Any gift, award, gratuity, good, service, credit, reward, or any other thing of
value that may be transferred to a person, whether possession of the prize is actually transferred, or
placed on an account or other record as evidence of the intent to transfer the prize.
SWEEPSTAKES TERMINAL DEVICE FACILITY. Any location in this state where a
sweepstakes terminal device is provided to a sweepstakes participant, except as provided in § 134.02(G)
and R.C. § 2915.02(G). 
166 Madeira - General Offenses
VETERAN’S ORGANIZATION. Any individual post or state headquarters of a national veteran’s
association or an auxiliary unit of any individual post of a national veteran’s association, which post,
state headquarters, or auxiliary unit is incorporated as a nonprofit corporation and either has received
a letter from the state headquarters of the national veteran’s association indicating that the individual post
or auxiliary unit is in good standing with the national veteran’s association or has received a letter from
the national veteran’s association indicating that the state headquarters is in good standing with the
national veteran’s association. As used in this definition, NATIONAL VETERAN’S ASSOCIATION
means any veteran’s association that has been in continuous existence as such for a period of at least five
years and either is incorporated by an act of the United States Congress or has a national dues-paying
membership of at least 5,000 persons.
VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTER’S ORGANIZATION. Any organization of volunteer firefighters,
as defined in R.C. § 146.01, that is organized and operated exclusively to provide financial support for
a volunteer fire department or a volunteer fire company and that is recognized or ratified by a county,
municipal corporation, or township.
VOLUNTEER RESCUE SERVICE ORGANIZATION. Any organization of volunteers organized
to function as an emergency medical service organization, as defined in R.C. § 4765.01.
YOUTH ATHLETIC ORGANIZATION. Any organization, not organized for profit, that is
organized and operated exclusively to provide financial support to, or to operate, athletic activities for
persons who are 21 years of age or younger by means of sponsoring, organizing, operating, or
contributing to the support of an athletic team, club, league, or association.
YOUTH ATHLETIC PARK ORGANIZATION. Any organization, not organized for profit, that
satisfies both of the following:
(1) It owns, operates, and maintains playing fields that satisfy both of the following:
(a) The playing fields are used at least 100 days per year for athletic activities by one or
more organizations, not organized for profit, each of which is organized and operated exclusively to
provide financial support to, or to operate, athletic activities for persons who are 18 years of age or
younger by means of sponsoring, organizing, operating, or contributing to the support of an athletic
team, club, league, or association; and
(b) The playing fields are not used for any profit-making activity at any time during the
year.
(2) It uses the proceeds of bingo it conducts exclusively for the operation, maintenance, and
improvement of its playing fields of the type described in division (1) of this definition.
(R.C. § 2915.01) (1985 Code, § 134.01)
Gambling 167
§ 134.02 PROHIBITIONS AGAINST GAMBLING.
(A) No person shall do any of the following:
(1) Engage in bookmaking, or knowingly engage in conduct that facilitates bookmaking;
(2) Establish, promote, or operate or knowingly engage in conduct that facilitates any game
of chance conducted for profit or any scheme of chance;
(3) Knowingly procure, transmit, exchange or engage in conduct that facilitates the
procurement, transmission, or exchange of information for use in establishing odds or determining
winners in connection with bookmaking or with any game of chance conducted for profit or any scheme
of chance;
(4) Engage in betting or in playing any scheme or game of chance as a substantial source of
income or livelihood;
(5) Conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a sweepstakes with the use of a sweepstakes
terminal device at a sweepstakes terminal device facility and either:
(a) Give to another person any item described in R.C. § 2915.01(VV)(1), (VV)(2),
(VV)(3), or (VV)(4) as a prize for playing or participating in a sweepstakes; or
(b) Give to another person any merchandise prize, or a redeemable voucher for a
merchandise prize, the wholesale value of which is in excess of $10 and which is awarded as a single
entry for playing or participating in a sweepstakes. Redeemable vouchers shall not be redeemable for
a merchandise prize that has a wholesale value of more than $10.
(6) Conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a sweepstakes with the use of a sweepstakes
terminal device at a sweepstakes terminal device facility without first obtaining a current annual
“certificate of registration” from the Attorney General as required by R.C. § 2915.02(F); or
(7) With purpose to violate division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), (A)(5), or (A)(6) of this
section, acquire, possess, control, or operate any gambling device.
(B) For purposes of division (A)(1) of this section, a person facilitates bookmaking if the person
in any way knowingly aids an illegal bookmaking operation, including, without limitation, placing a bet
with a person engaged in or facilitating illegal bookmaking. For purposes of division (A)(2) of this
section, a person facilitates a game of chance conducted for profit or a scheme of chance if the person
in any way knowingly aids in the conduct or operation of any such game or scheme, including, without
limitation, playing any such game or scheme.
(C) This section does not prohibit conduct in connection with gambling expressly permitted by law.
168 Madeira - General Offenses
(D) This section does not apply to any of the following:
(1) Games of chance, if all of the following apply:
(a) The games of chance are not craps for money or roulette for money;
(b) The games of chance are conducted by a charitable organization that is and has received
from the Internal Revenue Service a determination letter that is currently in effect, stating that the
organization is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC
§ 501(c)(3);
(c) The games of chance are conducted at festivals of the charitable organization that are
conducted not more than a total of five days a calendar year, and are conducted on premises owned by
the charitable organization for a period of no less than one year immediately preceding the conducting
of the games of chance, on premises leased from a governmental unit, or on premises that are leased
from a veteran’s or fraternal organization and that have been owned by the lessor veteran’s or fraternal
organization for a period of no less than one year immediately preceding the conducting of the games
of chance. A charitable organization shall not lease premises from a veteran’s or fraternal organization
to conduct a festival described in this division, if the veteran’s or fraternal organization already has
leased the premises 12 times during the preceding year to charitable organizations for that purpose. If
a charitable organization leases premises from a veteran’s or fraternal organization to conduct a festival
described in this division, the charitable organization shall not pay a rental rate for the premises per day
of the festival that exceeds the rental rate per bingo session that a charitable organization may pay under
R.C. § 2915.09(B)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance when it leases premises from
another charitable organization to conduct bingo games;
(d) All of the money or assets received from the games of chance after deduction only of
prizes paid out during the conduct of the games of chance are used by, given, donated or otherwise
transferred to any organization that is described in IRC § 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is either a
governmental unit or an organization that is tax exempt under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC
§ 501(c)(3); and
(e) The games of chance are not conducted during or within ten hours of a bingo game
conducted for amusement purposes only pursuant to R.C. § 2915.12 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance. No person shall receive any commission, wage, salary, reward, tip, donation,
gratuity or other form of compensation, directly or indirectly, for operating or assisting in the operation
of any game of chance.
(2) Any tag fishing tournament, as defined in R.C. § 1531.01, operated under a permit issued
under R.C. § 1533.92.
(3) Bingo conducted by a charitable organization that holds a license issued under R.C.
§ 2915.08.
Gambling 169
(E) Division (D) of this section shall not be construed to authorize the sale, lease, or other
temporary or permanent transfer of the right to conduct games of chance, as granted by that division,
by any charitable organization that is granted that right.
(F) Any person desiring to conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a sweepstakes with the use of
a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes terminal device facility shall first register with the Office
of the Attorney General and obtain an annual certificate of registration by providing a filing fee of $200
and all information as required by rule adopted under R.C. § 2915.02(H). Not later than the tenth day
of each month, each sweepstakes terminal device operator shall file a sweepstakes terminal device
monthly report with the Attorney General and provide a filing fee of $50 and all information required
by rule adopted under R.C. § 2915.02(H). All information provided to the Attorney General under this
division shall be available to law enforcement upon request.
(G) (1) A person may apply to the Attorney General, on a form prescribed by the Attorney
General, for a certificate of compliance that the person is not operating a sweepstakes terminal device
facility. The form shall require the person to include the address of the business location where
sweepstakes terminal devices will be used and to make the following certifications:
(a) That the person will not use more than two sweepstakes terminal devices at the business
location;
(b) That the retail value of sweepstakes prizes to be awarded at the business location using
sweepstakes terminal devices during a reporting period will be less than 3% of the gross revenue
received at the business location during the reporting period;
(c) That no other form of gaming except lottery ticket sales as authorized under R.C.
Chapter 3770 will be conducted at the business location or in an adjoining area of the business location;
(d) That any sweepstakes terminal device at the business location will not allow any deposit
of any money, coin, or token, or the use of any credit card, debit card, prepaid card, or any other
method of similar payment to be used, directly or indirectly, to participate in a sweepstakes;
(e) That notification of any prize will not take place on the same day as a participant’s
sweepstakes entry; and
(f) That the person consents to provide any other information to the Attorney General as
required by rule adopted under R.C. § 2915.02(H).
(2) The filing fee for a certificate of compliance is $250. The Attorney General may charge
up to an additional $250 for reasonable expenses resulting from any investigation related to an
application for a certificate of compliance.
(3) A certificate of compliance is effective for one year. The certificate holder may reapply for
a certificate of compliance. A person issued a certificate of compliance shall file semiannual reports with
the Attorney General stating the number of sweepstakes terminal devices at the business location and that
170 Madeira - General Offenses
the retail value of prizes awarded at the business location using sweepstakes terminal devices is less than
3% of the gross revenue received at the business location.
(H) Whoever violates this section is guilty of gambling, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of any gambling offense, gambling is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law. Notwithstanding this division, failing to file a sweepstakes terminal device
monthly report as required by division (F) of this section or the semiannual report required by division
(G) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2915.02(A) - (G), (K)) (1985 Code, § 134.02)
§ 134.03 OPERATING A GAMBLING HOUSE.
(A) No person, being the owner or lessee, or having custody, control or supervision of premises,
shall:
(1) Use or occupy the premises for gambling in violation of R.C. § 2915.02 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance; or
(2) Recklessly permit the premises to be used or occupied for gambling in violation of R.C.
§ 2915.02 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(B) Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of operating a gambling house, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a gambling offense,
operating a gambling house is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(C) Premises used or occupied in violation of this section constitute a nuisance subject to abatement
under R.C. Chapter 3767.
(R.C. § 2915.03) (1985 Code, § 134.03) (Ord. 1169, passed 6-10-1974; Ord. 1306, passed 6-13-1977)
§ 134.04 PUBLIC GAMING.
(A) No person, while at a hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall or other place of public
accommodation, business, amusement or resort shall make a bet or play any game of chance or scheme
of chance.
(B) No person, being the owner or lessee, or having custody, control or supervision of a hotel,
restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall or other place of public accommodation, business, amusement or
resort shall recklessly permit those premises to be used or occupied in violation of division (A) of this
section.
(C) Divisions (A) and (B) of this section do not prohibit conduct in connection with gambling
expressly permitted by law.
Gambling 171
(D) Whoever violates this section is guilty of public gaming. Except as otherwise provided in this
division (D), public gaming is a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been convicted of
any gambling offense, public gaming is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(E) Premises used or occupied in violation of division (B) of this section constitute a nuisance
subject to abatement under R.C. Chapter 3767.
(R.C. § 2915.04) (1985 Code, § 134.04) (Ord. 1169, passed 6-10-1974; Ord. 1306, passed 6-13-1977)
§ 134.05 CHEATING.
(A) No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is facilitating a fraud, shall
engage in conduct designed to corrupt the outcome of any of the following:
(1) The subject of a bet;
(2) A contest of knowledge, skill or endurance that is not an athletic or sporting event;
(3) A scheme or game of chance; or
(4) Bingo.
(B) No person shall knowingly do any of the following:
(1) Offer, give, solicit or accept anything of value to corrupt the outcome of an athletic or
sporting event; or
(2) Engage in conduct designed to corrupt the outcome of an athletic or sporting event.
(C) (1) Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of cheating. Except as otherwise
provided in this division (C), cheating is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the potential gain from
the cheating is $1,000 or more or if the offender previously has been convicted of any gambling offense
or of any theft offense as defined in R.C. § 2913.01, cheating is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(2) Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of corrupting sports. Corrupting
sports is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.05) (1985 Code, § 134.05) (Ord. 1169, passed 6-10-1974; Ord. 1306, passed 6-13-1977)
§ 134.06 REGULATIONS CONCERNING OPERATION.
(A) No charitable organization that conducts bingo shall fail to do any of the following:
172 Madeira - General Offenses
(1) Own all of the equipment used to conduct bingo or lease that equipment from a charitable
organization that is licensed to conduct bingo, or from the landlord of a premises where bingo is
conducted, for a rental rate that is not more than is customary and reasonable for that equipment;
(2) Except as otherwise provided in division (A)(3) of this section, use all of the gross receipts
from bingo for paying prizes, for reimbursement of expenses for or for renting premises in which to
conduct bingo, for reimbursement of expenses for or for purchasing or leasing bingo supplies used in
conducting bingo, for reimbursement of expenses for or for hiring security personnel, for reimbursement
of expenses for or for advertising bingo, or for reimbursement of other expenses or for other expenses
listed in the definition for “expenses” in R.C. § 2915.01, provided that the amount of the receipts so
spent is not more than is customary and reasonable for a similar purchase, lease, hiring, advertising or
expense. If the building in which bingo is conducted is owned by the charitable organization conducting
bingo and the bingo conducted includes a form of bingo described in division (1) of the definition of
“bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01, the charitable organization may deduct from the total amount of the gross
receipts from each session a sum equal to the lesser of $600 or 45% of the gross receipts from the bingo
described in that division as consideration for the use of the premises; or
(3) Use, or give, donate or otherwise transfer, all of the net profit derived from bingo, other
than instant bingo, for a charitable purpose listed in its license application and described in the definition
for “charitable purpose” in R.C. § 2915.01, or distribute all of the net profit from the proceeds of the
sale of instant bingo as stated in its license application and in accordance with R.C. § 2915.101.
(B) No charitable organization that conducts a bingo game described in division (1) of the definition
of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01 shall fail to do any of the following:
(1) Conduct the bingo game on premises that are owned by the charitable organization, on
premises that are owned by another charitable organization and leased from that charitable organization
for a rental rate not in excess of the lesser of $650 per bingo session or 45% of the gross receipts of the
bingo session, on premises that are leased from a person other than a charitable organization for a rental
rate that is not more than is customary and reasonable for premises that are similar in location, size and
quality but not in excess of $450 per bingo session, or on premises that are owned by a person other than
a charitable organization, that are leased from that person by another charitable organization, and that
are subleased from that other charitable organization by the charitable organization for a rental rate not
in excess of $450 per bingo session. No charitable organization is required to pay property taxes or
assessments on premises that the charitable organization leases from another person to conduct bingo
sessions. If the charitable organization leases from a person other than a charitable organization the
premises on which it conducts bingo sessions, the lessor of the premises shall provide only the premises
to the organization and shall not provide the organization with bingo game operators, security personnel,
concessions or concession operators, bingo supplies or any other type of service. A charitable
organization shall not lease or sublease premises that it owns or leases to more than three other charitable
organizations per calendar week for conducting bingo sessions on the premises. A person that is not a
charitable organization shall not lease premises that it owns, leases or otherwise is empowered to lease
to more than three charitable organizations per calendar week for conducting bingo sessions on the
premises. In no case shall more than nine bingo sessions be conducted on any premises in any calendar
week;
Gambling 173
(2) Display its license conspicuously at the premises where the bingo session is conducted; or
(3) Conduct the bingo session in accordance with division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in
R.C. § 2915.01.
(C) No charitable organization that conducts a bingo game described in division (1) of the definition
of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01 shall do any of the following:
(1) Pay any compensation to a bingo game operator for operating a bingo session that is
conducted by the charitable organization or for preparing, selling or serving food or beverages at the site
of the bingo session, permit any auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization to pay
compensation to any bingo game operator who prepares, sells or serves food or beverages at a bingo
session conducted by the charitable organization, or permit any auxiliary unit or society of the charitable
organization to prepare, sell or serve food or beverages at a bingo session conducted by the charitable
organization, if the auxiliary unit or society pays any compensation to the bingo game operators who
prepare, sell or serve the food or beverages;
(2) Pay consulting fees to any person for any services performed in relation to the bingo
session;
(3) Pay concession fees to any person who provides refreshments to the participants in the
bingo session;
(4) Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(4) of this section, conduct more than three
bingo sessions in any seven-day period. A volunteer firefighter’s organization or a volunteer rescue
service organization that conducts not more than five bingo sessions in a calendar year may conduct more
than three bingo sessions in a seven-day period after notifying the Attorney General when it will conduct
the sessions;
(5) Pay out more than $6,000 in prizes for bingo games described in R.C. § 2915.01(S)(1)
during any bingo session that is conducted by the charitable organization. Prizes do not include awards
from the conduct of instant bingo;
(6) Conduct a bingo session at any time during the eight-hour period between 2:00 a.m. and
10:00 a.m., at any time during, or within ten hours of, a bingo game conducted for amusement only
pursuant to R.C. § 2915.12 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, at any premises not
specified on its license, or on any day of the week or during any time period not specified on its license.
This division (C) does not prohibit the sale of instant bingo tickets beginning at 9:00 a.m. for a bingo
session that begins at 10:00 a.m. If circumstances make it impractical for the charitable organization to
conduct a bingo session at the premises, or on the day of the week or at the time specified on its license
or if a charitable organization wants to conduct bingo sessions on a day of the week or at a time other
than the day or time specified on its license, the charitable organization may apply in writing to the
Attorney General for an amended license pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08(F). A charitable organization may
apply twice in each calendar year for an amended license to conduct bingo sessions on a day of the week
or at a time other than the day or time specified on its license. If the amended license is granted, the
174 Madeira - General Offenses
organization may conduct bingo sessions at the premises, on the day of the week, and at the time
specified on its amended license;
(7) Permit any person whom the charitable organization knows, or should have known, is under
the age of 18 to work as a bingo game operator;
(8) Permit any person whom the charitable organization knows, or should have known, has
been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any jurisdiction to be a bingo game operator;
(9) Permit the lessor of the premises on which the bingo session is conducted, if the lessor is
not a charitable organization, to provide the charitable organization with bingo game operators, security
personnel, concessions, bingo supplies or any other type of service;
(10) Purchase or lease bingo supplies from any person except a distributor issued a license under
R.C. § 2915.081;
(11) (a) Use or permit the use of electronic bingo aids except under the following
circumstances:
1. For any single participant, not more than 90 bingo faces can be played using an
electronic bingo aid or aids;
2. The charitable organization shall provide a participant using an electronic bingo
aid with corresponding paper bingo cards or sheets;
3. The total price of bingo faces played with an electronic bingo aid shall be equal
to the total price of the same number of bingo faces played with a paper bingo card or sheet sold at the
same bingo session but without an electronic bingo aid;
4. An electronic bingo aid cannot be part of an electronic network other than a
network that includes only bingo aids and devices that are located on the premises at which the bingo
is being conducted or be interactive with any device not located on the premises at which the bingo is
being conducted;
5. An electronic bingo aid cannot be used to participate in bingo that is conducted at
a location other than the location at which the bingo session is conducted and at which the electronic
bingo aid is used; and
6. An electronic bingo aid cannot be used to provide for the input of numbers and
letters announced by a bingo caller other than the bingo caller who physically calls the numbers and
letters at the location at which the bingo session is conducted and at which the electronic bingo aid is
used.
(b) The Attorney General may adopt rules in accordance with R.C. Chapter 119 that
govern the use of electronic bingo aids. The rules may include a requirement that an electronic bingo aid
Gambling 175
be capable of being audited by the Attorney General to verify the number of bingo cards or sheets played
during each bingo session.
(12) Permit any person the charitable organization knows, or should have known, to be under
18 years of age to play bingo described in division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01.
(D) (1) Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3) of this section, no charitable organization
shall provide to a bingo game operator, and no bingo game operator shall receive or accept, any
commission, wage, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity or other form of compensation, directly or
indirectly, regardless of the source, for conducting bingo or providing other work or labor at the site of
bingo during a bingo session.
(2) Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3) of this section, no charitable organization
shall provide to a bingo game operator any commission, wage, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity
or other form of compensation, directly or indirectly regardless of the source, for conducting instant
bingo other than at a bingo session at the site of instant bingo other than at a bingo session.
(3) Nothing in this division (D) of this section prohibits an employee of a fraternal
organization, veteran’s organization or sporting organization from selling instant bingo tickets or cards
to the organization’s members or invited guests, as long as no portion of the employee’s compensation
is paid from any receipts of bingo.
(E) Notwithstanding division (B)(1) of this section, a charitable organization that, prior to December
6, 1977, has entered into written agreements for the lease of premises it owns to another charitable
organization or other charitable organizations for the conducting of bingo sessions so that more than two
bingo sessions are conducted per calendar week on the premises, and a person that is not a charitable
organization and that, prior to December 6, 1977, has entered into written agreements for the lease of
premises it owns to charitable organizations for the conducting of more than two bingo sessions per
calendar week on the premises, may continue to lease the premises to those charitable organizations,
provided that no more than four sessions are conducted per calendar week, that the lessor organization
or person has notified the Attorney General in writing of the organizations that will conduct the sessions
and the days of the week and the times of the day on which the sessions will be conducted, that the initial
lease entered into with each organization that will conduct the sessions was filed with the Attorney
General prior to December 6, 1977, and that each organization that will conduct the sessions was issued
a license to conduct bingo games by the Attorney General prior to December 6, 1977.
(F) This section does not prohibit a bingo licensed charitable organization or a game operator from
giving any person an instant bingo ticket as a prize.
(G) Whoever violates division (A)(2) of this section is guilty of illegally conducting a bingo game,
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. Except as otherwise provided in this division (G),
whoever violates division (A)(1), (A)(3), (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3), (C)(1) through (C)(11) or (D) of this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation
of division (A)(1), (A)(3), (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3), (C)(1) through (C)(11) or (D) of this section, a violation
of division (A)(1), (A)(3), (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3), (C)(1) through (C)(11) or (D) of this section is a
176 Madeira - General Offenses
misdemeanor of the first degree. Whoever violates division (C)(12) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of division
(C)(12) of this section, a violation of division (C)(12) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.09) (1985 Code, § 134.06)
§ 134.07 RECORDS TO BE KEPT.
(A) No charitable organization that conducts bingo or a game of chance pursuant to R.C.
§ 2915.02(D), or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, shall fail to maintain the following
records for at least three years from the date on which the bingo or game of chance is conducted:
(1) An itemized list of the gross receipts of each bingo session, each game of instant bingo by
serial number, each raffle, each punch board game and each game of chance, and an itemized list of the
gross profits of each game of instant bingo by serial number;
(2) An itemized list of all expenses, other than prizes, that are incurred in conducting bingo
or instant bingo, the name of each person to whom the expenses are paid, and a receipt for all of the
expenses;
(3) A list of all prizes awarded during each bingo session, each raffle, each punch board game
and each game of chance conducted by the charitable organization, the total prizes awarded from each
game of instant bingo by serial number, and the name, address and Social Security number of all persons
who are winners of prizes of $600 or more in value;
(4) An itemized list of the recipients of the net profit of bingo or game of chance, including
the name and address of each recipient to whom the money is distributed, and if the organization uses
the net profit of bingo, or the money or assets received from a game of chance, for any charitable or
other purpose set forth in R.C. § 2915.01(V), R.C. § 2915.02(D) or R.C. § 2915.101, a list of each
purpose and an itemized list of each expenditure for each purpose;
(5) The number of persons who participate in any bingo session or game of chance that is
conducted by the charitable organization;
(6) A list of receipts from the sale of food and beverages by the charitable organization or one
of its auxiliary units or societies, if the receipts were excluded from “gross receipts” under R.C.
§ 2915.01(T); and
(7) An itemized list of all expenses incurred at each bingo session, each raffle, each punch
board game or each game of instant bingo conducted by the charitable organization in the sale of food
and beverages by the charitable organization or by an auxiliary unit or society of the charitable
organization, the name of each person to whom the expenses are paid, and a receipt for all of the
expenses.
Gambling 177
(B) A charitable organization shall keep the records that it is required to maintain pursuant to
division (A) of this section at its principal place of business in this state or at its headquarters in this state
and shall notify the Attorney General of the location at which those records are kept.
(C) The gross profit from each bingo session or game described in division (1) or (2) of the
definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01 shall be deposited into a checking account devoted exclusively
to the bingo session or game. Payments for allowable expenses incurred in conducting the bingo session
or game and payments to recipients of some or all of the net profit of the bingo session or game shall
be made only by checks or electronic fund transfers drawn on the bingo session or game account.
(D) Each charitable organization shall conduct and record an inventory of all of its bingo supplies
as of the first day of November of each year.
(E) The Attorney General may adopt rules in accordance with R.C. Chapter 119 that establish
standards of accounting, record keeping and reporting to ensure that gross receipts from bingo or games
of chance are properly accounted for.
(F) A distributor shall maintain, for a period of three years after the date of its sale or other
provision, a record of each instance of its selling or otherwise providing to another person bingo supplies
for use in this state. The record shall include all of the following for each instance:
(1) The name of the manufacturer from which the distributor purchased the bingo supplies and
the date of the purchase;
(2) The name and address of the charitable organization or other distributor to which the bingo
supplies were sold or otherwise provided;
(3) A description that clearly identifies the bingo supplies; and
(4) Invoices that include the nonrepeating serial numbers of all paper bingo cards and sheets
and all instant bingo deals sold or otherwise provided to each charitable organization.
(G) A manufacturer shall maintain, for a period of three years after the date of its sale or other
provision, a record of each instance of its selling or otherwise providing bingo supplies for use in this
state. The record shall include all of the following for each instance:
(1) The name and address of the distributor to whom the bingo supplies were sold or otherwise
provided;
(2) A description that clearly identifies the bingo supplies, including serial numbers; and
(3) Invoices that include the nonrepeating serial numbers of all paper bingo cards and sheets
and all instant bingo deals sold or otherwise provided to each distributor.
178 Madeira - General Offenses
(H) (1) The Attorney General or any law enforcement agency may do all of the following:
(a) Investigate any charitable organization or any officer, agent, trustee, member or
employee of the organization;
(b) Examine the accounts and records of the organization;
(c) Conduct inspections, audits and observations of bingo or games of chance;
(d) Conduct inspections of the premises where bingo or games of chance are conducted;
and
(e) Take any other necessary and reasonable action to determine if a violation of any
provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915 has occurred and to determine whether R.C. § 2915.11,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, has been complied with.
(2) If any law enforcement agency has reasonable grounds to believe that a charitable
organization or an officer, agent, trustee, member or employee of the organization has violated any
provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915, the law enforcement agency may proceed by action in
the proper court to enforce this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915, provided that the law enforcement agency
shall give written notice to the Attorney General when commencing an action as described in this division
(H).
(I) No person shall destroy, alter, conceal, withhold or deny access to any accounts or records of
a charitable organization that have been requested for examination, or obstruct, impede or interfere with
any inspection, audit or observation of bingo or a game of chance or premises where bingo or a game
of chance is conducted or refuse to comply with any reasonable request of, or obstruct, impede or
interfere with any other reasonable action undertaken by, the Attorney General or a law enforcement
agency pursuant to division (H) of this section.
(J) Whoever violates division (A) or (I) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 2915.10) (1985 Code, § 134.07)
§ 134.08 REQUIREMENTS FOR BINGO GAME OPERATORS.
(A) No person shall be a bingo game operator unless the person is 18 years of age or older.
(B) No person who has been convicted of a felony or a gambling offense in any jurisdiction shall
be a bingo game operator.
(C) Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2915.11) (1985 Code, § 134.08)
Gambling 179
§ 134.09 BINGO GAMES FOR AMUSEMENT ONLY.
(A) Sections 134.06 through 134.13 do not apply to bingo games that are conducted for the purpose
of amusement only. A bingo game is conducted for the purpose of amusement only if it complies with
all of the requirements specified in either division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section.
(1) (a) The participants do not pay any money or any other thing of value, including an
admission fee or any fee, for bingo cards or sheets, objects to cover the spaces, or other devices used
in playing bingo, for the privilege of participating in the bingo game, or to defray any costs of the game,
or pay tips or make donations during or immediately before or after the bingo game.
(b) All prizes awarded during the course of the game are non-monetary, and in the form
of merchandise, goods or entitlement to goods or services only, and the total value of all prizes awarded
during the game is less than $100.
(c) No commission, wages, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity or other form of
compensation, either directly or indirectly, and regardless of the source, is paid to any bingo game
operator for work or labor performed at the site of the bingo game.
(d) The bingo game is not conducted either during or within ten hours of any of the
following:
1. A bingo session during which a charitable bingo game is conducted pursuant to
R.C. §§ 2915.07 through 2915.11 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance; or
2. A scheme or game of chance, or bingo described in R.C. § 2915.01(O)(2).
(e) The number of players participating in the bingo game does not exceed 50.
(2) (a) The participants do not pay money or any other thing of value as an admission fee, and
no participant is charged more than $0.25 to purchase a bingo card or sheet, objects to cover the spaces
or other devices used in playing bingo.
(b) The total amount of money paid by all of the participants for bingo cards or sheets,
objects to cover the spaces, or other devices used in playing bingo does not exceed $100.
(c) All of the money paid for bingo cards or sheets, objects to cover spaces, or other
devices used in playing bingo is used only to pay winners monetary and nonmonetary prizes and to
provide refreshments.
(d) The total value of all prizes awarded during the game does not exceed $100.
180 Madeira - General Offenses
(e) No commission, wages, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity or other form of
compensation, either directly or indirectly and regardless of the source, is paid to any bingo game
operator for work or labor performed at the site of the bingo game.
(f) The bingo game is not conducted during or within ten hours of either of the following:
1. A bingo session during which a charitable bingo game is conducted pursuant to
R.C. §§ 2915.07 through 2915.11 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance; or
2. A scheme of chance or a game of chance, or bingo described in R.C.
§ 2915.01(O)(2).
(g) All of the participants reside at the premises where the bingo game is conducted.
(h) The bingo games are conducted on different days of the week and not more than twice
in a calendar week.
(B) The Attorney General or any local law enforcement agency may investigate the conduct of a
bingo game that purportedly is conducted for purposes of amusement only if there is reason to believe
that the purported amusement bingo game does not comply with the requirements of either division
(A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section. A local law enforcement agency may proceed by action in the proper
court to enforce this section if the local law enforcement agency gives written notice to the Attorney
General when commencing the action.
(R.C. § 2915.12) (1985 Code, § 134.09)
§ 134.10 PROHIBITIONS WHERE INSTANT BINGO GAME IS CONDUCTED.
(A) No charitable organization that conducts instant bingo shall do any of the following:
(1) Fail to comply with the requirements of R.C. § 2915.09(A)(1), (A)(2) and (A)(3), or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
(2) Conduct instant bingo unless either of the following applies:
(a) That organization is, and has received from the Internal Revenue Service a
determination letter that is currently in effect stating that the organization is, exempt from federal income
taxation under IRC § 501(a), is described in IRC § 501(c)(3), is a charitable organization as defined in
R.C. § 2915.01, is in good standing in the state pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08, and is in compliance with
R.C. Chapter 1716; or
(b) That organization is, and has received from the Internal Revenue Service a
determination letter that is currently in effect stating that the organization is, exempt from federal income
taxation under IRC § 501(a), is described in IRC § 501(c)(7), (c)(8), (c)(10) or (c)(19) or is a veteran’s
organization described in IRC § 501(c)(4), and conducts instant bingo under R.C. § 2915.13.
Gambling 181
(3) Conduct instant bingo on any day, at any time, or at any premises not specified on the
organization’s license issued pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08;
(4) Permit any person whom the organization knows or should have known has been convicted
of a felony or gambling offense in any jurisdiction to be a bingo game operator in the conduct of instant
bingo;
(5) Purchase or lease supplies used to conduct instant bingo or punch board games from any
person except a distributor licensed under R.C. § 2915.081;
(6) Sell or provide any instant bingo ticket or card for a price different from the price printed
on it by the manufacturer on either the instant bingo ticket or card or on the game flare;
(7) Sell an instant bingo ticket or card to a person under 18 years of age;
(8) Fail to keep unsold instant bingo tickets or cards for less than three years;
(9) Pay any compensation to a bingo game operator for conducting instant bingo that is
conducted by the organization or for preparing, selling or serving food or beverages at the site of the
instant bingo game, permit any auxiliary unit or society of the organization to pay compensation to any
bingo game operator who prepares, sells or serves food or beverages at an instant bingo game conducted
by the organization, or permit any auxiliary unit or society of the organization to prepare, sell or serve
food or beverages at an instant bingo game conducted by the organization, if the auxiliary unit or society
pays any compensation to the bingo game operators who prepare, sell or serve the food or beverages;
(10) Pay fees to any person for any services performed in relation to an instant bingo game,
except as provided in R.C. § 2915.093(D);
(11) Pay fees to any person who provides refreshments to the participants in an instant bingo
game;
(12) (a) Allow instant bingo tickets or cards to be sold to bingo game operators at a premises
at which the organization sells instant bingo tickets or cards or to be sold to employees of a D permit
holder who are working at a premises at which instant bingo tickets or cards are sold; and
(b) Division (A)(12)(a) of this section does not prohibit a licensed charitable organization
or a bingo game operator from giving any person an instant bingo ticket as a prize in place of a cash
prize won by a participant in an instant bingo game. In no case shall an instant bingo ticket or card be
sold or provided for a price different from the price printed on it by the manufacturer on either the
instant bingo ticket or card or on the game flare.
(13) Fail to display its bingo license, and the serial numbers of the deal of instant bingo tickets
or cards to be sold, conspicuously at each premises at which it sells instant bingo tickets or cards;
182 Madeira - General Offenses
(14) Possess a deal of instant bingo tickets or cards that was not purchased from a distributor
licensed under R.C. § 2915.081 as reflected on an invoice issued by the distributor that contains all of
the information required by R.C. § 2915.10(E);
(15) Fail, once it opens a deal of instant bingo tickets or cards, to continue to sell the tickets or
cards in that deal until the tickets or cards with the top two highest tiers of prizes in that deal are sold;
or
(16) Possess bingo supplies that were not obtained in accordance with R.C. Chapter 2915.
(B) A charitable organization may purchase, lease or use instant bingo ticket dispensers to sell
instant bingo tickets or cards.
(C) Pursuant to R.C. § 2915.091(C), the Attorney General may adopt rules in accordance with R.C.
Chapter 119 that govern the conduct of instant bingo by charitable organizations.
(D) Whoever violates division (A) of this section or a rule adopted under division (C) of this section
is guilty of illegal instant bingo conduct. Except as otherwise provided in this division (D), illegal instant
bingo conduct is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a
violation of division (A) of this section or of such a rule adopted under division (C) of this section, illegal
instant bingo conduct is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.091) (1985 Code, § 134.10)
§ 134.11 RAFFLE DRAWINGS.
(A) (1) Subject to division (A)(2) of this section, a charitable organization, a public school, a
chartered nonpublic school, a community school or a veteran’s organization, fraternal organization or
sporting organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and is described
in IRC §§ 501(c)(3), 501(c)(4), 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10) or 501(c)(19) may conduct a raffle to
raise money for the organization or school and does not need a license to conduct bingo in order to
conduct a raffle drawing that is not for profit.
(2) If a charitable organization that is described in division (A)(1) of this section, but that is
not also described in IRC § 501(c)(3), conducts a raffle, the charitable organization shall distribute at
least 50% of the net profit from the raffle to a charitable purpose described in R.C. § 2915.01(V) or to
a department or agency of the federal government, the state or any political subdivision.
(B) A chamber of commerce may conduct not more than one raffle per year to raise money for the
chamber of commerce.
(C) Except as provided in division (A) or (B) of this section, no person shall conduct a raffle
drawing that is for profit or a raffle drawing that is not for profit.
Gambling 183
(D) Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of illegal conduct of a raffle. Except as
otherwise provided in this division (D), illegal conduct of a raffle is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of division (C) of this section, illegal conduct
of a raffle is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.092) (1985 Code, § 134.11)
§ 134.12 INSTANT BINGO OTHER THAN AT BINGO SESSIONS.
(A) As used in this section, RETAIL INCOME FROM ALL COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY means
the income that a person receives from the provision of goods, services or activities that are provided
at the location where instant bingo other than at a bingo session is conducted, including the sale of instant
bingo tickets. A religious organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a)
and described in IRC § 501(c)(3), at not more than one location at which it conducts its charitable
programs, may include donations from its members and guests as retail income.
(B) (1) If a charitable instant bingo organization conducts instant bingo other than at a bingo
session, the charitable instant bingo organization shall enter into a written contract with the owner or
lessor of the location at which the instant bingo is conducted to allow the owner or lessor to assist in the
conduct of instant bingo other than at a bingo session, identify each location where the instant bingo
other than at a bingo session is being conducted, and identify the owner or lessor of each location.
(2) A charitable instant bingo organization that conducts instant bingo other than at a bingo
session is not required to enter into a written contract with the owner or lessor of the location at which
the instant bingo is conducted provided that the owner or lessor is not assisting in the conduct of the
instant bingo other than at a bingo session and provided that the conduct of the instant bingo other than
at a bingo session at that location is not more than five days per calendar year and not more than ten
hours per day.
(C) Except as provided in division (F) of this section, no charitable instant bingo organization shall
conduct instant bingo other than at a bingo session at a location where the primary source of retail
income from all commercial activity at that location is the sale of instant bingo tickets.
(D) (1) The owner or lessor of a location that enters into a contract pursuant to division (B) of this
section shall pay the full gross profit to the charitable instant bingo organization, in return for the deal
of instant bingo tickets. The owner or lessor may retain the money that the owner or lessor receives for
selling the instant bingo tickets; provided, however, that after the deal has been sold, the owner or lessor
shall pay to the charitable instant bingo organization the value of any unredeemed instant bingo prizes
remaining in the deal of instant bingo tickets.
(2) The charitable instant bingo organization shall pay 6% of the total gross receipts of any deal
of instant bingo tickets for the purpose of reimbursing the owner or lessor for expenses described in this
division (D).
184 Madeira - General Offenses
(3) As used in this division (D)(3), EXPENSES means those items provided for in R.C.
§§ 2915.01(GG)(4), (GG)(5), (GG)(6), (GG)(7), (GG)(8), (GG)(12) and (GG)(13) and that percentage
of the owner’s or lessor’s rent for the location where instant bingo is conducted. Expenses, in the
aggregate, shall not exceed 6% of the total gross receipts of any deal of instant bingo tickets.
(4) As used in this division (D)(4), FULL GROSS PROFIT means the amount by which the
total receipts of all instant bingo tickets, if the deal has been sold in full, exceeds the amount that would
be paid out if all prizes were redeemed.
(E) A charitable instant bingo organization shall provide the Attorney General with all of the
following information:
(1) That the charitable instant bingo organization has terminated a contract entered into
pursuant to division (B) of this section with an owner or lessor of a location;
(2) That the charitable instant bingo organization has entered into a written contract pursuant
to division (B) of this section with a new owner or lessor of a location; and
(3) That the charitable instant bingo organization is aware of conduct by the owner or lessor
of a location at which instant bingo is conducted that is in violation of R.C. Chapter 2915.
(F) Division (C) of this section does not apply to a volunteer firefighter’s organization that is exempt
from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3), that conducts instant
bingo other than at a bingo session on the premises where the organization conducts firefighter training,
that has conducted instant bingo continuously for at least five years prior to July 1, 2003, and that,
during each of those five years, had gross receipts of at least $1,500,000.
(R.C. § 2915.093)
(G) (1) A veteran’s organization, a fraternal organization or a sporting organization authorized to
conduct a bingo session pursuant to R.C. Chapter 2915 may conduct instant bingo other than at a bingo
session if all of the following apply:
(a) The veteran’s organization, fraternal organization or sporting organization limits the
sale of instant bingo to 12 hours during any day, provided that the sale does not begin earlier than 10:00
a.m. and ends not later than 2:00 a.m.;
(b) The veteran’s organization, fraternal organization or sporting organization limits the
sale of instant bingo to its own premises and to its own members and invited guests; and
(c) The veteran’s organization, fraternal organization or sporting organization is raising
money for an organization that is described in IRC § 509(a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(3) and is either a
governmental unit or an organization that maintains its principal place of business in this state, that is
exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3), and that is
in good standing in this state and executes a written contract with that organization as required in division
(G)(2) of this section.
Gambling 185
(2) If a veteran’s organization, fraternal organization or sporting organization authorized to
conduct instant bingo pursuant to division (G)(1) of this section is raising money for another organization
that is described in IRC § 509(a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(3) and is either a governmental unit or an organization
that maintains its principal place of business in this state, that is exempt from federal income taxation
under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c), and that is in good standing in this state, the
veteran’s organization, fraternal organization or sporting organization shall execute a written contract
with the organization that is described in IRC § 509(a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(3) and is either a governmental
unit or an organization that maintains its principal place of business in this state, that is exempt from
federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c), and that is in good standing
in this state in order to conduct instant bingo. That contract shall include a statement of the percentage
of the net proceeds that the veteran’s, fraternal or sporting organization will be distributing to the
organization that is described in IRC § 509(a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(3) and is either a governmental unit or
an organization that maintains its principal place of business in this state, that is exempt from federal
income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3), and that is in good standing in
this state.
(3) (a) If a veteran’s organization, fraternal organization or sporting organization authorized
to conduct instant bingo pursuant to division (G)(1) of this section has been issued a liquor permit under
R.C. Chapter 4303, that permit may be subject to suspension, revocation or cancellation if the veteran’s
organization, fraternal organization or sporting organization violates a provision of this chapter or R.C.
Chapter 2915.
(b) No veteran’s organization, fraternal organization or sporting organization that enters
into a written contract pursuant to division (G)(2) of this section shall violate any provision of this
chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915, or permit, aid or abet any other person in violating any provision of this
chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915.
(4) A veteran’s organization, fraternal organization or sporting organization shall give all
required proceeds earned from the conduct of instant bingo to the organization with which the veteran’s
organization, fraternal organization or sporting organization has entered into a written contract.
(5) Whoever violates division (G) of this section is guilty of illegal instant bingo conduct.
Except as otherwise provided in this division (G), illegal instant bingo conduct is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of division (G) of this section,
illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.13)
(1985 Code, § 134.12)
§ 134.13 RESTRICTIONS ON OWNER OR LESSOR OF LOCATION AT INSTANT BINGO.
(A) No owner or lessor of a location shall assist a charitable instant bingo organization in the
conduct of instant bingo other than at a bingo session at that location unless the owner or lessor has
entered into a written contract, as described in R.C. § 2915.093, with the charitable instant bingo
organization to assist in the conduct of instant bingo other than at a bingo session.
186 Madeira - General Offenses
(B) The location of the lessor or owner shall be designated as a location where the charitable instant
bingo organization conducts instant bingo other than at a bingo session.
(C) No owner or lessor of a location that enters into a written contract as prescribed in division (A)
of this section shall violate any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915, or permit, aid or abet
any other person in violating any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915.
(D) No owner or lessor of a location that enters into a written contract as prescribed in division (A)
of this section shall violate the terms of the contract.
(E) (1) Whoever violates division (C) or (D) of this section is guilty of illegal instant bingo
conduct. Except as otherwise provided in this division (E), illegal instant bingo conduct is a misdemeanor
of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of division (C) or (D) of
this section, illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(2) If an owner or lessor of a location knowingly, intentionally or recklessly violates division
(C) or (D) of this section, any license that the owner or lessor holds for the retail sale of any goods on
the owner’s or lessor’s premises that is issued by the state or a political subdivision is subject to
suspension, revocation or payment of a monetary penalty at the request of the Attorney General.
(R.C. § 2915.094) (1985 Code, § 134.13)
§ 134.14 SKILL-BASED AMUSEMENT MACHINES; PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
(A) No person shall give to another person any item described in division (1), (2), (3) or (4) of the
definition for “merchandise prize” in § 134.01 in exchange for a noncash prize, toy or novelty received
as a reward for playing or operating a skill-based amusement machine or for a free or reduced-price
game won on a skill-based amusement machine.
(B) Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of skill-based amusement machine
prohibited conduct. A violation of division (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree for
each redemption of a prize that is involved in the violation. If the offender previously has been convicted
of a violation of division (A) of this section, a violation of that division is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.06) (1985 Code, § 134.14)
CHAPTER 135: OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
Section
135.01 Definitions
135.02 Negligent homicide
135.03 Vehicular homicide; vehicular manslaughter
135.04 Assault
135.05 Negligent assault
135.06 Injury of persons by hunters
135.07 Aggravated menacing
135.08 Menacing
135.09 Menacing by stalking
135.10 Unlawful restraint
135.11 Criminal child enticement
135.12 Coercion
135.13 Bigamy
135.14 Unlawful abortion
135.15 Abortion trafficking
135.16 Nonsupport of dependents
135.17 Endangering children
135.18 Interference with custody
135.19 Interference with support orders
135.20 Abusing family
135.21 Pocket picking attempt
135.22 Domestic violence
135.23 Hazing prohibited
135.24 Contributing to unruliness or delinquency of a child
135.25 Failure to provide for functionally impaired person
135.26 Patient abuse or neglect; patient endangerment; exceptions; false statements; retaliation
135.27 Violating a protection order, consent agreement, anti-stalking protection order or order
issued by a court of another state
135.28 Adulteration of food
135.29 Illegal distribution of cigarettes or other tobacco products; transaction scans
135.30 Nonsmoking areas in places of public assembly
135.31 Spreading contagion
135.32 Unlawful collection of bodily substances
187
188 Madeira - General Offenses
§ 135.01 DEFINITIONS.
(A) For the purpose of §§ 135.01 through 135.06, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ANOTHER’S UNBORN or OTHER PERSON’S UNBORN. A member of the species Homo
sapiens who is or was carried in the womb of another during a period that begins with fertilization and
that continues unless and until live birth occurs.
UNLAWFUL TERMINATION OF ANOTHER’S PREGNANCY. Causing the death of an
unborn member of the species Homo sapiens who is or was carried in the womb of another, as a result
of injuries inflicted during the period that begins with fertilization and that continues unless and until live
birth occurs.
(B) Notwithstanding division (A) of this section, in no case shall the definitions of the terms
“another’s unborn,” “other person’s unborn” and “unlawful termination of another’s pregnancy” that
are set forth in division (A) of this section be applied or construed in any of the following manners:
(1) Except as otherwise provided in this division (B)(1) of this section, in a manner so that the
offense prohibits or is construed as prohibiting any pregnant woman or her physician from performing
an abortion with the consent of the pregnant woman, with the consent of the pregnant woman implied
by law in a medical emergency, or with the approval of one otherwise authorized by law to consent to
medical treatment on behalf of the pregnant woman. An abortion that violates the conditions described
in the immediately preceding sentence may be punished as any violation of R.C. § 2903.01, 2903.02,
2903.03, 2903.04, 2903.05, 2903.06, 2903.08, 2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.14, 2903.21 or
2903.22, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, as applicable. An abortion that does not
violate the conditions described in the second immediately preceding sentence but that does violate R.C.
§ 2919.12, 2919.13(B), 2919.151, 2919.17 or 2919.18, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, may be punished as a violation of such section, as applicable; or
(2) In a manner so that the offense is applied or is construed as applying to a woman based on
an act or omission of the woman that occurs while she is or was pregnant and that results in any of the
following:
(a) Her delivery of a stillborn baby;
(b) Her causing, in any other manner, the death in utero of a viable, unborn human that
she is carrying;
(c) Her causing the death of her child who is born alive but who dies from one or more
injuries that are sustained while the child is a viable, unborn human;
Offenses Against Persons 189
(d) Her causing her child who is born alive to sustain one or more injuries while the child
is a viable, unborn human; or
(e) Her causing, threatening to cause or attempting to cause, in any other manner, an
injury, illness or other psychological illness or condition, regardless of its duration or gravity, to a
viable, unborn human that she is carrying.
(R.C. § 2903.09)
§ 135.02 NEGLIGENT HOMICIDE.
(A) No person shall negligently cause the death of another or the unlawful termination of another’s
pregnancy by means of a deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance, as defined in R.C. § 2923.11.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of negligent homicide, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2903.05) (1985 Code, § 135.01)
§ 135.03 VEHICULAR HOMICIDE; VEHICULAR MANSLAUGHTER.
(A) No person, while operating or participating in the operation of a motor vehicle, motorcycle,
snowmobile, locomotive, watercraft or aircraft, shall cause the death of another or the unlawful
termination of another’s pregnancy in any of the following ways:
(1) (a) As the proximate result of committing a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or of a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
(b) As the proximate result of committing a violation of R.C. § 1547.11(A), or of a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance; or
(c) As the proximate result of committing a violation of R.C. § 4561.15(A)(3), or of a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(2) In one of the following ways:
(a) Recklessly; or
(b) As the proximate result of committing, while operating or participating in the operation
of a motor vehicle or motorcycle in a construction zone, a reckless operation offense, provided that this
division (A) applies only if the person whose death is caused or whose pregnancy is unlawfully
terminated is in the construction zone at the time of the offender’s commission of the reckless operation
offense in the construction zone and does not apply as described in division (D) of this section.
190 Madeira - General Offenses
(3) In one of the following ways:
(a) Negligently; or
(b) As the proximate result of committing, while operating or participating in the operation
of a motor vehicle or motorcycle in a construction zone, a speeding offense, provided that this division
(A) applies only if the person whose death is caused or whose pregnancy is unlawfully terminated is in
the construction zone at the time of the offender’s commission of the speeding offense in the construction
zone and does not apply as described in division (D) of this section.
(4) As the proximate result of committing a violation of any provision of any section contained
in R.C. Title 45 that is a minor misdemeanor or of a municipal ordinance that, regardless of the penalty
set by ordinance for the violation, is substantially equivalent to any provision of any section contained
in R.C. Title 45 that is a minor misdemeanor.
(B) (1) Whoever violates division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section is guilty of aggravated vehicular
homicide, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(2) (a) Whoever violates division (A)(3) of this section is guilty of vehicular homicide. Except
as otherwise provided in this division (B), vehicular homicide is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
Vehicular homicide committed in violation of division (A)(3) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law if, at the time of the offense, the offender was driving under a suspension
or cancellation imposed under R.C. Chapter 4510 or any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code or
was operating a motor vehicle or motorcycle, did not have a valid driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident operating privilege, and was
not eligible for renewal of the offender’s driver’s license or commercial driver’s license without
examination under R.C. § 4507.10 or if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of this section or any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter or assault offense. The court
shall impose a mandatory jail term on the offender when required by division (C) of this section.
(b) In addition to any other sanctions imposed pursuant to this division (B), the court shall
impose upon the offender a class four suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident operating privilege from the
range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4) or, if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of this section or any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter or assault offense, a
class three suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in
R.C. § 4510.02(A)(3), or, if the offender previously had been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
traffic-related murder, felonious assault or attempted murder offense, a class two suspension of the
offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license or nonresident operating privilege as specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(2).
(3) (a) Whoever violates division (A)(4) of this section is guilty of vehicular manslaughter.
Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), vehicular manslaughter is a misdemeanor of the second
Offenses Against Persons 191
degree. Vehicular manslaughter is a misdemeanor of the first degree if, at the time of the offense, the
offender was driving under a suspension or cancellation imposed under R.C. Chapter 4510 or any other
provision of the Ohio Revised Code or was operating a motor vehicle or motorcycle, did not have a valid
driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license or
nonresident operating privilege, and was not eligible for renewal of the offender’s driver’s license or
commercial driver’s license without examination under R.C. § 4507.10 or if the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this section or any traffic-related homicide,
manslaughter or assault offense.
(b) In addition to any other sanctions imposed pursuant to this division (B), the court shall
impose upon the offender a class six suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident operating privilege from the
range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(6) or, if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of this section, any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter or assault offense, or a
traffic-related murder, felonious assault or attempted murder offense, a class four suspension of the
offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4).
(C) The court shall impose a mandatory prison term on an offender who is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a felony violation of this section, as provided in R.C. § 2903.06(E). The court shall impose a
mandatory jail term of at least 15 days on an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
misdemeanor violation of division (A)(3)(b) of this section and may impose upon the offender a longer
jail term as authorized pursuant to R.C. § 2929.24.
(D) Divisions (A)(2)(b) and (A)(3)(b) of this section do not apply in a particular construction zone
unless signs of the type described in R.C. § 2903.081 are erected in that construction zone in accordance
with the guidelines and design specifications established by the Director of Transportation under R.C.
§ 5501.27. The failure to erect signs of the type described in R.C. § 2903.081 in a particular
construction zone in accordance with those guidelines and design specifications does not limit or affect
the application of division (A)(1), (A)(2)(a), (A)(3)(a) or (A)(4) of this section in that construction zone
or the prosecution of any person who violates any of those divisions in that construction zone.
(E) (1) As used in this section:
CONSTRUCTION ZONE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5501.27.
MANDATORY JAIL TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
MANDATORY PRISON TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
192 Madeira - General Offenses
RECKLESS OPERATION OFFENSE. Means a violation of R.C. § 4511.20 or a
municipal ordinance substantially equivalent to R.C. § 4511.20.
SPEEDING OFFENSE. Means a violation of R.C. § 4511.21 or a municipal ordinance
pertaining to speed.
TRAFFIC-RELATED HOMICIDE, MANSLAUGHTER OR ASSAULT OFFENSE.
Means a violation of R.C. § 2903.04 in circumstances in which division (D) of that section applies, a
violation of R.C. § 2903.06 or 2903.08, or a violation of R.C. § 2903.06, 2903.07 or 2903.08 as they
existed prior to March 23, 2000.
TRAFFIC-RELATED MURDER, FELONIOUS ASSAULT OR ATTEMPTED MURDER
OFFENSE. Means a violation of R.C. § 2903.01 or R.C. § 2903.02 in circumstances in which the
offender used a motor vehicle as the means to commit the violation, a violation of R.C. § 2903.11(A)(2)
in circumstances in which the deadly weapon used in the commission of the violation is a motor vehicle,
or an attempt to commit aggravated murder or murder in violation of R.C. § 2923.02 in circumstances
in which the offender used a motor vehicle as the means to attempt to commit the aggravated murder or
murder.
(2) For the purposes of this section, when a penalty or suspension is enhanced because of a
prior or current violation of a specified law or a prior or current specified offense, the reference to the
violation of the specified law or the specified offense includes any violation of any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, former law of this state, or current or former law of this or another state
or the United States.
(R.C. § 2903.06) (1985 Code, § 135.02)
Statutory reference:
Aggravated vehicular assault, felony, see R.C. § 2903.08
Trial court to suspend driver’s license, see R.C. § 4510.05
§ 135.04 ASSAULT.
(A) No person shall knowingly cause or attempt to cause physical harm to another or to another’s
unborn.
(B) No person shall recklessly cause serious physical harm to another or to another’s unborn.
(C) Whoever violates division (A) or (B) of this section is guilty of assault. Except as provided in
R.C. § 2903.13(C), assault is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
Offenses Against Persons 193
(D) If an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to assault when it is a misdemeanor also is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a specification as described in R.C. § 2941.1423 (victim of the offense
was a woman whom the defendant knew was pregnant at the time of the offense) that was included in
the indictment, count in the indictment, or information charging the offense, the court shall sentence the
offender to a mandatory jail term as provided in R.C. § 2929.24(G).
(R.C. § 2903.13) (1985 Code, § 135.03)
Statutory reference:
Aggravated and felonious assault, see R.C. §§ 2903.11 and 2903.12
Aggravated vehicular assault, felony, see R.C. § 2903.08
Felony offenses: assaulting functionally impaired person, peace officer, investigator of the Bureau
 of Criminal Identification and Investigation, firefighter, person performing emergency medical
 service, officer or employee of a public children services agency or private child placing agency;
 assault at a correctional institution; assault on school officials and school bus drivers, see
 R.C. § 2903.13(C)
§ 135.05 NEGLIGENT ASSAULT.
(A) No person shall negligently, by means of a deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance as defined
in R.C. § 2923.11, cause physical harm to another or to another’s unborn.
(B) Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of negligent assault, a misdemeanor of
the third degree.
(R.C. § 2903.14) (1985 Code, § 135.04) (Ord. 1306, passed 6-13-1977)
§ 135.06 INJURY OF PERSONS BY HUNTERS.
(A) No person in the act of hunting, pursuing, taking or killing a wild animal shall act in a
negligent, careless or reckless manner so as to injure persons.
(R.C. § 1533.171(A))
(B) Whoever violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 1533.99(C)) (1985 Code, § 135.041)
Statutory reference:
Violation, license revocation, see R.C. § 1533.171(B) through (E)
§ 135.07 AGGRAVATED MENACING.
(A) No person shall knowingly cause another to believe that the offender will cause serious physical
harm to the person or property of the other person, such other person’s unborn or a member of such
other person’s immediate family.
194 Madeira - General Offenses
(B) Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of aggravated menacing. Except as
otherwise provided in this division (B), aggravated menacing is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
victim of the offense is an officer or employee of a public children services agency or a private child
placing agency and the offense relates to the officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated
performance of official responsibilities or duties, aggravated menacing is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law or, if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to an offense
of violence, the victim of that prior offense was an officer or employee of a public children services
agency or private child placing agency, and that prior offense related to the officer’s or employee’s
performance or anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties, a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2903.21) (1985 Code, § 135.05)
§ 135.08 MENACING.
(A) No person shall knowingly cause another to believe that the offender will cause physical harm
to the person or property of the other person, the other person’s unborn or a member of the other
person’s immediate family.
(B) Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of menacing. Except as otherwise
provided in this division (B), menacing is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the victim of the
offense is an officer or employee of a public children services agency or a private child placing agency
and the offense relates to the officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated performance of official
responsibilities or duties, menacing is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to an offense of violence, the victim of that prior offense was
an officer or employee of a public children services agency or private child placing agency, and that
prior offense related to the officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated performance of official
responsibilities or duties, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2903.22) (1985 Code, § 135.06)
§ 135.09 MENACING BY STALKING.
(A) (1) No person by engaging in a pattern of conduct shall knowingly cause another person to
believe that the offender will cause physical harm to the other person or cause mental distress to the other
person.
(2) No person, through the use of any electronic method of remotely transferring information,
including but not limited to any computer, computer network, computer program or computer system,
shall post a message with purpose to urge or incite another to commit a violation of division (C)(1)(a)
of this section.
(3) No person, with a sexual motivation, shall violate division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section.
Offenses Against Persons 195
(B) Whoever violates division (A)(1) of this section is guilty of menacing by stalking.
(1) Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2) of this section, menacing by stalking is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(2) Menacing by stalking is a felony, to be prosecuted under appropriate state law, if any of
the following applies:
(a) The offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of R.C.
§ 2903.211 or a violation of R.C. § 2911.211, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to either
of these offenses;
(b) In committing the offense under division (A)(1), (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this section, the
offender made a threat of physical harm to or against the victim, or as a result of an offense committed
under division (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this section, a third person induced by the offender’s posted message
made a threat of physical harm to or against the victim;
(c) In committing the offense under division (A)(1), (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this section, the
offender trespassed on the land or premises where the victim lives, is employed or attends school, or as
a result of an offense committed under division (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this section, a third person induced
by the offender’s posted message trespassed on the land or premises where the victim lives, is employed
or attends school;
(d) The victim of the offense is a minor;
(e) The offender has a history of violence towards the victim or any other person or a
history of other violent acts towards the victim or any other person;
(f) While committing the offense under division (A)(1) of this section or a violation of
division (A)(3) of this section based on conduct in violation of division (A)(1) of this section, the
offender had a deadly weapon on or about the offender’s person or under the offender’s control. Division
(B)(2)(f) of this section does not apply in determining the penalty for a violation of division (A)(2) of this
section or a violation of division (A)(3) of this section based on conduct in violation of division (A)(2)
of this section;
(g) At the time of the commission of the offense, the offender was the subject of a
protection order issued under R.C. § 2903.213 or R.C. § 2903.214, regardless of whether or not the
person to be protected under the order is the victim of the offense or another person;
(h) In committing the offense under division (A)(1), (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this section, the
offender caused serious physical harm to the premises at which the victim resides, to the real property
on which that premises is located, or to any personal property located on that premises, or as a result
of an offense committed under division (A)(2) of this section or an offense committed under division
196 Madeira - General Offenses
(A)(3) of this section based on a violation of division (A)(2) of this section, a third person induced by
the offender’s posted message caused serious physical harm to that premises, that real property, or any
personal property on that premises;
(i) Prior to committing the offense, the offender had been determined to represent a
substantial risk of physical harm to others as manifested by evidence of then-recent homicidal or other
violent behavior, evidence of then-recent threats that placed another in reasonable fear of violent
behavior and serious harm, or other evidence of then-present dangerousness;
(j) The victim of the offense is an officer or employee of a public children services agency
or a private child placing agency and the offense relates to the officer’s or employee’s performance or
anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties; or
(k) The offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to an offense of
violence, the victim of that prior offense was an officer or employee of a public children services agency
or private child placing agency, and that prior offense related to the officer’s or employee’s performance
or anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties.
(C) R.C. § 2919.271 applies in relation to a defendant charged with a violation of this section.
(D) As used in this section:
COMPUTER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
COMPUTER NETWORK. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
COMPUTER PROGRAM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
COMPUTER SYSTEM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
EMERGENCY FACILITY PERSON. Is the singular of “emergency facility personnel” as
defined in R.C. § 2909.04.
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSON. Is the singular of “emergency medical
services personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2133.21.
MENTAL DISTRESS. Means any of the following:
(a) Any mental illness or condition that involves some temporary substantial incapacity;
or
(b) Any mental illness or condition that would normally require psychiatric treatment,
psychological treatment or other mental health services, whether or not any person requested or received
psychiatric treatment, psychological treatment or other mental health services.
Offenses Against Persons 197
PATTERN OF CONDUCT. Means two or more actions or incidents closely related in time,
whether or not there has been a prior conviction based on any of those actions or incidents. Actions or
incidents that prevent, obstruct or delay the performance by a public official, firefighter, rescuer,
emergency medical services person or emergency facility person of any authorized act within the public
official’s, firefighter’s, rescuer’s, emergency medical services person’s or emergency facility person’s
official capacity or the posting of messages or receipt of information or data through the use of an
electronic method of remotely transferring information, including but not limited to a computer,
computer network, computer program, computer system or telecommunications device, may constitute
a PATTERN OF CONDUCT.
POST A MESSAGE. Means transferring, sending, posting, publishing, disseminating or
otherwise communicating, or attempting to transfer, send, post, publish, disseminate or otherwise
communicate, any message or information, whether truthful or untruthful, about an individual, and
whether done under one’s own name, under the name of another, or while impersonating another.
PUBLIC OFFICIAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.01.
SEXUAL MOTIVATION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2971.01.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
THIRD PERSON. Means, in relation to conduct as described in division (C)(1)(b) of this
section, an individual who is neither the offender nor the victim of the conduct.
(E) The prosecution does not need to prove in a prosecution under this section that a person
requested or received psychiatric treatment, psychological treatment or other mental health services in
order to show that the person was caused mental distress as described in division (b) of the definition for
“mental distress” in this section.
(F) (1) This section does not apply to a person solely because the person provided access or
connection to or from an electronic method of remotely transferring information not under that person’s
control, including having provided capabilities that are incidental to providing access or connection to
or from the electronic method of remotely transferring the information, and that do not include the
creation of the content of the material that is the subject of the access or connection. In addition, any
person providing access or connection to or from an electronic method of remotely transferring
information not under that person’s control shall not be liable for any action voluntarily taken in good
faith to block the receipt or transmission through its service of any information that it believes is or will
be sent in violation of this section.
(2) Division (F)(1) of this section does not create an affirmative duty for any person providing
access or connection to or from an electronic method of remotely transferring information not under that
person’s control to block the receipt or transmission through its service of any information that it believes
is or will be sent in violation of this section except as otherwise provided by law.
198 Madeira - General Offenses
(3) Division (F)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who conspires with a person
actively involved in the creation or knowing distribution of material in violation of this section or who
knowingly advertises the availability of material of that nature.
(R.C. § 2903.211) (1985 Code, § 135.061)
Statutory reference:
Conditions of bail for violators, see R.C. § 2903.212
Persons who may seek relief under anti-stalking protection order; ex parte orders, see
 R.C. § 2903.214
Protection order as pretrial condition of release, see R.C. § 2903.213
§ 135.10 UNLAWFUL RESTRAINT.
(A) No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly restrain another of the other person’s
liberty.
(B) No person, without privilege to do so and with a sexual motivation, shall knowingly restrain
another of the other person’s liberty.
(C) Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful restraint, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(D) As used in this section, SEXUAL MOTIVATION has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2971.01.
(R.C. § 2905.03) (1985 Code, § 135.07)
§ 135.11 CRIMINAL CHILD ENTICEMENT.
(A) No person, by any means and without privilege to do so, shall knowingly solicit, coax, entice
or lure any child under 14 years of age to accompany the person in any manner, including entering into
any vehicle or onto any vessel, whether or not the offender knows the age of the child, if both of the
following apply:
(1) The actor does not have the express or implied permission of the parent, guardian, or other
legal custodian of the child in undertaking the activity; and
(2) The actor is not a law enforcement officer, medic, firefighter or other person who regularly
provides emergency services, and is not an employee or agent of or a volunteer acting under the direction
of, any board of education, or the actor is any such person, but at the time the actor undertakes the
activity, the actor is not acting within the scope of the actor’s lawful duties in that capacity.
(B) No person, with a sexual motivation, shall violate division (A) of this section.
(C) No person, for any unlawful purpose other than, or in addition to, that proscribed by division
(A) of this section, shall engage in any activity described in division (A) of this section.
Offenses Against Persons 199
(D) It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A) of this section that the actor undertook
the activity in response to a bona fide emergency situation or that the actor undertook the activity in a
reasonable belief that it was necessary to preserve the health, safety, or welfare of the child.
(E) Whoever violates division (A), (B) or (C) of this section is guilty of criminal child enticement,
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this
section, a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03 or
former R.C. § 2907.12, or R.C. § 2905.01 or 2907.05 when the victim of that prior offense was under
17 years of age at the time of the offense, criminal child enticement is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(F) As used in this section:
SEXUAL MOTIVATION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2971.01.
VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
VESSEL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1547.01.
(R.C. § 2905.05)
§ 135.12 COERCION.
(A) No person, with purpose to coerce another into taking or refraining from action concerning
which he or she has a legal freedom of choice, shall do any of the following:
(1) Threaten to commit any offense;
(2) Utter or threaten any slander against any person;
(3) Expose or threaten to expose any matter tending to subject any person to hatred, contempt
or ridicule, or to damage his or her personal or business repute, or to impair his or her credit;
(4) Institute or threaten criminal proceedings against any person; or
(5) Take or withhold, or threaten to take or withhold official action, or cause or threaten to
cause official action to be taken or withheld.
(B) Divisions (A)(4) and (A)(5) of this section shall not be construed to prohibit a prosecutor or
court from doing any of the following in good faith and in the interests of justice:
(1) Offering or agreeing to grant, or granting immunity from prosecution pursuant to R.C.
§ 2945.44;
200 Madeira - General Offenses
(2) In return for a plea of guilty to one or more offenses charged or to one or more other or
lesser offenses, or in return for the testimony of the accused in a case to which he or she is not a party,
offering or agreeing to dismiss, or dismissing one or more charges pending against an accused, or
offering or agreeing to impose, or imposing a certain sentence or modification of sentence; or
(3) Imposing probation on certain conditions, including without limitation requiring the
offender to make restitution or redress to the victim of his or her offense.
(C) It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(3), (A)(4) or (A)(5) of this section
that the actor’s conduct was a reasonable response to the circumstances which occasioned it, and that his
or her purpose was limited to:
(1) Compelling another to refrain from misconduct or to desist from further misconduct;
(2) Preventing or redressing a wrong or injustice;
(3) Preventing another from taking action for which the actor reasonably believed the other
person to be disqualified; or
(4) Compelling another to take action which the actor reasonably believed the other person to
be under a duty to take.
(D) Whoever violates this section is guilty of coercion, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(E) As used in this section, THREAT includes a direct threat and a threat by innuendo.
(R.C. § 2905.12) (1985 Code, § 135.09)
§ 135.13 BIGAMY.
(A) No married person shall marry another or continue to cohabit with such other person in this
municipality.
(B) It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the actor’s spouse was
continuously absent for five years immediately preceding the purported subsequent marriage, and was
not known by the actor to be alive within that time.
(C) Whoever violates this section is guilty of bigamy, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2919.01) (1985 Code, § 135.10)
§ 135.14 UNLAWFUL ABORTION.
(A) As used in this section:
Offenses Against Persons 201
ABORTION. Means the purposeful termination of a human pregnancy by any person, including
the pregnant woman herself, with an intention other than to produce a live birth or to remove a dead
fetus or embryo.
(R.C. § 2919.11)
EMANCIPATED. A minor shall be considered emancipated if the minor has married, entered
the armed services of the United States, become employed and self-subsisting, or has otherwise become
independent from the care and control of her parent, guardian or custodian.
UNEMANCIPATED. Means a woman who is unmarried and under 18 years of age who has
not entered the armed services of the United States, has not become employed and self-subsisting, or has
not otherwise become independent from the care and control of her parent, guardian or custodian.
(B) No person shall perform or induce an abortion without the informed consent of the pregnant
woman.
(C) No person shall knowingly perform or induce an abortion upon a pregnant minor unless one
of the following is the case:
(1) The attending physician has secured the informed written consent of the minor and one
parent, guardian or custodian;
(2) The minor is emancipated and the attending physician has received her informed written
consent;
(3) The minor has been authorized to consent to the abortion by a court order issued pursuant
to R.C. § 2919.121(C) and the attending physician has received her informed written consent; or
(4) The court has given its consent in accordance with R.C. § 2919.121(C) and the minor is
having the abortion willingly.
(D) No person shall knowingly perform or induce an abortion upon a woman who is pregnant,
unmarried, under 18 years of age and unemancipated unless at least one of the circumstances enumerated
in R.C. § 2919.12(B) applies.
(E) (1) It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (D) of this section that the pregnant
woman provided the person who performed or induced the abortion with false, misleading or incorrect
information about her age, marital status or emancipation, about the age of the brother or sister to whom
she requested notice to be given as a specified relative instead of one of her parents, her guardian or her
custodian, or about the last known address of either of her parents, her guardian, her custodian or a
specified brother, sister, stepparent or grandparent to whom she requested notice be given and the person
who performed or induced the abortion did not otherwise have reasonable cause to believe the pregnant
woman was under 18 years of age, unmarried or unemancipated, to believe that the age of the brother
or sister to whom she requested notice be given as a specified relative instead of one of her parents, her
guardian or her custodian was not 21 years of age, or to believe that the last known address of either of
202 Madeira - General Offenses
her parents, her guardian, her custodian, or a specified brother, sister, stepparent or grandparent to
whom she requested notice be given was incorrect.
(2) It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that compliance with the
requirements of this section was not possible because an immediate threat of serious risk to the life or
physical health of the pregnant woman or pregnant minor from the continuation of her pregnancy created
an emergency necessitating the immediate performance or inducement of an abortion.
(F) Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful abortion. A violation of division (B), (C) or
(D) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree on the first offense and a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.
(G) Whoever violates this section is liable to the pregnant woman or pregnant minor, and her
parents, guardian or custodian for civil, compensatory and exemplary damages.
(R.C. §§ 2919.12, 2919.121)
(H) (1) Division (C) of this section applies in lieu of division (D) of this section whenever its
operation is not enjoined. If division (C) of this section is enjoined, division (D) of this section applies.
(2) If a person complies with the requirements of division (D) of this section under the good
faith belief that the application or enforcement of division (C) of this section is subject to a restraining
order or injunction, good faith compliance shall constitute a complete defense to any civil, criminal or
professional disciplinary action brought under division (C) of this section or R.C. § 2919.121.
(3) If a person complies with the requirements of division (C) of this section under the good
faith belief that it is not subject to a restraining order or injunction, good faith compliance shall constitute
a complete defense to any civil, criminal or professional disciplinary action for failure to comply with
the requirements of division (D) of this section.
(R.C. § 2919.122)
(I) Failure to perform viability testing.
(1) Except in a medical emergency that prevents compliance with this division (I), no physician
shall perform or induce or attempt to perform or induce an abortion on a pregnant woman after the
beginning of the twentieth week of gestation unless, prior to the performance or inducement of the
abortion or the attempt to perform or induce the abortion, the physician determines, in the physician’s
good faith medical judgment, that the unborn child is not viable, and the physician makes that
determination after performing a medical examination of the pregnant woman and after performing or
causing to be performed those tests for assessing gestational age, weight, lung maturity or other tests that
the physician, in that physician’s good faith medical judgment, believes are necessary to determine
whether an unborn child is viable.
(2) Except in a medical emergency that prevents compliance with this division (I), no physician
shall perform or induce or attempt to perform or induce an abortion on a pregnant woman after the
beginning of the twentieth week of gestation without first entering the determination made in division
Offenses Against Persons 203
(I)(1) of this section and the associated findings of the medical examination and tests in the medical
record of the pregnant woman.
(3) Whoever violates this division (I) is guilty of failure to perform viability testing, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(4) The State Medical Board shall suspend a physician’s license to practice medicine in this
state for a period of not less than six months if the physician violates this section.
(R.C. § 2919.18)
(1985 Code, § 135.11)
§ 135.15 ABORTION TRAFFICKING.
(A) No person shall experiment upon or sell the product of human conception which is aborted.
Experiment does not include autopsies pursuant to R.C. §§ 313.13 and 2108.50.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of abortion trafficking, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2919.14) (1985 Code, § 135.12)
§ 135.16 NONSUPPORT OF DEPENDENTS.
(A) No person shall abandon, or fail to provide adequate support to:
(1) His or her spouse, as required by law;
(2) His or her legitimate or illegitimate child who is under age 18, or mentally or physically
disabled child who is under age 21; and
(3) His or her aged or infirm parent or adoptive parent, who from lack of ability and means
is unable to provide adequately for his or her own support.
(B) No person shall abandon or fail to provide support as established by court order to another
person whom, by court order or decree, the person is legally obligated to support.
(C) No person shall aid, abet, induce, cause, encourage or contribute to a child or a ward of the
juvenile court becoming a dependent child, as defined in R.C. § 2151.04, or a neglected child, as defined
in R.C. § 2151.03.
(D) It is an affirmative defense to a charge of failure to provide adequate support under division (A)
of this section or a charge of failure to provide support established by a court order under division (B)
of this section that the accused was unable to provide adequate support or the established support, but
did provide the support that was within his or her ability and means.
204 Madeira - General Offenses
(E) It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(3) of this section that the parent
abandoned the accused, or failed to support the accused as required by law, while the accused was under
age 18, or was mentally or physically disabled and under age 21.
(F) It is not a defense to a charge under division (B) of this section that the person whom a court
has ordered the accused to support is being adequately supported by someone other than the accused.
(G) (1) Except as otherwise provided in this division (G), whoever violates division (A) or (B) of
this section is guilty of nonsupport of dependents, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (A)(2) or (B) of this section
or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or if the offender has failed to provide
support under division (A)(2) or (B) of this section for a total accumulated period of 26 weeks out of 104
consecutive weeks, whether or not the 26 weeks were consecutive, then a violation of division (A)(2)
or (B) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a felony violation of this section or a substantially equivalent
state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of division (A)(2) or (B) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(2) If the offender is guilty of nonsupport of dependents by reason of failing to provide support
to his or her child as required by a child support order issued on or after April 15, 1985, pursuant to
R.C. § 2151.23, 2151.231, 2151.232, 2151.33, 3105.21, 3109.05, 3111.13, 3113.04, 3113.31 or
3115.31, the court, in addition to any other sentence imposed, shall assess all court costs arising out of
the charge against the person and require the person to pay any reasonable attorney’s fees of any adverse
party other than the state, as determined by the court, that arose in relation to the charge.
(3) Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of contributing to the nonsupport of
dependents, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day of a violation of division (C) of this section is
a separate offense.
(R.C. § 2919.21) (1985 Code, § 135.13)
§ 135.17 ENDANGERING CHILDREN.
(A) No person, who is the parent, guardian, custodian, person having custody or control, or person
in loco parentis of a child under 18 years of age or a mentally or physically disabled child under 21 years
of age, shall create a substantial risk to the health or safety of the child by violating a duty of care,
protection or support. It is not a violation of a duty of care, protection or support under this division (A)
when the parent, guardian, custodian or person having custody or control of a child treats the physical
or mental illness or disability of the child by spiritual means through prayer alone, in accordance with
the tenets of a recognized religious body.
(B) No person shall do any of the following to a child under 18 years of age or a mentally or
physically disabled child under 21 years of age:
(1) Abuse the child;
Offenses Against Persons 205
(2) Torture or cruelly abuse the child;
(3) Administer corporal punishment or other physical disciplinary measure, or physically
restrain the child in a cruel manner or for a prolonged period, which punishment, discipline or restraint
is excessive under the circumstances and creates a substantial risk of serious physical harm to the child;
(4) Repeatedly administer unwarranted disciplinary measures to a child when there is a
substantial risk that such conduct, if continued, will seriously impair or retard the child’s mental health
or development;
(5) Entice, coerce, permit, encourage, compel, hire, employ, use or allow the child to act,
model, or in any other way participate in, or be photographed for, the production, presentation,
dissemination or advertisement of any material or performance that the offender knows or reasonably
should know is obscene, is sexually oriented matter or is nudity-oriented matter; or
(6) Allow the child to be on the same parcel of real property and within 100 feet of, or, in the
case of more than one housing unit on the same parcel of real property, in the same housing unit and
within 100 feet of, any act in violation of R.C. § 2925.04 or 2925.041 when the person knows that the
act is occurring, whether or not any person is prosecuted for or convicted of the violation of R.C.
§ 2925.04 or 2925.041 that is the basis of the violation of this division (B).
(C) (1) No person shall operate a vehicle, as defined by R.C. § 4511.01, within the municipality
and in violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, when one or
more children under 18 years of age are in the vehicle. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a
person may be convicted at the same trial or proceeding of a violation of this division (C) and a violation
of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that constitutes the basis of the
charge of the violation of this division (C). For purposes of R.C. §§ 4511.191 through 4511.197 and
all related provisions of law, a person arrested for a violation of this division (C) shall be considered to
be under arrest for operating a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a
combination of them or for operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled
substance or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath
or urine.
(2) As used in division (C)(1) of this section:
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
(D) (1) Division (B)(5) of this section does not apply to any material or performance that is
produced, presented or disseminated for a bona fide medical, scientific, educational, religious,
governmental, judicial or other proper purpose, by or to a physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist,
teacher, person pursuing bona fide studies for research, librarian, member of the clergy, prosecutor,
judge or other person having a proper interest in the material or performance.
206 Madeira - General Offenses
(2) Mistake of age is not a defense to a charge under division (B)(5) of this section.
(3) In a prosecution under division (B)(5) of this section, the trier of fact may infer that an
actor, model or participant in the material or performance involved is a juvenile if the material or
performance, through its title, text, visual representation or otherwise, represents or depicts the actor,
model or participant as a juvenile.
(4) As used in this division (D) and division (B)(5) of this section:
MATERIAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.01.
NUDITY-ORIENTED MATTER. Means any material or performance that shows a minor
in a state of nudity and that, taken as a whole by the average person applying contemporary community
standards, appeals to the prurient interest.
OBSCENE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.01.
PERFORMANCE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.01.
SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.01.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED MATTER. Means any material or performance that shows a
minor participating or engaging in sexual activity, masturbation or bestiality.
(E) Whoever violates this section is guilty of endangering children.
(1) If the offender violates division (A) or (B)(1) of this section, endangering children is one
of the following:
(a) Except as otherwise provided in division (E)(1)(b), (E)(1)(c) or (E)(1)(d), a
misdemeanor of the first degree;
(b) If the offender previously has been convicted of an offense under this section or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or of any offense involving neglect,
abandonment or contributing to the delinquency of or physical abuse of a child, except as otherwise
provided in division (E)(1)(c) or (E)(1)(d) of this section, endangering children is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law;
(c) If the violation is a violation of division (A) of this section and results in serious
physical harm to the child involved, endangering children is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law; or
(d) If the violation is a violation of division (B)(1) of this section and results in serious
physical harm to the child involved, endangering children is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
Offenses Against Persons 207
(2) If the offender violates division (B)(2), (B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(5) or (B)(6) of this section,
endangering children is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(3) If the offender violates division (C) of this section, the offender shall be punished as
follows:
(a) Except as provided in (E)(3)(b) or (E)(3)(c), endangering children in violation of
division (C) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree;
(b) If the violation results in serious physical harm to the child or if the offender previously
has been convicted of a violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, or of any offense involving neglect, abandonment or contributing to the delinquency of or
physical abuse of a child, except as otherwise provided in division (E)(3)(c) of this section, endangering
children in violation of division (C) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law;
(c) If the violation results in serious physical harm to the child and if the offender
previously has been convicted of a violation of this section, R.C. § 2903.06, 2903.08, 2919.22(C) or
former R.C. § 2903.07 as it existed prior to March 23, 2000, or R.C. § 2903.04, in a case in which the
offender was subject to the sanctions described in division (D) of that section, endangering children in
violation of division (C) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law;
(d) In addition to any term of imprisonment, fine or other sentence, penalty or sanction
it imposes upon the offender pursuant to divisions (E)(3)(a), (E)(3)(b) or (E)(3)(c) of this section or
pursuant to any other provision of law, and in addition to any suspension of the offender’s driver’s
license or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege under R.C. Chapter
4506, 4509, 4510 or 4511, or any other provision of law, the court also may impose upon the offender
a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or
nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7); and
(e) In addition to any term of imprisonment, fine or other sentence, penalty or sanction
imposed upon the offender pursuant to division (E)(3)(a), (E)(3)(b), (E)(3)(c) or (E)(3)(d) of this section
or pursuant to any other provision of law for the violation of division (C) of this section, if as a part of
the same trial or proceeding the offender also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a separate charge
charging the violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that was
the basis of the charge of the violation of division (C) of this section, the offender also shall be sentenced
in accordance with R.C. § 4511.19, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, for that violation
of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(F) (1) If a person violates division (C) of this section and if, at the time of the violation, there
were two or more children under 18 years of age in the motor vehicle involved in the violation, the
offender may be convicted of a violation of division (C) of this section for each of the children, but the
court may sentence the offender for only one of the violations.
208 Madeira - General Offenses
(2) (a) If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of division (C) of this section
but the person is not also convicted of and does not also plead guilty to a separate charge of violating
R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the basis of the charge
of the violation of division (C) of this section, both the following apply:
1. For purposes of the provisions of R.C. § 4511.19, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, that set forth the penalties and sanctions for a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the conviction of or plea of guilty to the violation of
division (C) of this section shall not constitute a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance; and
2. For purposes of the provisions of law that refers to a conviction of or plea of guilty
to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and that is not
described in division (F)(2)(a)1. of this section, the conviction of or plea of guilty to the violation of
division (C) of this section shall constitute a conviction or plea of guilty to a violation of R.C.
§ 4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(b) If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of division (C) of this section
and the person also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a separate charge of violating R.C. § 4511.19(A),
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the basis of the charge of the violation of
division (C) of this section, the conviction of or plea of guilty to the violation of division (C) of this
section shall not constitute, for the purposes of any provision of law that refers to a conviction of or a
plea of guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, a
conviction of or a plea of guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
(R.C. § 2919.22(A) - (E), (H)) (1985 Code, § 135.14)
Statutory reference:
Community service, requirements, see R.C. § 2919.22(F)
License suspension, requirements, see R.C. § 2919.22(G)
Permitting child abuse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.15
§ 135.18 INTERFERENCE WITH CUSTODY.
(A) No person, knowing that he or she is without privilege to do so or being reckless in that regard,
shall entice, take, keep or harbor a person identified in division (A)(1), (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this section
from the parent, guardian or custodian of the person identified in division (A)(1), (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this
section:
(1) A child under the age of 18, or a mentally or physically disabled child under the age of 21;
(2) A person committed by law to an institution for delinquent, unruly, neglected, abused or
dependent children; and
Offenses Against Persons 209
(3) A person committed by law to an institution for the mentally ill or mentally disabled.
(B) No person shall aid, abet, induce, cause or encourage a child or a ward of the juvenile court
who has been committed to the custody of any person, department or public or private institution to leave
the custody of that person, department or institution without legal consent.
(C) It is an affirmative defense to a charge of enticing or taking under division (A)(1) of this section
that the actor reasonably believed that his or her conduct was necessary to preserve the child’s health or
safety. It is an affirmative defense to a charge of keeping or harboring under division (A) of this section
that the actor in good faith gave notice to law enforcement or judicial authorities within a reasonable time
after the child or committed person came under his or her shelter, protection or influence.
(D) Whoever violates this section is guilty of interference with custody.
(1) Except as otherwise provided in this division (D)(1), a violation of division (A)(1) above
is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the child who is the subject of a violation of division (A)(1) is
removed from the state or if the offender previously has been convicted of an offense under this section
or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of division (A)(1) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the child who is the subject of a
violation of division (A)(1) suffers physical harm as a result of the violation, a violation of division
(A)(1) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(2) A violation of division (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(3) A violation of division (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day
of a violation of division (B) is a separate offense.
(R.C. § 2919.23) (1985 Code, § 135.15)
§ 135.19 INTERFERENCE WITH SUPPORT ORDERS.
(A) No person, by using physical harassment or threats of violence against another person, shall
interfere with the other person’s initiation or continuance of, or attempt to prevent the other person from
initiating or continuing, an action to issue or modify a support order under R.C. Chapter 3115, or under
R.C. § 2151.23, 2151.231, 2151.232, 2151.33, 2151.36, 2151.361, 2151.49, 3105.18, 3105.21,
3109.05, 3109.19, 3111.13, 3113.04, 3113.07 or 3113.31.
(B) Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of interfering with an action to issue or
modify a support order, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this division (A) or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, or R.C. § 3111.19, interfering with an action to issue or modify a support order is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2919.231) (1985 Code, § 135.151)
210 Madeira - General Offenses
§ 135.20 ABUSING FAMILY.
Whoever abuses his or her family shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor on the first offense, and
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree for each subsequent offense. For the purpose of enforcing
the provisions of this section, it shall be lawful for the police to enter any house to arrest any person
violating the same.
(1985 Code, § 135.16) (Ord. 1169, passed 6-10-1974; Ord. 1306, passed 6-13-1977)
§ 135.21 POCKET PICKING ATTEMPT.
Any person who otherwise then by force or violence, or by putting in fear, attempts to steal and take
from the person of another anything of value, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(1985 Code, § 135.17) (Ord. 1169, passed 6-10-1974; Ord. 1306, passed 6-13-1977)
§ 135.22 DOMESTIC VIOLENCE.
(A) No person shall knowingly cause or attempt to cause physical harm to a family or household
member.
(B) No person shall recklessly cause serious physical harm to a family or household member.
(C) No person, by threat of force, shall knowingly cause a family or household member to believe
that the offender will cause imminent physical harm to the family or household member.
(D) (1) Whoever violates this section is guilty of domestic violence, and the court shall sentence
the offender as provided in divisions (D)(2) to (D)(5) of this section.
(2) Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3), (D)(4) or (D)(5) of this section, a violation
of division (C) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree and a violation of division (A) or
(B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(3) Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(4) of this section, if the offender previously
has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of domestic violence, a violation of an existing or former
municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or the United States that is substantially equivalent
to domestic violence, a violation of R.C. § 2903.14, 2909.06, 2909.07, 2911.12, 2911.211 or 2919.22
if the victim of the violation was a family or household member at the time of the violation, a violation
of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or the United States that
is substantially equivalent to any of those sections if the victim of the violation was a family or household
member at the time of the commission of the violation, or any offense of violence if the victim of the
offense was a family or household member at the time of the commission of the offense, a violation of
division (A) or (B) is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law, and a violation of division
(C) is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
Offenses Against Persons 211
(4) If the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of two or more offenses
of domestic violence or two or more violations or offenses of the type described in division (D)(3) of this
section involving a person who was a family or household member at the time of the violations or
offenses, a violation of division (A) or (B) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law, and a violation of division (C) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(5) Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3) or (D)(4) of this section, if the offender
knew that the victim of the violation was pregnant at the time of the violation, a violation of division (A)
or (B) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law, and a violation of division
(C) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(E) Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no court or unit of state or local
government shall charge any fee, cost, deposit or money in connection with the filing of charges against
a person alleging that the person violated this section or a municipal ordinance substantially equivalent
to this section or in connection with the prosecution of any charges so filed.
(F) As used in this section:
FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Means any of the following:
(a) Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the offender:
1. A spouse, a person living as a spouse as defined below, or a former spouse of the
offender;
2. A parent, a foster parent or a child of the offender, or another person related by
consanguinity or affinity to the offender; or
3. A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the
offender, or another person related by consanguinity or affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse
or former spouse of the offender.
(b) The natural parent of any child of whom the offender is the other natural parent or is
the putative other natural parent.
PERSON LIVING AS A SPOUSE. Means a person who is living or has lived with the
offender in a common law marital relationship, who otherwise is cohabiting with the offender, or who
otherwise has cohabited with the offender within five years prior to the date of the alleged commission
of the act in question.
(R.C. § 2919.25)
Statutory reference:
Temporary protection orders, see R.C. § 2919.26
Violation of protection order or consent agreement, factors to consider, bail, see R.C. § 2919.251
212 Madeira - General Offenses
§ 135.23 HAZING PROHIBITED.
(A) As used in this section, HAZING means doing any act or coercing another, including the victim,
to do any act of initiation into any student or other organization that causes or creates a substantial risk
of causing mental or physical harm to any person.
(B) (1) No person shall recklessly participate in the hazing of another.
(2) No administrator, employee or faculty member of any primary, secondary or
post-secondary school or of any other educational institution, public or private, shall recklessly permit
the hazing of any person.
(C) Whoever violates this section is guilty of hazing, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 2903.31)
Statutory reference:
Civil liability for hazing, see R.C. § 2307.44
§ 135.24 CONTRIBUTING TO UNRULINESS OR DELINQUENCY OF A CHILD.
(A) No person, including a parent, guardian or other custodian of a child, shall do any of the
following:
(1) Aid, abet, induce, cause, encourage or contribute to a child or a ward of the juvenile court
becoming an unruly child, as defined in R.C. § 2151.022, or a delinquent child, as defined in R.C.
§ 2152.02;
(2) Act in a way tending to cause a child or a ward of the juvenile court to become an unruly
child, as defined in R.C. § 2151.022, or a delinquent child, as defined in R.C. § 2152.02; or
(3) If the person is the parent, guardian or custodian of a child who has the duties under R.C.
Chapters 2152 and 2950 to register, register a new residence address and periodically verify a residence
address, and, if applicable, to send a notice of intent to reside, and if the child is not emancipated, as
defined in R.C. § 2919.121, fail to ensure that the child complies with those duties under R.C. Chapters
2152 and 2950.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of contributing to the unruliness or delinquency of a
child, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day of a violation of this section is a separate offense.
(R.C. § 2919.24)
Statutory reference:
Failure to send child to school, see R.C. § 3321.38
Offenses Against Persons 213
§ 135.25 FAILURE TO PROVIDE FOR FUNCTIONALLY IMPAIRED PERSON.
(A) No caretaker shall knowingly fail to provide a functionally impaired person under his or her
care with any treatment, care, goods or service that is necessary to maintain the health or safety of the
functionally impaired person when this failure results in physical harm or serious physical harm to the
functionally impaired person.
(B) No caretaker shall recklessly fail to provide a functionally impaired person under his or her care
with any treatment, care, goods or service that is necessary to maintain the health or safety of the
functionally impaired person when this failure results in serious physical harm to the functionally
impaired person.
(C) (1) Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of knowingly failing to provide for
a functionally impaired person, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the functionally impaired person
under the offender’s care suffers serious physical harm as a result of the violation of this section, a
violation of division (A) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(2) Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of recklessly failing to provide for
a functionally impaired person, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the functionally impaired person
under the offender’s care suffers serious physical harm as a result of the violation of this section, a
violation of division (B) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2903.16)
(D) As used in this section:
CARETAKER. Means a person who assumes the duty to provide for the care and protection
of a functionally impaired person on a voluntary basis, by contract, through receipt of payment for care
and protection, as a result of a family relationship, or by order of a court of competent jurisdiction. The
term does not include a person who owns, operates or administers, or who is an agent or employee of,
a care facility, as defined in R.C. § 2903.33.
FUNCTIONALLY IMPAIRED PERSON. Means any person who has a physical or mental
impairment that prevents the person from providing for his or her own care or protection or whose
infirmities caused by aging prevent the person from providing for his or her own care or protection.
(R.C. § 2903.10)
§ 135.26 PATIENT ABUSE OR NEGLECT; PATIENT ENDANGERMENT; EXCEPTIONS;
FALSE STATEMENTS; RETALIATION.
(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
214 Madeira - General Offenses
ABUSE. Means knowingly causing physical harm or recklessly causing serious physical harm
to a person by physical contact with the person or by the inappropriate use of a physical or chemical
restraint, medication or isolation on the person.
CARE FACILITY. Means any of the following:
(a) Any “home” as defined in R.C. § 3721.10;
(b) Any “residential facility” as defined in R.C. § 5119.34 or 5123.19;
(c) Any institution or facility operated or provided by the Department of Mental Health
and Addiction Services or by the Department of Developmental Disabilities pursuant to R.C. §§ 5119.14
and 5123.03;
(d) Any unit of any hospital, as defined in R.C. § 3701.01, that provided the same services
as a nursing home, as defined in R.C. § 3721.01; or
(e) Any institution, residence or facility that provides, for a period of more than 24 hours,
whether for consideration or not, accommodations to one individual or two unrelated individuals who
are dependent upon the services of others.
GROSS NEGLECT. Means knowingly failing to provide a person with any treatment, care,
goods or service that is necessary to maintain the health or safety of the person when the failure results
in serious physical harm to the person.
INAPPROPRIATE USE OF A PHYSICAL OR CHEMICAL RESTRAINT, MEDICATION
OR ISOLATION. Means the use of physical or chemical restraint, medication or isolation as
punishment, for staff convenience, excessively, as a substitute for treatment, or in quantities that
preclude habilitation and treatment.
NEGLECT. Means recklessly failing to provide a person with any treatment, care, goods or
service that is necessary to maintain the health or safety of the person when the failure results in serious
physical harm to the person.
(R.C. § 2903.33)
(B) Patient abuse or neglect; spiritual treatment; defense.
(1) No person who owns, operates or administers, or who is an agent or employee of a care
facility shall do any of the following:
(a) Commit abuse against a resident or patient of the facility;
(b) Commit gross neglect against a resident or patient of the facility; or
(c) Commit neglect against a resident or patient of the facility.
Offenses Against Persons 215
(2) (a) A person who relies upon treatment by spiritual means through prayer alone, in
accordance with the tenets of a recognized religious denomination, shall not be considered neglectful
under division (B)(1)(c) of this section for that reason alone.
(b) It is an affirmative defense to a charge of gross neglect or neglect under this section
that the actor’s conduct was committed in good faith solely because the actor was ordered to commit the
conduct by a person with supervisory authority over the actor.
(3) (a) Whoever violates division (B)(1)(a) is guilty of patient abuse, a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
(b) Whoever violates division (B)(1)(b) is guilty of gross patient neglect, a misdemeanor
of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of, or pleaded guilty to, any violation
of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, gross patient neglect is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(c) Whoever violates division (B)(1)(c) is guilty of patient neglect, a misdemeanor of the
second degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of, or pleaded guilty to, any violation of
this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, gross patient neglect is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2903.34)
(C) Patient endangerment; spiritual treatment; defense.
(1) As used in division (C) of this section:
DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED PERSON. Has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 5123.01.
MENTALLY RETARDED PERSON. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5123.01.
MR/DD CARETAKER. Means any MR/DD employee or any person who assumes the duty
to provide for the care and protection of a mentally retarded person or a developmentally disabled person
on a voluntary basis, by contract, through receipt of payment for care and protection, as a result of a
family relationship, or by order of a court of competent jurisdiction. The term includes a person who
is an employee of a care facility and a person who is an employee of an entity under contract with a
provider. The term does not include a person who owns, operates, or administers a care facility or who
is an agent of a care facility unless that person also personally provides care to persons with mental
retardation or a developmental disability.
MR/DD EMPLOYEE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5123.50.
(2) No MR/DD caretaker shall create a substantial risk to the health or safety of a mentally
retarded person or a developmentally disabled person. An MR/DD caretaker does not create a substantial
risk to the health or safety of a mentally retarded person or a developmentally disabled person under this
216 Madeira - General Offenses
division when the MR/DD caretaker treats a physical or mental illness or defect of the mentally retarded
person or developmentally disabled person by spiritual means through prayer alone, in accordance with
the tenets of a recognized religious body.
(3) No person who owns, operates or administers a care facility or who is an agent of a care
facility shall condone, or knowingly permit, any conduct by an MR/DD caretaker who is employed by
or under the control of the owner, operator, administrator or agent that is in violation of division (C)(2)
of this section and that involves a mentally retarded person or a developmentally disabled person who
is under the care of the owner, operator, administrator or agent. A person who relies upon treatment by
spiritual means through prayer alone, in accordance with the tenets of a recognized religious
denomination, shall not be considered endangered under this division for that reason alone.
(4) (a) It is an affirmative defense to a charge of a violation of division (C)(2) or (C)(3) of this
section that the actor’s conduct was committed in good faith solely because the actor was ordered to
commit the conduct by a person to whom one of the following applies:
1. The person has supervisory authority over the actor; or
2. The person has authority over the actor’s conduct pursuant to a contract for the
provision of services.
(b) It is an affirmative defense to a charge of a violation of division (C)(3) of this section
that the person who owns, operates, or administers a care facility or who is an agent of a care facility
and who is charged with the violation is following the individual service plan for the involved mentally
retarded person or a developmentally disabled person or that the admission, discharge, and transfer rule
set forth in the Ohio Administrative Code is being followed.
(c) It is an affirmative defense to a charge of a violation of division (C)(3) of this section
that the actor did not have readily available a means to prevent either the harm to the person with mental
retardation or a developmental disability or the death of such a person and the actor took reasonable steps
to summon aid.
(5) (a) Except as provided in division (C)(5)(b) or (C)(5)(c) of this section, whoever violates
division (C)(2) or (C)(3) of this section is guilty of patient endangerment, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(b) If the offender previously has been convicted of, or pleaded guilty to, a violation of
this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, patient endangerment is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(c) If the violation results in serious physical harm to the person with mental retardation
or a developmental disability, patient endangerment is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
(R.C. § 2903.341)
Offenses Against Persons 217
(D) False statements.
(1) No person shall knowingly make a false statement, or knowingly swear or affirm the truth
of a false statement previously made, alleging a violation of division (B) of this section when the
statement is made with purpose to incriminate another.
(2) Whoever violates this division (D) is guilty of filing a false patient abuse or neglect
complaint, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2903.35)
(E) Retaliation against person reporting patient abuse or neglect. No care facility shall discharge
or in any manner discriminate or retaliate against any person solely because such person, in good faith,
filed a complaint, affidavit, or other document alleging a violation of division (B) of this section or a
violation of R.C. § 2903.34.
(R.C. § 2903.36)
Statutory reference:
License revocation for felony violations, see R.C. § 2903.37
§ 135.27 VIOLATING A PROTECTION ORDER, CONSENT AGREEMENT,
ANTI-STALKING PROTECTION ORDER OR ORDER ISSUED BY A COURT OF
ANOTHER STATE.
(A) No person shall recklessly violate the terms of any of the following:
(1) A protection order issued or consent agreement approved pursuant to R.C. § 2919.26 or
R.C. § 3113.31;
(2) A protection order issued pursuant to R.C. § 2151.34, 2903.213 or 2903.214; or
(3) A protection order issued by a court of another state.
(B) (1) Whoever violates this section is guilty of violating a protection order.
(2) Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(3) or (B)(4) of this section, violating a
protection order is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(3) If the offender previously has been convicted of, pleaded guilty to or been adjudicated a
delinquent child for a violation of a protection order issued pursuant to R.C. § 2151.34, 2903.213 or
2903.214, two or more violations of R.C. § 2903.21, 2903.211, 2903.22 or 2911.211, or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, that involved the same person who is the subject of the
protection order or consent agreement, or one or more violations of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, violating a protection order is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
218 Madeira - General Offenses
(4) If the offender violates a protection order or consent agreement while committing a felony
offense, violating a protection order is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(5) If the protection order violated by the offender was an order issued pursuant to R.C.
§ 2151.34 or 2903.214 that required electronic monitoring of the offender pursuant to that section, the
court may require in addition to any other sentence imposed upon the offender that the offender be
electronically monitored for a period not exceeding five years by a law enforcement agency designated
by the court. If the court requires under this division (B) that the offender be electronically monitored,
unless the court determines that the offender is indigent, the court shall order that the offender pay the
costs of the installation of the electronic monitoring device and the cost of monitoring the electronic
monitoring device. If the court determines that the offender is indigent and subject to the maximum
amount allowable and the rules promulgated by the Attorney General under R.C. § 2903.214, the costs
of the installation of the electronic monitoring device and the cost of monitoring the electronic
monitoring device may be paid out of funds from the Reparations Fund created pursuant to R.C.
§ 2743.191. The total amount paid from the Reparations Fund created pursuant to R.C. § 2743.191 for
electronic monitoring under R.C. §§ 2151.34, 2903.214 and 2919.27 shall not exceed $300,000 per
year.
(C) It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(3) of this section that the protection
order issued by a court of another state does not comply with the requirements specified in 18 U.S.C.
§ 2265(b) for a protection order that must be accorded full faith and credit by a court of this state or that
it is not entitled to full faith and credit under 18 U.S.C. § 2265(c).
(D) As used in this section, PROTECTION ORDER ISSUED BY A COURT OF ANOTHER
STATE means an injunction or another order issued by a criminal court of another state for the purpose
of preventing violent or threatening acts or harassment against, contact or communication with, or
physical proximity to another person including a temporary order, and means an injunction or order of
that nature issued by a civil court of another state, including a temporary order and a final order issued
in an independent action or as a pendente lite order in a proceeding for other relief, if the court issued
it in response to a complaint, petition or motion filed by or on behalf of a person seeking protection. The
term does not include an order for support or for custody of a child issued pursuant to the divorce and
child custody laws of another state, except to the extent that the order for support or for custody of a
child is entitled to full faith and credit under the laws of the United States.
(R.C. § 2919.27)
§ 135.28 ADULTERATION OF FOOD.
(A) No person shall do either of the following, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that
any person may suffer physical harm or be seriously inconvenienced or annoyed thereby:
(1) Place a pin, razor blade, glass, laxative, drug of abuse or other harmful or hazardous object
or substance in any food or confection; or
Offenses Against Persons 219
(2) Furnish to any person any food or confection which has been adulterated in violation of
division (A)(1) of this section.
(R.C. § 3716.11)
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 3716.99(C))
Statutory reference:
Adulteration of food generally, see R.C. § 3715.59
§ 135.29 ILLEGAL DISTRIBUTION OF CIGARETTES OR OTHER TOBACCO
PRODUCTS; TRANSACTION SCANS.
(A) Illegal distribution of cigarettes or other tobacco products.
(1) As used in this section:
CHILD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2151.011.
CIGARETTE. Includes clove cigarettes and hand-rolled cigarettes.
DISTRIBUTE. Means to furnish, give or provide cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
papers used to roll cigarettes to the ultimate consumer of the cigarettes, other tobacco products or papers
used to roll cigarettes.
PROOF OF AGE. Means a driver’s license, a commercial driver’s license, a military
identification card, a passport or an identification card issued under R.C. §§ 4507.50 through 4507.52
that shows that a person is 18 years of age or older.
VENDING MACHINE. Has the same meaning as “Coin Machine” in R.C. § 2913.01.
(2) No manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler or retailer of cigarettes, other tobacco
products or any papers used to roll cigarettes, no agent, employee or representative of a manufacturer,
producer, distributor, wholesaler or retailer of cigarettes, other tobacco products or papers used to roll
cigarettes, and no other person shall do any of the following:
(a) Give, sell or otherwise distribute cigarettes, other tobacco products or papers used to
roll cigarettes to any child;
(b) Give away, sell or distribute cigarettes, other tobacco products or papers used to roll
cigarettes in any place that does not have posted in a conspicuous place a sign stating that giving, selling
or otherwise distributing cigarettes, other tobacco products or papers used to roll cigarettes to a person
under 18 years of age is prohibited by law;
220 Madeira - General Offenses
(c) Knowingly furnish any false information regarding the name, age or other identification
of any child with purpose to obtain cigarettes, other tobacco products or papers used to roll cigarettes
for that child;
(d) Manufacture, sell or distribute in this state any pack or other container of cigarettes
containing fewer than 20 cigarettes or any package of roll-your-own tobacco containing less that
six-tenths of one ounce of tobacco; or
(e) Sell cigarettes in a smaller quantity than that placed in the pack or other container by
the manufacturer.
(3) No person shall sell or offer to sell cigarettes or other tobacco products by or from a
vending machine except in the following locations:
(a) An area within a factory, business, office or other place not open to the general public;
(b) An area to which children are not generally permitted access; and
(c) Any other place not identified in division (A)(3)(a) or (A)(3)(b) of this section, upon
all of the following conditions:
1. The vending machine is located within the immediate vicinity, plain view and
control of the person who owns or operates the place, or an employee of that person, so that all cigarettes
and other tobacco product purchases from the vending machine will be readily observed by the person
who owns or operates the place, or an employee of that person. For the purpose of this section, a
vending machine located in any unmonitored area, including an unmonitored coatroom, restroom,
hallway or outer waiting area shall not be considered located within the immediate vicinity, plain view
and control of the person who owns or operates the place, or an employee of that person; and
2. The vending machine is inaccessible to the public when the place is closed.
(4) The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under division (A)(2)(a) of this section:
(a) The child was accompanied by a parent, spouse who is 18 years of age or older or legal
guardian of the child; and
(b) The person who gave, sold or distributed cigarettes, other tobacco products or papers
used to roll cigarettes to a child under division (A)(2)(a) of this section is a parent, spouse who is 18
years of age or older or legal guardian of the child.
(5) It is not a violation of division (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(b) of this section for a person to give or
otherwise distribute to a child cigarettes, other tobacco products or papers used to roll cigarettes while
the child is participating in a research protocol if all of the following apply:
Offenses Against Persons 221
(a) The parent, guardian or legal custodian of the child has consented in writing to the
child participating in the research protocol;
(b) An institutional human subjects protection review board, or an equivalent entity, has
approved of the research protocol; and
(c) The child is participating in the research protocol at the facility or location specified
in the research protocol.
(6) (a) Whoever violates division (A)(2)(a), (A)(2)(b), (A)(2)(d) or (A)(2)(e) or (A)(3) of this
section is guilty of illegal distribution of cigarettes or other tobacco products, a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of division (A)(2)(a),
(A)(2)(b), (A)(2)(d), (A)(2)(e) or (A)(3) of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, illegal distribution of cigarettes or other tobacco products is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
(b) Whoever violates division (A)(2)(c) of this section is guilty of permitting children to
use cigarettes or other tobacco products, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the offender previously
has been convicted of a violation of division (A)(2)(c) or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, permitting children to use cigarettes or other tobacco products is a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(7) Any cigarettes, other tobacco products or papers used to roll cigarettes that are given, sold
or otherwise distributed to a child in violation of this division (A) and that are used, possessed, purchased
or received by a child in violation of R.C. § 2151.87 are subject to seizure and forfeiture as contraband
under R.C. Chapter 2981.
(R.C. § 2927.02)
(B) Tobacco product transaction scan.
(1) As used in this division (B) and division (C) of this section:
CARD HOLDER. Means any person who presents a driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or an identification card to a seller, or an agent or employee of a seller, to purchase or receive
cigarettes or other tobacco products from a seller, agent or employee.
IDENTIFICATION CARD. Means an identification card issued under R.C. §§ 4507.50
through 4507.52.
SELLER. Means a seller of cigarettes or other tobacco products and includes any person
whose gift of or other distribution of cigarettes or other tobacco products is subject to the prohibitions
of division (A) of this section.
TRANSACTION SCAN. Means the process by which a seller or an agent or employee of
a seller checks, by means of a transaction scan device, the validity of a driver’s or commercial driver’s
222 Madeira - General Offenses
license or an identification card that is presented as a condition for purchasing or receiving cigarettes or
other tobacco products.
TRANSACTION SCAN DEVICE. Means any commercial device or combination of
devices used at a point of sale that is capable of deciphering in an electronically readable format the
information encoded on the magnetic strip or bar code of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
an identification card.
(2) (a) A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may perform a transaction scan by means
of a transaction scan device to check the validity of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
identification card presented by a card holder as a condition for selling, giving away or otherwise
distributing to the card holder cigarettes or other tobacco products.
(b) If the information deciphered by the transaction scan performed under division (B)(2)(a)
of this section fails to match the information printed on the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
identification card presented by the card holder, or if the transaction scan indicates that the information
so printed is false or fraudulent, neither the seller nor any agent or employee of the seller shall sell, give
away or otherwise distribute any cigarettes or other tobacco products to the card holder.
(c) Division (B)(2)(a) of this section does not preclude a seller or an agent or employee
of a seller from using a transaction scan device to check the validity of a document other than a driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or identification card, if the document includes a bar code or magnetic
strip that may be scanned by the device, as a condition for selling, giving away or otherwise distributing
cigarettes or other tobacco products to the person presenting the document.
(3) Rules adopted by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles under R.C. § 4301.61(C) apply to the
use of transaction scan devices for purposes of this division (B) and division (C) of this section.
(4) (a) No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall electronically or mechanically record
or maintain any information derived from a transaction scan, except for the following:
1. The name and date of birth of the person listed on the driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or identification card presented by the card holder; or
2. The expiration date and identification number of the driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or identification card presented by the card holder.
(b) No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use the information that is derived from
a transaction scan or that is permitted to be recorded and maintained under division (B)(4)(a) of this
section, except for purposes of division (C) of this section.
(c) No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use a transaction scan device for a
purpose other than the purpose specified in division (C)(2)(a) of this section.
Offenses Against Persons 223
(d) No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall sell or otherwise disseminate the
information derived from a transaction scan to any third party, including but not limited to selling or
otherwise disseminating that information for any marketing, advertising or promotional activities, but
a seller or agent or employee of a seller may release that information pursuant to a court order or as
specifically authorized by division (C) of this section or another section of this code or the Ohio Revised
Code.
(5) Nothing in this division (B) or division (C) of this section relieves a seller or an agent or
employee of a seller of any responsibility to comply with any other applicable local, state or federal laws
or rules governing the sale, giving away or other distribution of cigarettes or other tobacco products.
(6) Whoever violates division (B)(2)(b) or (B)(4) of this section is guilty of engaging in an
illegal tobacco product transaction scan, and the court may impose upon the offender a civil penalty of
up to $1,000 for each violation. The Clerk of the court shall pay each collected civil penalty to the
County Treasurer for deposit into the county treasury.
(R.C. § 2927.021)
(C) Affirmative defenses.
(1) A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may not be found guilty of a charge of a
violation of division (A) of this section in which the age of the purchaser or other recipient of cigarettes
or other tobacco products is an element of the alleged violation, if the seller, agent or employee raises
and proves as an affirmative defense that all of the following occurred:
(a) A card holder attempting to purchase or receive cigarettes or other tobacco products
presented a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification card;
(b) A transaction scan of the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card
that the card holder presented indicated that the license or card was valid; and
(c) The cigarettes or other tobacco products were sold, given away or otherwise distributed
to the card holder in reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and the completed transaction
scan.
(2) In determining whether a seller or an agent or employee of a seller has proven the
affirmative defense provided by division (C)(1) of this section, the trier of fact in the action for the
alleged violation of division (A) of this section shall consider any written policy that the seller has
adopted and implemented and that is intended to prevent violations of division (A) of this section. For
purposes of division (C)(1)(c) of this section, the trier of fact shall consider that reasonable reliance upon
the identification presented and the completed transaction scan may require a seller or an agent or
employee of a seller to exercise reasonable diligence to determine, and that the use of a transaction scan
device does not excuse a seller or an agent or employee of a seller from exercising reasonable diligence
to determine, the following:
224 Madeira - General Offenses
(a) Whether a person to whom the seller or agent or employee of a seller sells, gives away
or otherwise distributes cigarettes or other tobacco products is 18 years of age or older; and
(b) Whether the description and picture appearing on the driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or identification card presented by a card holder is that of the card holder.
(3) In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense provided by division (C)(1) of this
section is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a Deputy Registrar who issued an identification card
under R.C. §§ 4507.50 through 4507.52 shall be permitted to submit certified copies of the records of
that issuance in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of or contractors with the Bureau of Motor
Vehicles in the action.
(R.C. § 2927.022)
(D) Shipment of tobacco products.
(1) As used in this division (D):
AUTHORIZED RECIPIENT OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS. Means a person who is:
1. Licensed as a cigarette wholesale dealer under R.C. § 5743.15;
2. Licensed as a retail dealer as long as the person purchases cigarettes with the
appropriate tax stamp affixed;
3. An export warehouse proprietor as defined in § 5702 of the Internal Revenue
Code;
4. An operator of a customs bonded warehouse under 19 U.S.C. § 1311 or 19 U.S.C.
§ 1555;
5. An officer, employee or agent of the federal government or of this state acting in
the person’s official capacity;
6. A department, agency, instrumentality or political subdivision of the federal
government or of this state; and
7. A person having a consent for consumer shipment issued by the Tax Commissioner
under R.C. § 5743.71.
MOTOR CARRIER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4923.01.
(2) The purpose of this division (D) is to prevent the sale of cigarettes to minors and to ensure
compliance with the Master Settlement Agreement, as defined in R.C. § 1346.01.
Offenses Against Persons 225
(3) (a) No person shall cause to be shipped any cigarettes to any person in this municipality
other than an authorized recipient of tobacco products.
(b) No motor carrier or other person shall knowingly transport cigarettes to any person
in this municipality that the carrier or other person reasonably believes is not an authorized recipient of
tobacco products. If cigarettes are transported to a home or residence, it shall be presumed that the motor
carrier or other person knew that the person to whom the cigarettes were delivered was not an authorized
recipient of tobacco products.
(4) No person engaged in the business of selling cigarettes who ships or causes to be shipped
cigarettes to any person in this municipality in any container or wrapping other than the original
container or wrapping of the cigarettes shall fail to plainly and visibly mark the exterior of the container
or wrapping in which the cigarettes are shipped with the words “cigarettes.”
(5) A court shall impose a fine of up to $1,000 for each violation of division (D)(3)(a),
(D)(3)(b) or (D)(4) of this section.
(R.C. § 2927.023)
§ 135.30 NONSMOKING AREAS IN PLACES OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY.
(A) As used in this section, PLACE OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY means:
(1) Enclosed theaters, except the lobby; opera houses; auditoriums; classrooms; elevators;
rooms in which persons are confined as a matter of health care, including but not limited to a hospital
room and a room in a residential care facility serving as the residence of a person living in such
residential care facility;
(2) All buildings and other enclosed structures owned by the state, its agencies or political
subdivisions, including but not limited to hospitals and state institutions for the mentally disabled and the
mentally ill; university and college buildings, except rooms within those buildings used primarily as the
residences of students or other persons affiliated with the university or college; office buildings; libraries;
museums; and vehicles used in public transportation. That portion of a building or other enclosed
structure that is owned by the state, a state agency or a political subdivision, and that is used primarily
as a food service establishment, is not a PLACE OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY; and
(3) Each portion of a building or enclosed structure that is not included in division (A)(1) or
(A)(2) of this section is a PLACE OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY if it has a seating capacity of 50 or more
persons and is available to the public. Restaurants, food service establishments, dining rooms, cafés,
cafeterias or other rooms used primarily for the service of food, as well as bowling alleys and places
licensed by the Ohio Division of Liquor Control to sell intoxicating beverages for consumption on the
premises, are not places of public assembly.
226 Madeira - General Offenses
(B) For the purpose of separating persons who smoke from persons who do not smoke for the
comfort and health of persons not smoking, in every place of public assembly there shall be an area
where smoking is not permitted, which shall be designated a no smoking area, provided that not more
than one-half of the rooms in any health care facility in which persons are confined as a matter of health
care may be designated as smoking areas in their entirety. The designation shall be made before the place
of public assembly is made available to the public. In places included in division (A)(1) of this section,
the local fire authority having jurisdiction shall designate the no smoking area. In places included in
division (A)(2) of this section that are owned by the state or its agencies, the Ohio Director of
Administrative Services shall designate the area, and if the place is owned by a political subdivision, its
legislative authority shall designate an officer who shall designate the area. In places included in division
(A)(3) of this section, the person having control of the operations of the place of public assembly shall
designate the no smoking area. In places included in division (A)(2) of this section which are also
included in division (A)(1) of this section, the officer who has authority to designate the area in places
in division (A)(2) of this section shall designate the no smoking area. A no smoking area may include
the entire place of public assembly. Designations shall be made by the placement of signs that are clearly
visible and that state “no smoking.” No person shall remove signs from areas designated as no smoking
areas.
(C) This section does not affect or modify the prohibition contained in R.C. § 3313.751(B).
(D) No person shall smoke in any area designated as a no smoking area in accordance with division
(B) of this section.
(E) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 3791.031)
§ 135.31 SPREADING CONTAGION.
(A) No person, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that he or she is suffering from a
dangerous, contagious disease, shall knowingly fail to take reasonable measures to prevent exposing
himself or herself to other persons, except when seeking medical aid.
(B) No person, having charge or care of a person whom he or she knows or has reasonable cause
to believe is suffering from a dangerous, contagious disease, shall recklessly fail to take reasonable
measures to protect others from exposure to the contagion, and to inform health authorities of the
existence of the contagion.
(C) No person, having charge of a public conveyance or place of public accommodation,
amusement, resort or trade, and knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that persons using such
conveyance or place have been or are being exposed to a dangerous, contagious disease, shall negligently
fail to take reasonable measures to protect the public from exposure to the contagion, and to inform
health authorities of the existence of the contagion.
(R.C. § 3701.81)
Offenses Against Persons 227
(D) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(R.C. § 3701.99(C))
Statutory reference:
Contagion and quarantine, see R.C. §§ 3707.04 et seq.
Power to prevent contagious diseases, see R.C. § 715.37
§ 135.32 UNLAWFUL COLLECTION OF BODILY SUBSTANCES.
(A) No person shall knowingly collect any blood, urine, tissue or other bodily substance of another
person without privilege or consent to do so.
(B) (1) Division (A) of this section does not apply to any of the following:
(a) The collection of any bodily substance of a person by a law enforcement officer, or
by another person pursuant to the direction or advice of a law enforcement officer, for purposes of a
chemical test or tests of the substance under R.C. § 1547.111(A)(1) or R.C. § 4511.191(A)(2) to
determine the alcohol, drug, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled substance or combination
content of the bodily substance; or
(b) The collection of any bodily substance of a person by a peace officer, or by another
person pursuant to the direction or advice of a peace officer, for purposes of a test or tests of the
substance as provided in R.C. § 4506.17(A) to determine the person’s alcohol concentration or the
presence of any controlled substance or metabolite of a controlled substance.
(2) Division (B)(1) of this section shall not be construed as implying that the persons identified
in divisions (B)(1)(a) and (B)(1)(b) of this section do not have privilege to collect the bodily substance
of another person as described in those divisions or as limiting the definition of “privilege” set forth in
R.C. § 2901.01.
(C) Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of unlawful collection of a bodily
substance. Except as otherwise provided in this division (C), unlawful collection of a bodily substance
is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of division (A) of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, unlawful collection of a bodily substance is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
(R.C. § 2927.15)
228 Madeira - General Offenses
CHAPTER 136: OFFENSES AGAINST JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION
Section
136.01 Definitions
136.02 Falsification
136.03 Compounding a crime
136.04 Failure to report a crime
136.05 Failure to aid a law enforcement officer
136.06 Obstructing official business
136.07 Obstructing justice
136.08 Resisting arrest
136.09 Having an unlawful interest in a public contract
136.10 Soliciting or receiving improper compensation
136.11 Dereliction of duty
136.12 Interfering with civil rights
136.13 Illegal conveyance of prohibited items onto grounds of a detention facility or mental
health or mental retardation and developmental disabilities facility
136.14 Arrest notice; failure to obey
136.15 Failure to answer summons
136.16 Reserved
136.17 Interfering with authorized persons at emergencies
136.18 Assaulting police dog or horse or assistance dog
136.19 Misuse of 9-1-1 system
136.20 Failure to disclose personal information
136.21 False report of child abuse or neglect
136.22 Disclosure of confidential peace officer information
136.23 Intimidation of crime victim or witness
136.24 Using sham legal process
136.25 Making false allegation of peace officer misconduct
§ 136.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
CAMPAIGN COMMITTEE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3517.01.
CONTRIBUTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3517.01.
229
230 Madeira - General Offenses
DETENTION. Arrest; confinement in any vehicle subsequent to an arrest; confinement in any
public or private facility for custody of persons charged with or convicted of crime in this state or
another state or under the laws of the United States or alleged or found to be a delinquent child or unruly
child in this state or another state or under the laws of the United States; hospitalization,
institutionalization or confinement in any public or private facility that is ordered pursuant to or under
the authority of R.C. § 2945.37, 2945.371, 2945.38, 2945.39, 2945.40, 2945.401 or 2945.402;
confinement in any vehicle for transportation to or from any facility of any of those natures; detention
for extradition or deportation; except as provided in this division, supervision by any employee of any
facility of any of those natures that is incidental to hospitalization, institutionalization or confinement in
the facility but that occurs outside the facility; supervision by an employee of the Department of
Rehabilitation and Correction of a person on any type of release from a state correctional institution; or
confinement in any vehicle, airplane, or place while being returned from outside of this state into this
state by a private person or entity pursuant to a contract entered into under R.C. § 311.29(E) or R.C.
§ 5149.03(B). For a person confined in a county jail who participates in a county jail industry program
pursuant to R.C. § 5147.30, the term includes time spent at an assigned work site and going to and from
the work site.
DETENTION FACILITY. Any public or private place used for the confinement of a person charged
with or convicted of any crime in this state or another state or under the laws of the United States or
alleged or found to be a delinquent child or an unruly child in this state or another state or under the laws
of the United States.
LEGISLATIVE CAMPAIGN FUND. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3517.01.
OFFICIAL PROCEEDING. Any proceeding before a legislative, judicial, administrative or other
governmental agency or official authorized to take evidence under oath, and includes any proceeding
before a referee, hearing examiner, commissioner, notary or other person taking testimony or a
deposition in connection with an official proceeding.
PARTY OFFICIAL. Any person who holds an elective or appointive post in a political party in the
United States or this state, by virtue of which he or she directs, conducts, or participates in directing or
conducting party affairs at any level of responsibility.
POLITICAL ACTION COMMITTEE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3517.01.
POLITICAL CONTRIBUTING ENTITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3517.01.
POLITICAL PARTY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3517.01.
PROVIDER AGREEMENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5164.01.
PUBLIC OFFICIAL. Any elected or appointed officer, employee, or agent of the state or any
political subdivision thereof, whether in a temporary or permanent capacity, and includes but is not
Offenses Against Justice and Administration 231
limited to legislators, judges and law enforcement officers. The term does not include an employee,
officer or governor-appointed member of the board of directors of the nonprofit corporation formed
under R.C. § 187.01.
PUBLIC SERVANT.
(1) Any of the following:
(a) Any public official;
(b) Any person performing ad hoc a governmental function, including but not limited to
a juror, member of a temporary commission, master, arbitrator, advisor or consultant; or
(c) A person who is a candidate for public office, whether or not he or she is elected or
appointed to the office for which he or she is a candidate. A person is a candidate for purposes of this
division if he or she has been nominated according to law for election or appointment to public office,
or if he or she has filed a petition or petitions as required by law to have his or her name placed on the
ballot in a primary, general, or special election, or if he or she campaigns as a write-in candidate in any
primary, general or special election.
(2) The term does not include an employee, officer or governor-appointed member of the board
of directors of the nonprofit corporation formed under R.C. § 187.01.
VALUABLE THING or VALUABLE BENEFIT. Includes but is not limited to a contribution. This
inclusion does not indicate or imply that a contribution was not included in those terms before September
17, 1986.
(R.C. § 2921.01) (1985 Code, § 136.01)
§ 136.02 FALSIFICATION.
(A) No person shall knowingly make a false statement, or knowingly swear or affirm the truth of
a false statement previously made, when any of the following applies:
(1) The statement is made in any official proceeding;
(2) The statement is made with purpose to incriminate another;
(3) The statement is made with purpose to mislead a public official in performing his or her
official function;
(4) The statement is made with purpose to secure the payment of unemployment compensation;
Ohio Works First; prevention, retention and contingency benefits and services; disability financial
232 Madeira - General Offenses
assistance; retirement benefits or health care coverage from a state retirement system; economic
development assistance as defined in R.C. § 9.66; or other benefits administered by a governmental
agency or paid out of a public treasury;
(5) The statement is made with purpose to secure the issuance by a governmental agency of a
license, permit, authorization, certificate, registration, release or provider agreement;
(6) The statement is sworn or affirmed before a notary public or another person empowered
to administer oaths;
(7) The statement is in writing on or in connection with a report or return that is required or
authorized by law;
(8) The statement is in writing, and is made with purpose to induce another to extend credit
to or employ the offender, or to confer any degree, diploma, certificate of attainment, award of
excellence or honor on the offender, or to extend to or bestow upon the offender any other valuable
benefit or distinction, when the person to whom the statement is directed relies upon it to his or her
detriment;
(9) The statement is made with purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of a theft
offense;
(10) The statement is knowingly made to a probate court in connection with any action,
proceeding or other matter within its jurisdiction, either orally or in a written document, including but
not limited to an application, petition, complaint or other pleading, or an inventory, account or report;
(11) The statement is made on an account, form, record, stamp, label or other writing that is
required by law;
(12) The statement is made in connection with the purchase of a firearm, as defined in R.C.
§ 2923.11, and in conjunction with the furnishing to the seller of the firearm of a fictitious or altered
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit, a fictitious or altered identification card, or any other
document that contains false information about the purchaser’s identity;
(13) The statement is made in a document or instrument of writing that purports to be a
judgment, lien or claim of indebtedness and is filed or recorded with the Secretary of State, a county
recorder or the clerk of a court of record;
(14) The statement is made in an application filed with a county sheriff pursuant to R.C.
§ 2923.125 in order to obtain or renew a concealed handgun license or is made in an affidavit submitted
to a county sheriff to obtain a concealed handgun license on a temporary emergency basis under R.C.
§ 2923.1213; and
Offenses Against Justice and Administration 233
(15) The statement is required under R.C. § 5743.71 in connection with the person’s purchase
of cigarettes or tobacco products in a delivery sale.
(B) No person, in connection with the purchase of a firearm as defined in R.C. § 2923.11, shall
knowingly furnish to the seller of the firearm a fictitious or altered driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or permit, a fictitious or altered identification card, or any other document that contains false
information about the purchaser’s identity.
(C) No person, in an attempt to obtain a concealed handgun license under R.C. § 2923.125, shall
knowingly present to a sheriff a fictitious or altered document that purports to be certification of the
person’s competence in handling a handgun as described in division (B)(3) of that section.
(D) It is no defense to a charge under division (A)(6) of this section that the oath or affirmation was
administered or taken in an irregular manner.
(E) If contradictory statements relating to the same fact are made by the offender within the period
of the statute of limitations for falsification, it is not necessary for the prosecution to prove which
statement was false, but only that one or the other was false.
(F) (1) Whoever violates division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), (A)(5), (A)(6), (A)(7), (A)(8),
(A)(10), (A)(11), (A)(13) or (A)(15) of this section is guilty of falsification, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(2) Whoever violates division (A)(9) of this section is guilty of falsification in a theft offense.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, falsification in a theft offense is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the value of the property or services stolen is $1,000 or more, falsification in a theft offense
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(3) Whoever violates division (A)(12) or (B) of this section is guilty of falsification to purchase
a firearm, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(4) Whoever violates division (A)(14) or (C) of this section is guilty of falsification to obtain
a concealed handgun license, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.13)
(G) (1) No person who has knowingly failed to maintain proof of financial responsibility in
accordance with R.C. § 4509.101 shall produce any document with the purpose to mislead a peace
officer upon the request of a peace officer for proof of financial responsibility made in accordance with
R.C. § 4509.101(D)(2).
(2) Whoever violates this division (G) is guilty of falsification, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4509.102) (1985 Code, § 136.02)
234 Madeira - General Offenses
§ 136.03 COMPOUNDING A CRIME.
(A) No person shall knowingly demand, accept or agree to accept anything of value in consideration
of abandoning or agreeing to abandon a pending criminal prosecution.
(B) It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section when both of the following apply:
(1) The pending prosecution involved is for a violation of R.C. § 2913.02, 2913.11,
2913.21(B)(2) or 2913.47, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, of which the actor under
this section was the victim; and
(2) The thing of value demanded, accepted or agreed to be accepted, in consideration of
abandoning or agreeing to abandon the prosecution, did not exceed an amount that the actor reasonably
believed due him or her as restitution for the loss caused him or her by the offense.
(C) When a prosecuting witness abandons or agrees to abandon a prosecution under division (B) of
this section, the abandonment or agreement in no way binds the state to abandoning the prosecution.
(D) Whoever violates this section is guilty of compounding a crime, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 2921.21) (1985 Code, § 136.03)
§ 136.04 FAILURE TO REPORT A CRIME.
(A) (1) Except as provided in division (A)(2) of this section, no person, knowing that a felony has
been or is being committed, shall knowingly fail to report the information to law enforcement authorities.
(2) No person, knowing that a violation of R.C. § 2913.04(B) has been or is being committed
or that the person has received information derived from such a violation, shall knowingly fail to report
the violation to law enforcement authorities.
(B) Except for conditions that are within the scope of division (E) of this section, no person who
is a physician, limited practitioner, nurse or other person giving aid to a sick or injured person shall
negligently fail to report to law enforcement authorities any gunshot or stab wound that the person treated
or observed, or any serious physical harm to other persons that the person knows or has reasonable cause
to believe resulted from an offense of violence.
(C) No person who discovers a body or acquires the first knowledge of the death of a person shall
fail to report the death immediately to a physician whom the person knows to be treating the deceased
for a condition from which death at that time would not be unexpected, or to a law enforcement officer,
ambulance service, emergency squad or the coroner in a political subdivision in which the body is
discovered, the death is believed to have occurred, or knowledge concerning the death is obtained.
Offenses Against Justice and Administration 235
(D) No person shall fail to provide upon request of the person to whom a report required by division
(C) of this section was made, or to any law enforcement officer who has reasonable cause to assert the
authority to investigate the circumstances surrounding the death, any facts within his or her knowledge
that may have a bearing on the investigation of the death.
(E) (1) As used in this section, BURN INJURY means any of the following:
(a) Second or third degree burns;
(b) Any burns to the upper respiratory tract or laryngeal edema due to the inhalation of
super-heated air; or
(c) Any burn injury or wound that may result in death.
(2) No physician, nurse or limited practitioner who, outside a hospital, sanitarium or other
medical facility, attends or treats a person who has sustained a burn injury inflicted by an explosion or
other incendiary device, or that shows evidence of having been inflicted in a violent, malicious or
criminal manner, shall fail to report the burn injury immediately to the local arson bureau, if there is
such a bureau in the jurisdiction in which the person is attended or treated, or otherwise to local law
enforcement authorities.
(3) No manager, superintendent or other person in charge of a hospital, sanitarium or other
medical facility in which a person is attended or treated for any burn injury inflicted by an explosion or
other incendiary device, or that shows evidence of having been inflicted in a violent, malicious or
criminal manner, shall fail to report the burn injury immediately to the local arson bureau, if there is
such a bureau in the jurisdiction in which the person is attended or treated, or otherwise to local law
enforcement authorities.
(4) No person who is required to report any burn injury under division (E)(2) or (E)(3) of this
section shall fail to file, within three working days after attending or treating the victim, a written report
of the burn injury with the office of the State Fire Marshal. The report shall be made on a form provided
by the State Fire Marshal.
(5) Anyone participating in the making of reports under division (E) of this section or anyone
participating in a judicial proceeding resulting from the reports is immune from any civil or criminal
liability that otherwise might be incurred or imposed as a result of such actions. Notwithstanding R.C.
§ 4731.22, the physician-patient relationship is not a ground for excluding evidence regarding a person’s
burn injury or the cause of the burn injury in any judicial proceeding resulting from a report submitted
pursuant to division (E) of this section.
(F) (1) Any doctor of medicine or osteopathic medicine, hospital intern or resident, registered or
licensed practical nurse, psychologist, social worker, independent social worker, social work assistant,
professional clinical counselor or professional counselor who knows or has reasonable cause to believe
that a patient or client has been the victim of domestic violence as defined in R.C. § 3113.31 shall note
that knowledge or belief and the basis for it in the patient’s or client’s records.
236 Madeira - General Offenses
(2) Notwithstanding R.C. § 4731.22, the physician-patient privilege shall not be a ground for
excluding any information regarding the report containing the knowledge or belief noted pursuant to
division (F)(1), and the information may be admitted as evidence in accordance with the Rules of
Evidence.
(G) Division (A) or (D) of this section does not require disclosure of information, when any of the
following applies.
(1) The information is privileged by reason of the relationship between attorney and client,
doctor and patient, licensed psychologist or licensed school psychologist and client, member of the clergy
or rabbi or minister or priest and any person communicating information confidentially to the member
of the clergy, rabbi, minister or priest for a religious counseling purpose in the professional character
of the member of the clergy, rabbi, minister or priest, husband and wife, or a communications assistant
and those who are a party to a telecommunications relay service call.
(2) The information would tend to incriminate a member of the actor’s immediate family.
(3) Disclosure of the information would amount to revealing a news source, privileged under
R.C. § 2739.04 or 2739.12.
(4) Disclosure of the information would amount to disclosure by a member of the ordained
clergy of an organized religious body of a confidential communication made to him or her in his or her
capacity as such by a person seeking his or her aid or counsel.
(5) Disclosure would amount to revealing information acquired by the actor in the course of
his or her duties in connection with a bona fide program of treatment or services for drug dependent
persons or persons in danger of drug dependence, which program is maintained or conducted by a
hospital, clinic, person, agency or services provider certified pursuant to R.C. § 5119.36.
(6) Disclosure would amount to revealing information acquired by the actor in the course of
his or her duties in connection with a bona fide program for providing counseling services to victims of
crimes that are violations of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.05, or to victims of felonious sexual penetration
in violation of former R.C. § 2907.12. As used in this division, COUNSELING SERVICES include
services provided in an informal setting by a person who, by education or experience, is competent to
provide such services.
(H) No disclosure of information pursuant to this section gives rise to any liability or recrimination
for a breach of privilege or confidence.
(I) Whoever violates division (A) or (B) of this section is guilty of failure to report a crime.
Violation of division (A)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Violation of division
(A)(2) or (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
Offenses Against Justice and Administration 237
(J) Whoever violates division (C) or (D) of this section is guilty of failure to report knowledge of
a death, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(K) (1) Whoever negligently violates division (E) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(2) Whoever knowingly violates division (E) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
second degree.
(R.C. § 2921.22) (1985 Code, § 136.04)
§ 136.05 FAILURE TO AID A LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
(A) No person shall negligently fail or refuse to aid a law enforcement officer, when called upon
for assistance in preventing or halting the commission of an offense, or in apprehending or detaining an
offender, when the aid can be given without a substantial risk of physical harm to the person giving it.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to aid a law enforcement officer, a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 2921.23) (1985 Code, § 136.05)
§ 136.06 OBSTRUCTING OFFICIAL BUSINESS.
(A) No person, without privilege to do so and with purpose to prevent, obstruct or delay the
performance by a public official of any authorized act within the public official’s official capacity, shall
do any act that hampers or impedes a public official in the performance of the public official’s lawful
duties.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of obstructing official business. Except as otherwise
provided in this division (B), obstructing official business is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If a
violation of this section creates a risk of physical harm to any person, obstructing official business is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.31) (1985 Code, § 136.06)
§ 136.07 OBSTRUCTING JUSTICE.
(A) No person, with purpose to hinder the discovery, apprehension, prosecution, conviction or
punishment of another for crime, or to assist another to benefit from the commission of a crime, and no
person, with purpose to hinder the discovery, apprehension, prosecution, adjudication as a delinquent
child, or disposition of a child for an act that if committed by an adult would be a crime or to assist a
child to benefit from the commission of an act that if committed by an adult would be a crime, shall do
any of the following:
(1) Harbor or conceal the other person or child;
238 Madeira - General Offenses
(2) Provide the other person or child with money, transportation, a weapon, a disguise or other
means of avoiding discovery or apprehension;
(3) Warn the other person or child of impending discovery or apprehension;
(4) Destroy or conceal physical evidence of the crime or act, or induce any person to withhold
testimony or information or to elude legal process summoning him or her to testify or supply evidence;
(5) Communicate false information to any person; or
(6) Prevent or obstruct any person, by means of force, intimidation or deception, from
performing any act to aid in the discovery, apprehension or prosecution of the other person or child.
(B) A person may be prosecuted for, and may be convicted of or adjudicated a delinquent child for
committing, a violation of division (A) of this section regardless of whether the person or child aided
ultimately is apprehended for, is charged with, is convicted of, pleads guilty to or is adjudicated a
delinquent child for committing the crime or act the person or child aided committed. The crime or act
the person or child aided committed shall be used under division (C) of this section in determining the
penalty for violation of division (A) of this section, regardless of whether the person or child aided
ultimately is apprehended for, is charge with, is convicted of, pleads guilty to, or is adjudicated a
delinquent child for committing the crime or act the person or child aided committed.
(C) Whoever violates this section is guilty of obstructing justice.
(1) If the crime committed by the person aided is a misdemeanor or if the act committed by the
child aided would be a misdemeanor if committed by an adult, obstructing justice is a misdemeanor of
the same degree as the crime committed by the person aided or a misdemeanor of the same degree that
the act committed by the child aided would be if committed by an adult.
(2) If the crime committed by the person aided is a felony or if the act committed by the child
aided would be a felony if committed by an adult, or if the crime or act committed by the person or child
aided is an act of terrorism, obstructing justice is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(D) As used in this section:
ACT OF TERRORISM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.21.
ADULT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2151.011.
CHILD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2151.011.
DELINQUENT CHILD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2152.02.
(R.C. § 2921.32) (1985 Code, § 136.07)
Offenses Against Justice and Administration 239
§ 136.08 RESISTING ARREST.
(A) No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a lawful arrest of himself, herself
or another.
(B) No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a lawful arrest of the person or
another person and, during the course of or as a result of the resistance or interference, cause physical
harm to a law enforcement officer.
(C) No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a lawful arrest of the person or
another person if either of the following applies:
(1) The offender, during the course of or as a result of the resistance or interference, recklessly
causes physical harm to a law enforcement officer by means of a deadly weapon; or
(2) The offender, during the course of the resistance or interference, brandishes a deadly
weapon.
(D) Whoever violates this section is guilty of resisting arrest. A violation of division (A) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the second degree. A violation of division (B) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. A violation of division (C) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
(E) As used in this section, DEADLY WEAPON has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2923.11.
(R.C. § 2921.33) (1985 Code, § 136.08)
§ 136.09 HAVING AN UNLAWFUL INTEREST IN A PUBLIC CONTRACT.
(A) No public official shall knowingly do any of the following:
(1) Authorize or employ the authority of the public official’s office to secure authorization of
any public contract in which the public official, a member of the public official’s family, or any of the
public official’s business associates has an interest;
(2) Authorize or employ the authority or influence of the public official’s office to secure the
investment of public funds in any share, bond, mortgage or other security with respect to which the
public official, a member of the public official’s family, or any of the public official’s business associates
either has an interest, is an underwriter or receives any brokerage, origination or servicing fees;
(3) During the public official’s term of office or within one year thereafter, occupy any position
of profit in the prosecution of a public contract authorized by the public official or by a legislative body,
commission or board of which the public official was a member at the time of authorization, unless the
contract was let by competitive bidding to the lowest and best bidder;
240 Madeira - General Offenses
(4) Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public contract entered into by or for the use
of the political subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality with which the public official is
connected; or
(5) Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public contract that is not let by competitive
bidding when required by law, and that involves more than $150.
(B) In the absence of bribery or a purpose to defraud, a public official, member of a public official’s
family, or any of a public official’s business associates shall not be considered as having an interest in
a public contract or the investment of public funds, if all of the following apply:
(1) The interest of that person is limited to owning or controlling shares of the corporation, or
being a creditor of the corporation or other organization, that is the contractor on the public contract
involved, or that is the issuer of the security in which public funds are invested;
(2) The shares owned or controlled by that person do not exceed 5% of the outstanding shares
of the corporation, and the amount due that person as creditor does not exceed 5% of the total
indebtedness of the corporation or other organization; and
(3) That person, prior to the time the public contract is entered into, files with the political
subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality involved, an affidavit giving that person’s exact
status in connection with the corporation or other organization.
(C) This section does not apply to a public contract in which a public official, member of a public
official’s family, or one of a public official’s business associates has an interest, when all of the following
apply:
(1) The subject of the public contract is necessary supplies or services for the political
subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality involved;
(2) The supplies or services are unobtainable elsewhere for the same or lower cost, or are being
furnished to the political subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality as part of a continuing
course of dealing established prior to the public official’s becoming associated with the political
subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality involved;
(3) The treatment accorded the political subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality
is either preferential to or the same as that accorded other customers or clients in similar transactions;
and
(4) The entire transaction is conducted at arm’s length, with full knowledge by the political
subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality involved, of the interest of the public official,
member of the public official’s family or business associate, and the public official takes no part in the
deliberations or decision of the political subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality with
respect to the public contract.
Offenses Against Justice and Administration 241
(D) Division (A)(4) of this section does not prohibit participation by a public employee in any
housing program funded by public monies if the public employee otherwise qualifies for the program
and does not use the authority or influence of the public employee’s office or employment to secure
benefits from the program and if the monies are to be used on the primary residence of the public
employee. Such participation does not constitute an unlawful interest in a public contract in violation of
this section.
(E) Whoever violates this section is guilty of having an unlawful interest in a public contract.
Violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law. Violation of division (A)(3), (A)(4) or (A)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(F) It is not a violation of this section for a prosecuting attorney to appoint assistants and employees
in accordance with R.C. §§ 309.06 and 2921.421, or for a chief legal officer of a municipality or an
official designated as prosecutor in a municipality to appoint assistants and employees in accordance with
R.C. §§ 733.621 and 2921.421, or for a township law director appointed under R.C. § 504.15 to appoint
assistants and employees in accordance with R.C. §§ 504.151 and 2921.421.
(G) Any public contract in which a public official, a member of the public official’s family, or any
of the public official’s business associates has an interest in violation of this section is void and
unenforceable. Any contract securing the investment of public funds in which a public official, a member
of the public official’s family, or any of the public official’s business associates has an interest, is an
underwriter, or receives any brokerage, origination or servicing fees and that was entered into in
violation of this section is void and unenforceable.
(H) As used in this section:
CHIEF LEGAL OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 733.621.
PUBLIC CONTRACT. Means any of the following:
(a) The purchase or acquisition, or a contract for the purchase or acquisition, of property
or services by or for the use of the state or any of its political subdivisions, or any agency or
instrumentality of either, including the employment of an individual by the state, any of its political
subdivisions or any agency or instrumentality of either; or
(b) A contract for the design, construction, alteration, repair or maintenance of any public
property.
(R.C. § 2921.42) (1985 Code, § 136.09)
§ 136.10 SOLICITING OR RECEIVING IMPROPER COMPENSATION.
(A) No public servant shall knowingly solicit or accept and no person shall knowingly promise or
give to a public servant either of the following:
242 Madeira - General Offenses
(1) Any compensation, other than as allowed by R.C. § 102.03(G), (H), (I) or other provisions
of law, to perform the public servant’s official duties, to perform any other act or service in the public
servant’s public capacity, for the general performance of the duties of the public servant’s public office
or public employment, or as a supplement to the public servant’s public compensation; or
(2) Additional or greater fees or costs than are allowed by law to perform the public servant’s
official duties.
(B) No public servant for the public servant’s own personal or business use and no person for the
person’s own personal or business use or for the personal or business use of a public servant or party
official, shall solicit or accept anything of value in consideration of either of the following:
(1) Appointing or securing, maintaining or renewing the appointment of any person to any
public office, employment or agency; or
(2) Preferring, or maintaining the status of, any public employee with respect to compensation,
duties, placement, location, promotion or other material aspects of employment.
(C) No person for the benefit of a political party, campaign committee, legislative campaign fund,
political action committee or political contributing entity shall coerce any contribution in consideration
of either of the following:
(1) Appointing or securing, maintaining or renewing the appointment of any person to any
public office, employment or agency; or
(2) Preferring, or maintaining the status of, any public employee with respect to compensation,
duties, placement, location, promotion or other material aspects of employment.
(D) Whoever violates this section is guilty of soliciting improper compensation, a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
(E) A public servant who is convicted of a violation of this section is disqualified from holding any
public office, employment or position of trust in this state for a period of seven years from the date of
conviction.
(F) Divisions (A), (B) and (C) of this section do not prohibit any person from making voluntary
contributions to a political party, campaign committee, legislative campaign fund, political action
committee or political contributing entity or prohibit a political party, campaign committee, legislative
campaign fund, political action committee or political contributing entity from accepting voluntary
contributions.
(R.C. § 2921.43) (1985 Code, § 136.10) (Ord. 87-44, passed 9-8-1987)
Offenses Against Justice and Administration 243
§ 136.11 DERELICTION OF DUTY.
(A) No law enforcement officer shall negligently do any of the following:
(1) Fail to serve a lawful warrant without delay; or
(2) Fail to prevent or halt the commission of an offense or to apprehend an offender, when it
is in the law enforcement officer’s power to do so alone or with available assistance.
(B) No law enforcement, ministerial or judicial officer shall negligently fail to perform a lawful duty
in a criminal case or proceeding.
(C) No officer, having charge of a detention facility, shall negligently do any of the following:
(1) Allow the detention facility to become littered or unsanitary;
(2) Fail to provide persons confined in the detention facility with adequate food, clothing,
bedding, shelter and medical attention;
(3) Fail to control an unruly prisoner, or to prevent intimidation of or physical harm to a
prisoner by another;
(4) Allow a prisoner to escape; or
(5) Fail to observe any lawful and reasonable regulation for the management of the detention
facility.
(D) No public official shall recklessly create a deficiency, incur a liability or expend a greater sum
than is appropriated by the legislative authority for the use in any one year of the department, agency
or institution with which the public official is connected.
(E) No public servant shall recklessly fail to perform a duty expressly imposed by law with respect
to the public servant’s office, or recklessly do any act expressly forbidden by law with respect to the
public servant’s office.
(F) Whoever violates this section is guilty of dereliction of duty, a misdemeanor of the second
degree.
(G) As used in this section, PUBLIC SERVANT includes an officer or employee of a contractor
as defined in R.C. § 9.08.
(R.C. § 2921.44) (1985 Code, § 136.11)
244 Madeira - General Offenses
§ 136.12 INTERFERING WITH CIVIL RIGHTS.
(A) No public servant, under color of his or her office, employment or authority, shall knowingly
deprive, conspire or attempt to deprive any person of a constitutional or statutory right.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of interfering with civil rights, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 2921.45) (1985 Code, § 136.12)
§ 136.13 ILLEGAL CONVEYANCE OF PROHIBITED ITEMS ONTO GROUNDS OF A
DETENTION FACILITY OR MENTAL HEALTH OR MENTAL RETARDATION AND
DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES FACILITY.
(A) No person shall knowingly convey, or attempt to convey, onto the grounds of a detention
facility or of an institution, office building or other place that is under the control of the Department of
Mental Health and Addiction Services, the Department of Developmental Disabilities, the Department
of Youth Services or the Department of Rehabilitation and Correction, any of the following items:
(1) Any deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance, as defined in R.C. § 2923.11, or any part of
or ammunition for use in such deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance;
(2) Any drug of abuse, as defined in R.C. § 3719.011; or
(3) Any intoxicating liquor, as defined in R.C. § 4301.01.
(B) Division (A) of this section does not apply to any person who conveys or attempts to convey
an item onto the grounds of a detention facility or of an institution, office building or other place under
the control of the Department of Mental Health and Addiction Services, the Department of
Developmental Disabilities, the Department of Youth Services or the Department of Rehabilitation and
Correction, with written authorization of the person in charge of the detention facility or the institution,
office building or other place and in accordance with the written rules of the detention facility or the
institution, office building or other place.
(C) No person shall knowingly deliver, or attempt to deliver, to any person who is confined in a
detention facility, to a child confined in a youth services facility, to a prisoner who is temporarily
released from confinement for a work assignment, or to any patient in an institution under the control
of the Department of Mental Health and Addiction Services or the Department of Developmental
Disabilities, any item listed in division (A).
(D) No person shall knowingly deliver or attempt to deliver cash to any person who is confined in
a detention facility, to a child confined in a youth services facility, or to a prisoner who is temporarily
released from confinement for a work assignment.
Offenses Against Justice and Administration 245
(E) No person shall knowingly deliver, or attempt to deliver, to any person who is confined in a
detention facility, to a child confined in a youth services facility, or to a prisoner who is temporarily
released from confinement for a work assignment a cellular telephone, two-way radio or other electronic
communications device.
(F) (1) It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(1) of this section that the weapon
or dangerous ordnance in question was being transported in a motor vehicle for any lawful purpose, that
it was not on the actor’s person, and if the weapon or dangerous ordnance was a firearm, that it was
unloaded and was being carried in a closed package, box or case or in a compartment that can be reached
only by leaving the vehicle.
(2) It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (C) of this section that the actor was
not otherwise prohibited by law from delivering the item to the confined person, the child, the prisoner,
or the patient and that either of the following applies:
(a) The actor was permitted by the written rules of the detention facility or the institution,
office building, or other place to deliver the item to the confined person or the patient.
(b) The actor was given written authorization by the person in charge of the detention
facility or the institution, office building, or other place to deliver the item to the confined person or the
patient.
(G) (1) Whoever violates division (A)(1) of this section or commits a violation of division (C) of
this section involving any item listed in division (A)(1) of this section is guilty of illegal conveyance of
weapons onto the grounds of a specified governmental facility, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(2) Whoever violates division (A)(2) of this section or commits a violation of division (C) of
this section involving any drug of abuse is guilty of illegal conveyance of drugs of abuse onto the
grounds of a specified governmental facility, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(3) Whoever violates division (A)(3) of this section or commits a violation of division (C) of
this section involving any intoxicating liquor is guilty of illegal conveyance of intoxicating liquor onto
the grounds of a specified governmental facility, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(4) Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty of illegal conveyance of cash onto
the grounds of a detention facility, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (D) of this section or a substantially equivalent
state law or municipal ordinance, illegal conveyance of cash onto the grounds of a detention facility is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(5) Whoever violates division (E) of this section is guilty of illegal conveyance of a
communications device onto the grounds of a specified governmental facility, a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the offender previously has been convicted or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (E) of
246 Madeira - General Offenses
this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, illegal conveyance of a
communications device onto the grounds of a detention facility is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.36)
(H) The person in charge of a detention facility shall, on the grounds of the detention facility, have
the same power as a peace officer, as defined in R.C. § 2935.01, to arrest a person who violates this
section.
(R.C. § 2921.37)
(1985 Code, § 136.13)
§ 136.14 ARREST NOTICE; FAILURE TO OBEY.
(A) Arrest of a person charged with a misdemeanor under an ordinance of this municipality or
section of this code may be made by taking the person charged into custody or by serving him or her
with an arrest notice. Such arrest notice may be served by the arresting officer when he or she is satisfied
that the defendant will obey the order of arrest and all orders of the court, and that peace and order will
be subserved by not taking such person into custody. The defendant shall in such cases acknowledge in
writing the service of notice and shall agree to obey its order and all orders of the court.
(B) Failure to obey the order of an arrest notice shall be a minor misdemeanor.
(1985 Code, § 136.14) (Ord. 1169, passed 6-10-1974; Ord. 1306, passed 6-13-1977)
§ 136.15 FAILURE TO ANSWER SUMMONS.
If a person summoned to appear as provided in R.C. § 2935.10(B) fails to appear without just cause
and personal service of the summons was had upon the person, he or she may be found guilty of
contempt of court, and may be fined not to exceed $20 for such contempt. Upon failure to appear, the
court or magistrate may forthwith issue a warrant for his or her arrest.
(R.C. § 2935.11) (1985 Code, § 136.15) (Ord. 1169, passed 6-10-1974; Ord. 1306, passed 6-13-1977)
§ 136.16 RESERVED.
§ 136.17 INTERFERING WITH AUTHORIZED PERSONS AT EMERGENCIES.
(A) No person shall willfully obstruct, impede or hamper in any way the lawful operation of
Sheriffs, police officers, deputies or other law enforcement officers, or of firefighters, rescue personnel,
medical personnel or other authorized persons, at the scene of fires, accidents, disasters or emergencies
of any kind, and no person shall willfully fail to obey the lawful order of any Sheriff, police officer,
Offenses Against Justice and Administration 247
deputy or other law enforcement officer engaged in the performance of his or her duties at the scene of
or in connection with fires, accidents, disasters or emergencies of any kind.
(B) Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit access of or deny information to news media
representatives in the lawful performance of their work.
(C) Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(1985 Code, § 136.17) (Ord. 1169, passed 6-10-1974; Ord. 1306, passed 6-13-1977)
§ 136.18 ASSAULTING POLICE DOG OR HORSE OR ASSISTANCE DOG.
(A) No person shall knowingly cause, or attempt to cause, physical harm to a police dog or horse
in either of the following circumstances:
(1) The police dog or horse is assisting a law enforcement officer in the performance of the
officer’s official duties at the time the physical harm is caused or attempted; or
(2) The police dog or horse is not assisting a law enforcement officer in the performance of
the officer’s official duties at the time the physical harm is caused or attempted, but the offender has
actual knowledge that the dog or horse is a police dog or horse.
(B) No person shall recklessly do any of the following:
(1) Taunt, torment or strike a police dog or horse;
(2) Throw an object or substance at a police dog or horse;
(3) Interfere with or obstruct a police dog or horse, or interfere with or obstruct a law
enforcement officer who is being assisted by a police dog or horse, in a manner that does any of the
following:
(a) Inhibits or restricts the law enforcement officer’s control of the police dog or horse;
(b) Deprives the law enforcement officer of control of the police dog or horse;
(c) Releases the police dog or horse from its area of control;
(d) Enters the area of control of the police dog or horse without the consent of the law
enforcement officer, including placing food or any other object or substance into that area; or
(e) Inhibits or restricts the ability of the police dog or horse to assist a law enforcement
officer.
248 Madeira - General Offenses
(4) Engage in any conduct that is likely to cause serious physical injury or death to a police dog
or horse; or
(5) If the person is the owner, keeper or harborer of a dog, fail to reasonably restrain the dog
from taunting, tormenting, chasing, approaching in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack,
or attempting to bite or otherwise endanger a police dog or horse that at the time of the conduct is
assisting a law enforcement officer in the performance of the officer’s duties or that the person knows
is a police dog or horse.
(C) No person shall knowingly cause, or attempt to cause, physical harm to an assistance dog in
either of the following circumstances:
(1) The dog is assisting or serving a blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility impaired
person at the time the physical harm is caused or attempted; or
(2) The dog is not assisting or serving a blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility impaired
person at the time the physical harm is caused or attempted, but the offender has actual knowledge that
the dog is an assistance dog.
(D) No person shall recklessly do any of the following:
(1) Taunt, torment or strike an assistance dog;
(2) Throw an object or substance at an assistance dog;
(3) Interfere with or obstruct an assistance dog, or interfere with or obstruct a blind, deaf or
hearing impaired, or mobility impaired person who is being assisted or served by an assistance dog, in
a manner that does any of the following:
(a) Inhibits or restricts the assisted or served person’s control of the dog;
(b) Deprives the assisted or served person of control of the dog;
(c) Releases the dog from its area of control;
(d) Enters the area of control of the dog without the consent of the assisted or served
person, including placing food or any other object or substance into that area; or
(e) Inhibits or restricts the ability of the dog to assist the assisted or served person.
(4) Engage in any conduct that is likely to cause serious physical injury or death to an
assistance dog; or
Offenses Against Justice and Administration 249
(5) If the person is the owner, keeper or harborer of a dog, fail to reasonably restrain the dog
from taunting, tormenting, chasing, approaching in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack,
or attempting to bite or otherwise endanger an assistance dog that at the time of the conduct is assisting
or serving a blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility impaired person or that the person knows is
an assistance dog.
(E) (1) Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of assaulting a police dog or horse.
Except as otherwise provided in this division (E), assaulting a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of
the second degree. If the violation results in physical harm to the police dog or horse other than death
or serious physical harm, assaulting a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
violation results in serious physical harm to the police dog or horse or results in its death, assaulting a
police dog or horse is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(2) Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of harassing a police dog or horse.
Except as otherwise provided this division (E), harassing a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the
second degree. If the violation results in physical harm to the police dog or horse but does not result in
its death or in serious physical harm to it, harassing a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the violation results in serous physical harm to the police dog or horse or results in its death,
harassing a police dog or horse is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(3) Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of assaulting an assistance dog.
Except as otherwise provided in this division (E), assaulting an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the
second degree. If the violation results in physical harm to the assistance dog other than death or serious
physical harm, assaulting an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation results
in serious physical harm to the assistance dog or results in its death, assaulting an assistance dog is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(4) Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty of harassing an assistance dog. Except
as otherwise provided in this division (E), harassing an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. If the violation results in physical harm to the assistance dog but does not result in the death or
in serious physical harm to it, harassing an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
violation results in serious physical harm to the assistance dog or results in its death, harassing an
assistance dog is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(5) In addition to any other sanctions or penalty imposed for the offense under this section,
R.C. Chapter 2929 or any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code or this code, whoever violates
division (A), (B), (C) or (D) of this section is responsible for the payment of all of the following:
(a) Any veterinary bill or bill for medication incurred as a result of the violation by the
Police Department regarding a violation of division (A) or (B) of this section or by the blind, deaf or
hearing impaired, or mobility impaired person assisted or served by the assistance dog regarding a
violation of division (C) or (D) of this section;
(b) The cost of any damaged equipment that results from the violation;
250 Madeira - General Offenses
(c) If the violation did not result in the death of the police dog or horse or the assistance
dog that was the subject of the violation and if, as a result of that dog or horse being the subject of the
violation, the dog or horse needs further training or retraining to be able to continue in the capacity of
a police dog or horse or an assistance dog, the cost of any further training or retraining of that dog or
horse by a law enforcement officer or by the blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility impaired
person assisted or served by the assistance dog; and
(d) If the violation resulted in the death of the police dog or horse or the assistance dog
that was the subject of the violation or resulted in serious physical harm to that dog or horse to the extent
that the dog or horse needs to be replaced on either a temporary or a permanent basis, the cost of
replacing that dog or horse and of any further training of a new police dog or horse or a new assistance
dog by a law enforcement officer or by the blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility impaired person
assisted or served by the assistance dog, which replacement or training is required because of the death
of or the serious physical harm to the dog or horse that was the subject of the violation.
(F) This section does not apply to a licensed veterinarian whose conduct is in accordance with R.C.
Chapter 4741.
(G) This section only applies to an offender who knows or should know at the time of the violation
that the police dog or horse or assistance dog that is the subject of a violation under this section is a
police dog or horse or an assistance dog.
(H) As used in this section:
ASSISTANCE DOG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 955.011.
BLIND. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 955.011.
MOBILITY IMPAIRED PERSON. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 955.011.
PHYSICAL HARM. Means any injury, illness or other psychological impairment, regardless
of its gravity or duration.
POLICE DOG OR HORSE. Means a dog or horse that has been trained and may be used to
assist law enforcement officers in the performance of their official duties.
SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM. Means any of the following:
(a) Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death;
(b) Any physical harm that causes permanent maiming or that involves some temporary,
substantial maiming; or
Offenses Against Justice and Administration 251
(c) Any physical harm that causes acute pain of a duration that results in substantial
suffering.
(R.C. § 2921.321) (1985 Code, § 136.18)
§ 136.19 MISUSE OF 9-1-1 SYSTEM.
(A) As used in this section, 9-1-1 SYSTEM means a system through which individuals can request
emergency service using the telephone number 9-1-1.
(R.C. § 128.01(A))
(B) No person shall knowingly use the telephone number of a 9-1-1 system established under R.C.
Chapter 128 to report an emergency if the person knows that no emergency exists.
(C) No person shall knowingly use a 9-1-1 system for a purpose other than obtaining emergency
service.
(D) No person shall disclose or use any information concerning telephone numbers, addresses, or
names obtained from the database that serves the public safety answering point of a 9-1-1 system
established under R.C. Chapter 128, except for any of the following purposes or under any of the
following circumstances:
(1) For the purpose of the 9-1-1 system;
(2) For the purpose of responding to an emergency call to an emergency service provider;
(3) In the circumstance of the inadvertent disclosure of such information due solely to
technology of the wireless telephone network portion of the 9-1-1 system not allowing access to the
database to be restricted to 9-1-1 specific answering lines at a public safety answering point;
(4) In the circumstance of access to a database being given by a telephone company that is a
wireless service provider to a public utility or municipal utility in handling customer calls in times of
public emergency or service outages. The charge, terms and conditions for the disclosure or use of such
information for the purpose of such access to a database shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the Steering
Committee; or
(5) In the circumstance of access to a database given by a telephone company that is a wireline
service provider to a state and local government in warning of a public emergency, as determined by the
Steering Committee. The charge, terms and conditions for the disclosure or use of that information for
the purpose of access to a database is subject to the jurisdiction of the Steering Committee.
(R.C. § 128.32(E) - (G))
(E) (1) Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
252 Madeira - General Offenses
(2) Whoever violates division (C) or (D) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree on a first offense and a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent
offense.
(R.C. § 128.99(A), (B))
(1985 Code, § 136.19)
§ 136.20 FAILURE TO DISCLOSE PERSONAL INFORMATION.
(A) No person who is in a public place shall refuse to disclose the person’s name, address or date
of birth, when requested by a law enforcement officer who reasonably suspects either of the following:
(1) The person is committing, has committed or is about to commit a criminal offense; or
(2) The person witnessed any of the following:
(a) An offense of violence that would constitute a felony under the laws of this state;
(b) A felony offense that causes or results in, or creates a substantial risk of, serious
physical harm to another person or property;
(c) Any attempt or conspiracy to commit, or complicity in committing, any offenses
identified in division (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(b) of this section; or
(d) Any conduct reasonably indicating that any offense identified in division (A)(2)(a) or
(A)(2)(b) of this section or any attempt, conspiracy or complicity described in division (A)(2)(c) of this
section has been, is being or is about to be committed.
(B) Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of failure to disclose one’s personal
information, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(C) Nothing in division (A) of this section requires a person to answer any questions beyond that
person’s name, address or date of birth. Nothing in division (A) of this section authorizes a law
enforcement officer to arrest a person for not providing any information beyond the person’s name,
address or date of birth or for refusing to describe the offense observed.
(D) It is not a violation of division (A) of this section to refuse to answer a question that would
reveal a person’s age or date of birth if age is an element of the crime that the person is suspected of
committing.
(R.C. § 2921.29)
(E) No person entering an airport, train station, port or other similar critical transportation
infrastructure site shall refuse to show identification when requested by a law enforcement officer when
there is a threat to security and the law enforcement officer is requiring identification of all persons
entering the site.
Offenses Against Justice and Administration 253
(F) A law enforcement officer may prevent any person who refuses to show identification when
asked under the circumstances described in division (E) of this section from entering the critical
transportation infrastructure site.
(R.C. § 2909.31)
(1985 Code, § 136.20)
§ 136.21 FALSE REPORT OF CHILD ABUSE OR NEGLECT.
(A) No person shall knowingly make or cause another person to make a false report under R.C.
§ 2151.421(B) alleging that any person has committed an act or omission that resulted in a child being
an abused child as defined in R.C. § 2151.031 or a neglected child as defined in R.C. § 2151.03.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of making or causing a false report of child abuse or child
neglect, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2921.14)
§ 136.22 DISCLOSURE OF CONFIDENTIAL PEACE OFFICER INFORMATION.
(A) No officer or employee of a law enforcement agency or court, or of the Clerk’s office of any
court, shall disclose during the pendency of any criminal case the home address of any peace officer,
parole officer, prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, correctional employee or youth
services employee who is a witness or arresting officer in the case.
(B) Division (A) of this section does not prohibit a peace officer, parole officer, prosecuting
attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, correctional employee or youth services employee from
disclosing the peace officer’s, parole officer’s, prosecuting attorney’s, assistant prosecuting attorney’s,
correctional employee’s or youth services employee’s own home address, and does not apply to any
person who discloses the home address of a peace officer, parole officer, prosecuting attorney, assistant
prosecuting attorney, correctional employee or youth services employee pursuant to a court-ordered
disclosure under division (C) of this section.
(C) The court in which any criminal case is pending may order the disclosure of the home address
of any peace officer, parole officer, prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, correctional
employee or youth services employee who is a witness or arresting officer in the case, if the court
determines after a written request for the disclosure that good cause exists for disclosing the home
address of the peace officer, parole officer, prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney,
correctional employee or youth services employee.
(D) Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of disclosure of confidential information,
a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 2921.24)
254 Madeira - General Offenses
(E) No judge of a court of record, or Mayor presiding over a Mayor’s court, shall order a peace
officer, parole officer, prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, correctional employee or
youth services employee who is a witness in a criminal case, to disclose the peace officer’s, parole
officer’s, prosecuting attorney’s, assistant prosecuting attorney’s, correctional employee’s or youth
services employee’s home address during the peace officer’s, parole officer’s, prosecuting attorney’s,
assistant prosecuting attorney’s, correctional employee’s or youth services employee’s examination in
the case unless the judge or Mayor determines that the defendant has a right to the disclosure.
(F) As used in this section:
PEACE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01.
CORRECTIONAL EMPLOYEE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 149.43.
YOUTH SERVICES EMPLOYEE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 149.43.
(R.C. § 2921.25)
§ 136.23 INTIMIDATION OF CRIME VICTIM OR WITNESS.
(A) No person shall knowingly attempt to intimidate or hinder the victim of a crime or delinquent
act in the filing or prosecution of criminal charges or a delinquent child action or proceeding, and no
person shall knowingly attempt to intimidate a witness to a criminal or delinquent act by reason of the
person being a witness to that act.
(B) No person, knowingly and by force or by unlawful threat of harm to any person or property
or by unlawful threat to commit any offense or calumny against any person, shall attempt to influence,
intimidate or hinder any of the following persons:
(1) The victim of a crime or delinquent act in the filing or prosecution of criminal charges or
a delinquent child action or proceeding;
(2) A witness to a criminal or delinquent act by reason of the person being a witness to that act;
or
(3) An attorney by reason of the attorney’s involvement in any criminal or delinquent child
action or proceeding.
(C) Division (A) of this section does not apply to any person who is attempting to resolve a dispute
pertaining to the alleged commission of a criminal offense, either prior to or subsequent to the filing of
a complaint, indictment or information by participating in the arbitration, mediation, compromise,
settlement or conciliation of that dispute pursuant to an authorization for arbitration, mediation,
compromise, settlement or conciliation of a dispute of that nature that is conferred by any of the
following:
Offenses Against Justice and Administration 255
(1) A section of the Ohio Revised Code;
(2) The Rules of Criminal Procedure, the Rules of Superintendence for Municipal Courts and
County Courts, the Rules of Superintendence for Courts of Common Pleas, or another rule adopted by
the Ohio Supreme Court in accordance with Ohio Constitution, Art. IV, § 5;
(3) A local rule of court, including but not limited to a local rule of court that relates to
alternative dispute resolution or other case management programs and that authorizes the referral of
disputes pertaining to the alleged commission of certain types of criminal offenses to appropriate and
available arbitration, mediation, compromise, settlement or other conciliation programs; or
(4) The order of a judge of a municipal court, county court or court of common pleas.
(D) Whoever violates this section is guilty of intimidation of an attorney, victim or witness in a
criminal case. A violation of division (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. A violation
of division (B) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(E) As used in this section, WITNESS means any person who has or claims to have knowledge
concerning a fact or facts concerning a criminal or delinquent act, whether or not criminal or delinquent
child charges are actually filed.
(R.C. § 2921.04)
§ 136.24 USING SHAM LEGAL PROCESS.
(A) As used in this section:
LAWFULLY ISSUED. Means adopted, issued or rendered in accordance with the United States
Constitution, the Constitution of a state, and the applicable statutes, rules, regulations and ordinances
of the United States, a state and the political subdivisions of a state.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS. Means municipal corporations, townships, counties, school
districts and all other bodies corporate and politic that are organized under state law and are responsible
for governmental activities only in geographical areas smaller than that of a state.
SHAM LEGAL PROCESS. Means an instrument that meets all of the following conditions:
(a) It is not lawfully issued;
(b) It purports to do any of the following:
1. To be a summons, subpoena, judgment or order of a court, a law enforcement
officer, or a legislative, executive or administrative body;
256 Madeira - General Offenses
2. To assert jurisdiction over or determine the legal or equitable status, rights, duties,
powers or privileges of any person or property; and
3. To require or authorize the search, seizure, indictment, arrest, trial or sentencing
of any person or property.
(c) It is designed to make another person believe that it is lawfully issued.
STATE. Means a state of the United States, including without limitation the state legislature,
the highest court of the state that has statewide jurisdiction, the offices of all elected state officers and
all departments, boards, offices, commissions, agencies, institutions and other instrumentalities of the
state. The term does not include the political subdivisions of the state.
(B) No person shall, knowing the sham legal process to be a sham legal process, do any of the
following:
(1) Knowingly issue, display, deliver, distribute or otherwise use sham legal process;
(2) Knowingly use sham legal process to arrest, detain, search or seize any person or the
property of another person;
(3) Knowingly commit or facilitate the commission of an offense using sham legal process; or
(4) Knowingly commit a felony by using sham legal process.
(C) It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (B)(1) or (B)(2) of this section that the
use of sham legal process was for a lawful purpose.
(D) Whoever violates this section is guilty of using sham legal process. A violation of division
(B)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. A violation of division (B)(2) or (B)(3) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree, except that if the purpose of a violation of division
(B)(3) of this section is to commit or facilitate the commission of a felony, a violation of division (B)(3)
of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of division (B)(4) of
this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.52(A) - (D))
§ 136.25 MAKING FALSE ALLEGATION OF PEACE OFFICER MISCONDUCT.
(A) As used in this section, PEACE OFFICER has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01.
(B) No person shall knowingly file a complaint against a peace officer that alleges that the peace
officer engaged in misconduct in the performance of the officer’s duties if the person knows that the
allegation is false.
Offenses Against Justice and Administration 257
(C) Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of making a false allegation of peace
officer misconduct, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2921.15)
258 Madeira - General Offenses
CHAPTER 137: WEAPONS CONTROL
Section
137.01 Definitions
137.02 Carrying concealed weapons
137.03 Using weapons while intoxicated
137.04 Improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle
137.05 Discharging firearms; hunting
137.06 Failure to secure dangerous ordnance
137.07 Unlawful transactions in weapons
137.08 Underage purchase of firearms or handgun
137.09 Concealed handgun licenses: possession of a revoked or suspended license; additional
restrictions; posting of signs prohibiting possession
137.10 Possession of an object indistinguishable from a firearm in a school safety zone
137.11 Possession of deadly weapon while under detention
137.12 Defaced firearms
137.13 Possessing criminal tools
137.14 Pointing and discharging firearms and other weapons
137.15 License or permit to possess dangerous ordnance
§ 137.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
AUTOMATIC FIREARM. Any firearm designed or specially adapted to fire a succession of
cartridges with a single function of the trigger. The term also means any semi-automatic firearm designed
or specially adapted to fire more than 31 cartridges without reloading, other than a firearm chambering
only .22 caliber short, long or long-rifle cartridges.
BALLISTIC KNIFE. A knife with a detachable blade that is propelled by a spring-operated
mechanism.
CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSE or LICENSE TO CARRY A CONCEALED HANDGUN.
(1) Means, subject to division (2) of this definition, a license or temporary emergency license
to carry a concealed handgun issued under R.C. § 2923.125 or R.C. § 2923.1213 or a license to carry
259
260 Madeira - General Offenses
a concealed handgun issued by another state with which the Attorney General has entered into a
reciprocity agreement under R.C. § 109.69.
(2) A reference in any provision of this Code to a concealed handgun license issued under R.C.
§ 2923.125 or a license to carry a concealed handgun issued under R.C. § 2923.125 means only a license
of the type that is specified in that section. A reference in any provision of this Code to a concealed
handgun license issued under R.C. § 2923.1213, a license to carry a concealed handgun issued under
R.C. § 2923.1213, or a license to carry a concealed handgun on a temporary emergency basis means
only a license of the type that is specified in R.C. § 2923.1213. A reference in any provision of this
Code to a concealed handgun license issued by another state or a license to carry a concealed handgun
issued by another state means only a license issued by another state with which the Attorney General has
entered into a reciprocity agreement under R.C. § 109.69.
DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.
(1) Any of the following, except as provided in division (2) of this definition:
(a) Any automatic or sawed-off firearm, zip-gun or ballistic knife.
(b) Any explosive device or incendiary device;
(c) Nitroglycerin, nitrocellulose, nitrostarch, PETN, cyclonite, TNT, picric acid and other
high explosives; amatol, tritonal, tetrytol, pentolite, pecretol, cyclotol and other high explosive
compositions; plastic explosives; dynamite, blasting gelatin, gelatin dynamite, sensitized ammonium
nitrate, liquid-oxygen blasting explosives, blasting powder and other blasting agents; and any other
explosive substance having sufficient brisance or power to be particularly suitable for use as a military
explosive, or for use in mining, quarrying, excavating or demolitions;
(d) Any firearm, rocket launcher, mortar, artillery piece, grenade, mine, bomb, torpedo
or similar weapon, designed and manufactured for military purposes, and the ammunition for that
weapon;
(e) Any firearm muffler or silencer; and
(f) Any combination of parts that is intended by the owner for use in converting any
firearm or other device into a dangerous ordnance.
(2) The term does not include any of the following:
(a) Any firearm, including a military weapon and the ammunition for that weapon, and
regardless of its actual age, that employs a percussion cap or other obsolete ignition system, or that is
designed and safe for use only with black powder;
Weapons Control 261
(b) Any pistol, rifle or shotgun, designed or suitable for sporting purposes, including a
military weapon as issued or as modified, and the ammunition for that weapon, unless the firearm is an
automatic or sawed-off firearm;
(c) Any cannon or other artillery piece that, regardless of its actual age, is of a type in
accepted use prior to 1887, has no mechanical, hydraulic, pneumatic or other system for absorbing recoil
and returning the tube into battery without displacing the carriage, and is designed and safe for use only
with black powder;
(d) Black powder, priming quills and percussion caps possessed and lawfully used to fire
a cannon of a type defined in division (2)(c) of this definition during displays, celebrations, organized
matches or shoots and target practice, and smokeless and black powder, primers and percussion caps
possessed and lawfully used as a propellant or ignition device in small-arms or small-arms ammunition;
(e) Dangerous ordnance that is inoperable or inert and cannot readily be rendered operable
or activated, and that is kept as a trophy, souvenir, curio or museum piece; or
(f) Any device that is expressly excepted from the definition of a destructive device
pursuant to the Gun Control Act of 1968, 18 U.S.C. § 921(a)(4), as amended, and regulations issued
under that act.
DEADLY WEAPON. Any instrument, device, or thing capable of inflicting death, and designed or
specially adapted for use as a weapon, or possessed, carried, or used as a weapon.
EXPLOSIVE. Any chemical compound, mixture or device, the primary or common purpose of
which is to function by explosion. The term includes all materials that have been classified as division
1.1, division 1.2, division 1.3 or division 1.4 explosives by the United States Department of
Transportation in its regulations and includes but is not limited to dynamite, black powder, pellet
powders, initiating explosives, blasting caps, electric blasting caps, safety fuses, fuse igniters, squibs,
cordeau detonant fuses, instantaneous fuses and igniter cords and igniters. The term does not include
“fireworks,” as defined in R.C. § 3743.01, or any substance or material otherwise meeting the definition
of explosive set forth in this section that is manufactured, sold, possessed, transported, stored, or used
in any activity described in R.C. § 3743.80, provided the activity is conducted in accordance with all
applicable laws, rules, and regulations, including but not limited to the provisions of R.C. § 3743.80 and
the rules of the Fire Marshal adopted pursuant to R.C. § 3737.82.
EXPLOSIVE DEVICE. Any device designed or specially adapted to cause physical harm to persons
or property by means of an explosion, and consisting of an explosive substance or agency and a means
to detonate it. The term includes without limitation any bomb, any explosive demolition device, any
blasting cap or detonator containing an explosive charge and any pressure vessel that has been knowingly
tampered with or arranged so as to explode.
262 Madeira - General Offenses
FIREARM.
(1) Any deadly weapon capable of expelling or propelling one or more projectiles by the action
of an explosive or combustible propellant. The term includes an unloaded firearm, and any firearm that
is inoperable but that can readily be rendered operable.
(2) When determining whether a firearm is capable of expelling or propelling one or more
projectiles by the action of an explosive or combustible propellant, the trier of fact may rely upon
circumstantial evidence, including but not limited to the representations and actions of the individual
exercising control over the firearm.
HANDGUN. Any of the following:
(1) Any firearm that has a short stock and is designed to be held and fired by the use of a single
hand; or
(2) Any combination of parts from which a firearm of a type described in division (1) of this
definition can be assembled.
INCENDIARY DEVICE. Any firebomb, and any device designed or specially adapted to cause
physical harm to persons or property by means of fire, and consisting of an incendiary substance or agent
and a means to ignite it.
SAWED-OFF FIREARM. A shotgun with a barrel less than 18 inches long, or a rifle with a barrel
less than 16 inches long, or a shotgun or rifle less than 26 inches long overall.
SEMI-AUTOMATIC FIREARM. Any firearm designed or specially adapted to fire a single
cartridge and automatically chamber a succeeding cartridge ready to fire, with a single function of the
trigger.
VALID CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSE or VALID LICENSE TO CARRY A CONCEALED
HANDGUN. A concealed handgun license that is currently valid, that is not under a suspension under
R.C. § 2923.128(A)(1), under R.C. § 2923.1213, or under a suspension provision of the state other than
this state in which the license was issued, and that has not been revoked under R.C. § 2923.128(B)(1),
under R.C. § 2923.1213, or under a revocation provision of the state other than this state in which the
license was issued.
ZIP-GUN. Any of the following:
(1) Any firearm of crude and extemporized manufacture;
(2) Any device, including without limitation a starter’s pistol, not designed as a firearm, but
that is specially adapted for use as a firearm; or
Weapons Control 263
(3) Any industrial tool, signaling device or safety device, not designed as a firearm, but that
as designed is capable of use as such, when possessed, carried or used as a firearm.
(R.C. § 2923.11) (1985 Code, § 137.01)
§ 137.02 CARRYING CONCEALED WEAPONS.
(A) No person shall knowingly carry or have, concealed on the person’s person or concealed ready
at hand, any of the following:
(1) A deadly weapon other than a handgun;
(2) A handgun other than a dangerous ordnance; or
(3) A dangerous ordnance.
(B) No person who has been issued a concealed handgun license shall do any of the following:
(1) If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose, and is carrying a concealed
handgun, fail to promptly inform any law enforcement officer who approaches the person after the
person has been stopped that the person has been issued a concealed handgun license and that the person
then is carrying a concealed handgun;
(2) If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and is carrying a concealed handgun,
knowingly fail to keep the person’s hands in plain sight at any time after any law enforcement officer
begins approaching the person while stopped and before the law enforcement officer leaves, unless the
failure is pursuant to and in accordance with directions given by a law enforcement officer;
(3) If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose, if the person is carrying a concealed
handgun, and if the person is approached by any law enforcement officer while stopped, knowingly
remove or attempt to remove the loaded handgun from the holster, pocket or other place in which the
person is carrying it, knowingly grasp or hold the loaded handgun, or knowingly have contact with the
loaded handgun by touching it with the person’s hands or fingers at any time after the law enforcement
officer begins approaching and before the law enforcement officer leaves, unless the person removes,
attempts to remove, grasps, holds or has contact with the loaded handgun pursuant to and in accordance
with directions given by the law enforcement officer; or
(4) If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and is carrying a concealed handgun,
knowingly disregard or fail to comply with any lawful order of any law enforcement officer given while
the person is stopped, including but not limited to a specific order to the person to keep the person’s
hands in plain sight.
(C) (1) This section does not apply to any of the following:
264 Madeira - General Offenses
(a) An officer, agent or employee of this or any other state or the United States, or to a
law enforcement officer, who is authorized to carry concealed weapons or dangerous ordnance or is
authorized to carry handguns and is acting within the scope of the officer’s, agent’s or employee’s duties;
(b) Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to carry concealed
weapons or dangerous ordnance or is authorized to carry handguns, and who is subject to and in
compliance with the requirements of R.C. § 109.801, unless the appointing authority of the person has
expressly specified that the exemption provided in this division (C)(1)(b) does not apply to the person;
(c) A person’s transportation or storage of a firearm, other than a firearm described in
R.C. § 2923.11(G) to (M), in a motor vehicle for any lawful purpose if the firearm is not on the actor’s
person; or
(d) A person’s storage or possession of a firearm, other than a firearm described in R.C.
§ 2923.11(G) to (M), in the actor’s own home for any lawful purpose.
(2) Division (A)(2) of this section does not apply to any person who, at the time of the alleged
carrying or possession of a handgun, is carrying a valid concealed handgun license, unless the person
knowingly is in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
(D) It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(1) of this section of carrying or
having control of a weapon other than a handgun and other than a dangerous ordnance, that the actor was
not otherwise prohibited by law from having the weapon, and that any of the following applies.
(1) The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for defensive purposes, while
the actor was engaged in or was going to or from the actor’s lawful business or occupation, which
business or occupation was of a character or was necessarily carried on in a manner or at a time or place
as to render the actor particularly susceptible to criminal attack, such as would justify a prudent person
in going armed.
(2) The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for defensive purposes, while
the actor was engaged in a lawful activity and had reasonable cause to fear a criminal attack upon the
actor, a member of the actor’s family, or the actor’s home, such as would justify a prudent person in
going armed.
(3) The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for any lawful purpose and
while in the actor’s own home.
(E) No person who is charged with a violation of this section shall be required to obtain a concealed
handgun license as a condition for the dismissal of the charge.
(F) (1) Whoever violates this section is guilty of carrying concealed weapons. Except as otherwise
provided in this division or division (F)(2) of this section, carrying concealed weapons in violation of
division (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Except as otherwise provided in this
division or division (F)(2) of this section, if the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of
Weapons Control 265
this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance or of any offense of violence,
if the weapon involved is a firearm that is either loaded or for which the offender has ammunition ready
at hand, or if the weapon involved is dangerous ordnance, carrying concealed weapons in violation of
division (A) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. Except as otherwise
provided in division (F)(2) of this section, if the offense is committed aboard an aircraft, or with purpose
to carry a concealed weapon aboard an aircraft, regardless of the weapon involved, carrying concealed
weapons in violation of division (A) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
(2) If a person being arrested for a violation of division (A)(2) of this section promptly
produces a valid concealed handgun license, and if at the time of the violation the person was not
knowingly in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B), the officer shall not arrest the person for a
violation of that division. If the person is not able to promptly produce any concealed handgun license
and if the person is not in a place described in that section, the officer may arrest the person for a
violation of that division, and the offender shall be punished as follows.
(a) The offender shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor if both of the following apply:
1. Within ten days after the arrest, the offender presents a concealed handgun license,
which license was valid at the time of the arrest to the law enforcement agency that employs the arresting
officer; and
2. At the time of the arrest, the offender was not knowingly in a place described in
R.C. § 2923.126(B).
(b) The offender shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined $500 if all of the
following apply:
1. The offender previously had been issued a concealed handgun license, and that
license expired within the two years immediately preceding the arrest;
2. Within 45 days after the arrest, the offender presents a concealed handgun license
to the law enforcement agency that employed the arresting officer, and the offender waives in writing
the offender’s right to a speedy trial on the charge of the violation that is provided in R.C. § 2945.71;
and
3. At the time of the commission of the offense, the offender was not knowingly in
a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
(c) If neither division (F)(2)(a) nor (F)(2)(b) of this section applies, the offender shall be
punished under division (F)(1) of this section.
(3) Except as otherwise provided in this division, carrying concealed weapons in violation of
division (B)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree, and, in addition to any other penalty
or sanction imposed for a violation of division (B)(1) of this section, the offender’s concealed handgun
266 Madeira - General Offenses
license shall be suspended pursuant to R.C. § 2923.128(A)(2). If, at the time of the stop of the offender
for a law enforcement purpose that was the basis of the violation, any law enforcement officer involved
with the stop had actual knowledge that the offender has been issued a concealed handgun license,
carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (B)(1) of this section is a minor misdemeanor, and
the offender’s concealed handgun license shall not be suspended pursuant to R.C. § 2923.128(A)(2).
(4) Carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (B)(2) or (B)(4) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of division (B)(2) or (B)(4) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. In addition to any other
penalty or sanction imposed for a misdemeanor violation of division (B)(2) or (B)(4) of this section, the
offender’s concealed handgun license shall be suspended pursuant to R.C. § 2923.128(A)(2).
(5) Carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (B)(3) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(G) If a law enforcement officer stops a person to question the person regarding a possible violation
of this section, for a traffic stop, or for any other law enforcement purpose, if the person surrenders a
firearm to the officer, either voluntarily or pursuant to a request or demand of the officer, and if the
officer does not charge the person with a violation of this section or arrest the person for any offense,
the person is not otherwise prohibited by law from possessing the firearm, and the firearm is not
contraband, the officer shall return the firearm to the person at the termination of the stop. If a court
orders a law enforcement officer to return a firearm to a person pursuant to the requirement set forth in
this division, R.C. § 2923.163(B) applies.
(R.C. § 2923.12) (1985 Code, § 137.02)
§ 137.03 USING WEAPONS WHILE INTOXICATED.
(A) No person, while under the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse, shall carry or use any
firearm or dangerous ordnance.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of using weapons while intoxicated, a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
(R.C. § 2923.15) (1985 Code, § 137.03)
§ 137.04 IMPROPERLY HANDLING FIREARMS IN A MOTOR VEHICLE.
(A) No person shall knowingly discharge a firearm while in or on a motor vehicle.
(B) No person shall knowingly transport or have a loaded firearm in a motor vehicle in such a
manner that the firearm is accessible to the operator or any passenger without leaving the vehicle.
Weapons Control 267
(C) No person shall knowingly transport or have a firearm in a motor vehicle, unless the person
may lawfully possess that firearm under applicable law of this state or the United States, the firearm is
unloaded, and the firearm is carried in one of the following ways:
(1) In a closed package, box or case;
(2) In a compartment that can be reached only by leaving the vehicle;
(3) In plain sight and secured in a rack or holder made for the purpose; or
(4) If the firearm is at least 24 inches in overall length as measured from the muzzle to the part
of the stock furthest from the muzzle and if the barrel is at least 18 inches in length, either in plain sight
with the action open or the weapon stripped, or, if the firearm is of a type on which the action will not
stay open or which cannot easily be stripped, in plain sight.
(D) No person shall knowingly transport or have a loaded handgun in a motor vehicle if, at the time
of that transportation or possession, any of the following applies:
(1) The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse or a combination of them; or
(2) The person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine contains a concentration
of alcohol, a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance prohibited for
persons operating a vehicle, as specified in R.C. § 4511.19(A), regardless of whether the person at the
time of the transportation or possession as described in this division is the operator of or a passenger in
the motor vehicle.
(E) No person who has been issued a concealed handgun license, who is the driver or an occupant
of a motor vehicle that is stopped as a result of a traffic stop or a stop for another law enforcement
purpose or is the driver or an occupant of a commercial motor vehicle that is stopped by an employee
of the motor carrier enforcement unit for the purposes defined in R.C. § 5503.34, and who is
transporting or has a loaded handgun in the motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle in any manner,
shall do any of the following:
(1) Fail to promptly inform any law enforcement officer who approaches the vehicle while
stopped that the person has been issued a concealed handgun license and that the person then possesses
or has a loaded handgun in the motor vehicle;
(2) Fail to promptly inform the employee of the unit who approaches the vehicle while stopped
that the person has been issued a concealed handgun license and that the person then possesses or has
a loaded handgun in the commercial motor vehicle;
(3) Knowingly fail to remain in the motor vehicle while stopped, or knowingly fail to keep the
person’s hands in plain sight at any time after any law enforcement officer begins approaching the person
while stopped and before the law enforcement officer leaves, unless the failure is pursuant to and in
accordance with directions given by a law enforcement officer;
268 Madeira - General Offenses
(4) Knowingly have contact with the loaded handgun by touching it with the person’s hands
or fingers in the motor vehicle at any time after the law enforcement officer begins approaching and
before the law enforcement officer leaves, unless the person has contact with the loaded handgun
pursuant to and in accordance with directions given by the law enforcement officer; or
(5) Knowingly disregard or fail to comply with any lawful order of any law enforcement officer
given while the motor vehicle is stopped, including but not limited to a specific order to the person to
keep the person’s hands in plain sight.
(F) (1) Divisions (A), (B), (C) and (E) of this section do not apply to any of the following:
(a) An officer, agent or employee of this or any other state or the United States, or a law
enforcement officer, when authorized to carry or have loaded or accessible firearms in motor vehicles
and acting within the scope of the officer’s, agent’s or employee’s duties; or
(b) Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to carry or have loaded
or accessible firearms in motor vehicles, and who is subject to and in compliance with the requirements
of R.C. § 109.801, unless the appointing authority of the person has expressly specified that the
exemption provided in this division (F)(1)(b) does not apply to the person.
(2) Division (A) of this section does not apply to a person if all of the following circumstances
apply.
(a) The person discharges a firearm from a motor vehicle at a coyote or groundhog, the
discharge is not during the deer gun hunting season as set by the Chief of the Division of Wildlife of the
Department of Natural Resources, and the discharge at the coyote or groundhog, but for the operation
of this section, is lawful.
(b) The motor vehicle from which the person discharges the firearm is on real property
that is located in an unincorporated area of a township and that is either zoned for agriculture or is used
for agriculture.
(c) The person owns the real property described in division (F)(2)(b) of this section, is the
spouse or a child of another person who owns that real property, is a tenant of another person who owns
that real property, or is the spouse or a child of a tenant of another person who owns that real property.
(d) The person does not discharge the firearm in any of the following manners:
1. While under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or alcohol and a drug of
abuse;
2. In the direction of a street, highway or other public or private property used by
the public for vehicular traffic or parking;
Weapons Control 269
3. At or into an occupied structure that is a permanent or temporary habitation; or
4. In the commission of any violation of law, including but not limited to a felony
that includes, as an essential element, purposely or knowingly causing or attempting to cause the death
of or physical harm to another and that was committed by discharging a firearm from a motor vehicle.
(3) Division (A) of this section does not apply to a person if all of the following apply.
(a) The person possesses a valid electric-powered all-purpose vehicle permit issued under
R.C. § 1533.103 by the Chief of the Division of Wildlife.
(b) The person discharges a firearm at a wild quadruped or game bird as defined in R.C.
§ 1531.01 during the open hunting season for the applicable wild quadruped or game bird.
(c) The person discharges a firearm from a stationary electric-powered all-purpose vehicle
as defined in R.C. § 1531.01 or a motor vehicle that is parked on a road that is owned or administered
by the Division of Wildlife, provided that the road is identified by an electric-powered all-purpose
vehicle sign.
(d) The person does not discharge the firearm in any of the following manners:
1. While under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or alcohol and a drug of
abuse;
2. In the direction of a street, a highway, or other public or private property that is
used by the public for vehicular traffic or parking;
3. At or into an occupied structure that is a permanent or temporary habitation; or
4. In the commission of any violation of law, including but not limited to a felony
that includes, as an essential element, purposely or knowingly causing or attempting to cause the death
of or physical harm to another and that was committed by discharging a firearm from a motor vehicle.
(4) Divisions (B) and (C) of this section do not apply to a person if all of the following
circumstances apply.
(a) At the time of the alleged violation of either of those divisions, the person is the
operator of or a passenger in a motor vehicle.
(b) The motor vehicle is on real property that is located in an unincorporated area of a
township and that is either zoned for agriculture or is used for agriculture.
(c) The person owns the real property described in division (F)(4)(b) of this section, is the
spouse or a child of another person who owns that real property, is a tenant of another person who owns
that real property, or is the spouse or a child of a tenant of another person who owns that real property.
270 Madeira - General Offenses
(d) The person, prior to arriving at the real property described in division (F)(4)(b) of this
section, did not transport or possess a firearm in the motor vehicle in a manner prohibited by division
(B) or (C) of this section while the motor vehicle was being operated on a street, highway or other public
or private property used by the public for vehicular traffic or parking.
(5) Divisions (B) and (C) of this section do not apply to a person who transports or possesses
a handgun in a motor vehicle if, at the time of that transportation or possession, both of the following
apply.
(a) The person transporting or possessing the handgun is carrying a valid concealed
handgun license.
(b) The person transporting or possessing the handgun is not knowingly in a place
described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
(6) Divisions (B) and (C) of this section do not apply to a person if all of the following apply.
(a) The person possesses a valid electric-powered all-purpose vehicle permit issued under
R.C. § 1533.103 by the Chief of the Division of Wildlife.
(b) The person is on or in an electric-powered all-purpose vehicle as defined in R.C.
§ 1531.01 or a motor vehicle during the open hunting season for a wild quadruped or game bird.
(c) The person is on or in an electric-powered all-purpose vehicle as defined in R.C.
§ 1531.01 or a motor vehicle that is parked on a road that is owned or administered by the Division of
Wildlife, provided that the road is identified by an electric-powered all-purpose vehicle sign.
(G) (1) The affirmative defenses authorized in R.C. § 2923.12(D)(1) and (D)(2) are affirmative
defenses to a charge under division (B) or (C) of this section that involves a firearm other than a
handgun.
(2) It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (B) or (C) of this section of
improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle that the actor transported or had the firearm in the motor
vehicle for any lawful purpose and while the motor vehicle was on the actor’s own property, provided
that this affirmative defense is not available unless the person, immediately prior to arriving at the actor’s
own property, did not transport or possess the firearm in a motor vehicle in a manner prohibited by
division (B) or (C) of this section while the motor vehicle was being operated on a street, highway, or
other public or private property used by the public for vehicular traffic.
(H) (1) No person who is charged with a violation of division (B), (C), or (D) of this section shall
be required to obtain a concealed handgun license as a condition for the dismissal of the charge.
(2) (a) If a person is convicted of, was convicted of, pleads guilty to, or has pleaded guilty
to a violation of division (E) of this section as it existed prior to September 30, 2011, and if the conduct
that was the basis of the violation no longer would be a violation of division (E) of this section on or
Weapons Control 271
after September 30, 2011, the person may file an application under R.C. § 2953.37 requesting the
expungement of the record of conviction.
(b) If a person is convicted of, was convicted of, pleads guilty to, or has pleaded guilty
to a violation of division (B) or (C) of this section as the division existed prior to September 30, 2011,
and if the conduct that was the basis of the violation no longer would be a violation of division (B) or
(C) of this section on or after September 30, 2011, due to the application of division (F)(5) of this section
as it exists on and after September 30, 2011, the person may file an application under R.C. § 2953.37
requesting the expungement of the record of conviction.
(I) Whoever violates this section is guilty of improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle.
Violation of division (A) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
Violation of division (C) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. A violation of division
(D) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law and, if the loaded handgun
is concealed on the person’s person, it is also a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation of division (E)(1) or (E)(2) of this section is
a misdemeanor of the first degree, and, in addition to any other penalty or sanction imposed for the
violation, the offender’s concealed handgun license shall be suspended pursuant to R.C.
§ 2923.128(A)(2). If at the time of the stop of the offender for a traffic stop, for another law enforcement
purpose, or for a purpose defined in R.C. § 5503.34 that was the basis of the violation any law
enforcement officer involved with the stop or the employee of the motor carrier enforcement unit who
made the stop had actual knowledge of the offender’s status as a licensee, a violation of division (E)(1)
or (E)(2) of this section is a minor misdemeanor, and the offender’s concealed handgun license shall not
be suspended pursuant to R.C. § 2923.128(A)(2). A violation of division (E)(4) of this section is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of division (E)(3) or (E)(5) of this section is
a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of division (E)(3) or (E)(5) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. In addition to any other
penalty or sanction imposed for a misdemeanor violation of division (E)(3) or (E)(5) of this section, the
offender’s concealed handgun license shall be suspended pursuant to R.C. § 2923.128(A)(2). A violation
of division (B) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(J) If a law enforcement officer stops a motor vehicle for a traffic stop or any other purpose, if any
person in the motor vehicle surrenders a firearm to the officer, either voluntarily or pursuant to a request
or demand of the officer, and if the officer does not charge the person with a violation of this section or
arrest the person for any offense, the person is not otherwise prohibited by law from possessing the
firearm, and the firearm is not contraband, the officer shall return the firearm to the person at the
termination of the stop. If a court orders a law enforcement officer to return a firearm to a person
pursuant to the requirement set forth in this division, R.C. § 2923.163(B) applies.
(K) As used in this section:
AGRICULTURE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 519.01.
272 Madeira - General Offenses
COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4506.25(A).
HIGHWAY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
MOTOR CARRIER ENFORCEMENT UNIT. Means the Motor Carrier Enforcement Unit in
the Department of Public Safety, Division of State Highway Patrol, that is created by R.C. § 5503.34.
MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
OCCUPIED STRUCTURE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.01.
STREET. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
TENANT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1531.01.
UNLOADED.
(a) With respect to a firearm other than a firearm described in division (d) of this
definition, means that no ammunition is in the firearm in question, no magazine or speed loader
containing ammunition is inserted into the firearm, and one of the following applies.
1. There is no ammunition in a magazine or speed loader that is in the vehicle in
question and that may be used with the firearm in question.
2. Any magazine or speed loader that contains ammunition and that may be used with
the firearm in question is stored in a compartment within the vehicle in question that cannot be accessed
without leaving the vehicle or is stored in a container that provides complete and separate enclosure.
(b) For the purposes of division (a)2. of this definition, a “container that provides complete
and separate enclosure” includes but is not limited to any of the following:
1. A package, box or case with multiple compartments, as long as the loaded
magazine or speed loader and the firearm in question either are in separate compartments within the
package, box or case, or, if they are in the same compartment, the magazine or speed loader is contained
within a separate enclosure in that compartment that does not contain the firearm and that closes using
a snap, button, buckle, zipper, hook and loop closing mechanism, or other fastener that must be opened
to access the contents or the firearm is contained within a separate enclosure of that nature in that
compartment that does not contain the magazine or speed loader; or
2. A pocket or other enclosure on the person of the person in question that closes
using a snap, button, buckle, zipper, hook and loop closing mechanism, or other fastener that must be
opened to access the contents.
Weapons Control 273
(c) For the purposes of divisions (a) and (b) of this definition, ammunition held in
stripper-clips or in en-bloc clips is not considered ammunition that is loaded into a magazine or speed
loader.
(d) “Unloaded” means, with respect to a firearm employing a percussion cap, flintlock or
other obsolete ignition system, when the weapon is uncapped or when the priming charge is removed
from the pan.
(L) Divisions (a) and (b) of the definition of “unloaded” in division (K) of this section do not affect
the authority of a person who is carrying a valid concealed handgun license to have one or more
magazines or speed loaders containing ammunition anywhere in a vehicle, without being transported as
described in those divisions, as long as no ammunition is in a firearm, other than a handgun, in the
vehicle other than as permitted under any other provision of this chapter. A person who is carrying a
valid concealed handgun license may have one or more magazines or speed loaders containing
ammunition anywhere in a vehicle without further restriction, as long as no ammunition is in a firearm,
other than a handgun, in the vehicle other than as permitted under any provision of this chapter.
(R.C. § 2923.16) (1985 Code, § 137.04)
§ 137.05 DISCHARGING FIREARMS; HUNTING.
(A) No person shall engage in hunting or discharge any cannon, pistol or other firearm of any kind
whatsoever within the city. This section shall not prohibit the firing of a military salute or the firing of
weapons by persons of the nation’s armed forces acting under military authority, and shall not apply to
law enforcement officials in the proper enforcement of the law, or to any person in the proper exercise
of the right of self-defense. This section shall not prohibit the discharging of a pistol or other firearm of
any kind within the city on ranges constructed in conformance with plans approved by the City Manager.
(B) Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(1985 Code, § 137.05) (Ord. 1169, passed 6-10-1974; Ord. 1306, passed 6-13-1977)
§ 137.06 FAILURE TO SECURE DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.
(A) No person, in acquiring, possessing, carrying or using any dangerous ordnance, shall
negligently fail to take proper precautions:
(1) To secure the dangerous ordnance against theft, or against its acquisition or use by any
unauthorized or incompetent person; or
(2) To ensure the safety of persons and property.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to a secure dangerous ordnance, a misdemeanor
of the second degree.
(R.C. § 2923.19) (1985 Code, § 137.06)
274 Madeira - General Offenses
§ 137.07 UNLAWFUL TRANSACTIONS IN WEAPONS.
(A) No person shall:
(1) Recklessly sell, lend, give or furnish any firearm to any person prohibited by R.C.
§ 2923.13 or 2923.15, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, from acquiring or using any
firearm, or recklessly sell, lend, give or furnish any dangerous ordnance to any person prohibited by
R.C. § 2923.13, 2923.15 or 2923.17, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, from acquiring
or using any dangerous ordnance;
(2) Possess any firearm or dangerous ordnance with purpose to dispose of it in violation of
division (A)(1) of this section;
(3) Manufacture, possess for sale, sell or furnish to any person other than a law enforcement
agency for authorized use in police work, any brass knuckles, cestus, billy, blackjack, sandbag,
switchblade knife, springblade knife, gravity knife or similar weapon;
(4) When transferring any dangerous ordnance to another, negligently fail to require the
transferee to exhibit such identification, license or permit showing him or her to be authorized to acquire
dangerous ordnance pursuant to R.C. § 2923.17, or negligently fail to take a complete record of the
transaction and forthwith forward a copy of the record to the Sheriff of the county or Safety Director or
Police Chief of the municipality where the transaction takes place; or
(5) Knowingly fail to report to law enforcement authorities forthwith the loss or theft of any
firearm or dangerous ordnance in the person’s possession and under his or her control.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful transactions in weapons. A violation of
division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. A
violation of division (A)(3) or (A)(4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second degree. A violation
of division (A)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 2923.20) (1985 Code, § 137.07)
§ 137.08 UNDERAGE PURCHASE OF FIREARMS OR HANDGUN.
(A) No person under 18 years of age shall purchase or attempt to purchase a firearm.
(B) No person under 21 years of age shall purchase or attempt to purchase a handgun; provided,
that this division (B) does not apply to the purchase or attempted purchase of a handgun by a person 18
years of age or older and under 21 years of age if either of the following applies:
(1) The person is a law enforcement officer and has received firearms training approved by the
Ohio Peace Officer Training Council or equivalent firearms training; or
Weapons Control 275
(2) The person is an active or reserve member of the armed services of the United States or
the Ohio National Guard, or was honorably discharged from military service in the active or reserve
armed services of the United States or the Ohio National Guard, and the person has received firearms
training from the armed services or the national guard or equivalent firearms training.
(C) Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of underage purchase of a firearm, a
delinquent act that would be a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law if it could be
committed by an adult. Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of underage purchase of
a handgun, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(R.C. § 2923.211) (1985 Code, § 137.08)
§ 137.09 CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSES: POSSESSION OF A REVOKED OR
SUSPENDED LICENSE; ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS; POSTING OF SIGNS
PROHIBITING POSSESSION.
(A) Possession of a revoked or suspended concealed handgun license.
(1) No person, except in the performance of official duties, shall possess a concealed handgun
license that was issued and that has been revoked or suspended.
(2) Whoever violates this division (A) is guilty of possessing a revoked or suspended concealed
handgun license, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 2923.1211(B), (C))
(B) Additional restrictions. Pursuant to R.C. § 2923.126:
(1) (a) A concealed handgun license that is issued under R.C. § 2923.125 shall expire five
years after the date of issuance. A licensee who has been issued a license under that section shall be
granted a grace period of 30 days after the licensee’s license expires during which the licensee’s license
remains valid. Except as provided in divisions (B)(2) and (B)(3) of this section, a licensee who has been
issued a concealed handgun license under R.C. § 2923.125 or 2923.1213 may carry a concealed handgun
anywhere in this state if the licensee also carries a valid license and valid identification when the licensee
is in actual possession of a concealed handgun. The licensee shall give notice of any change in the
licensee’s residence address to the sheriff who issued the license within 45 days after that change.
(b) If a licensee is the driver or an occupant of a motor vehicle that is stopped as the result
of a traffic stop or a stop for another law enforcement purpose and if the licensee is transporting or has
a loaded handgun in the motor vehicle at that time, the licensee shall promptly inform any law
enforcement officer who approaches the vehicle while stopped that the licensee has been issued a
concealed handgun license and that the licensee currently possesses or has a loaded handgun; the licensee
shall not knowingly disregard or fail to comply with lawful orders of a law enforcement officer given
while the motor vehicle is stopped, knowingly fail to remain in the motor vehicle while stopped, or
knowingly fail to keep the licensee’s hands in plain sight after any law enforcement officer begins
approaching the licensee while stopped and before the officer leaves, unless directed otherwise by a law
276 Madeira - General Offenses
enforcement officer; and the licensee shall not knowingly have contact with the loaded handgun by
touching it with the licensee’s hands or fingers, in any manner in violation of R.C. § 2923.16(E), after
any law enforcement officer begins approaching the licensee while stopped and before the officer leaves.
Additionally, if a licensee is the driver or an occupant of a commercial motor vehicle that is stopped by
an employee of the motor carrier enforcement unit for the purposes defined in R.C. § 5503.04 and if the
licensee is transporting or has a loaded handgun in the commercial motor vehicle at that time, the
licensee shall promptly inform the employee of the unit who approaches the vehicle while stopped that
the licensee has been issued a concealed handgun license and that the licensee currently possesses or has
a loaded handgun.
(c) If a licensee is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and if the licensee is carrying
a concealed handgun at the time the officer approaches, the licensee shall promptly inform any law
enforcement officer who approaches the licensee while stopped that the licensee has been issued a
concealed handgun license and that the licensee currently is carrying a concealed handgun; the licensee
shall not knowingly disregard or fail to comply with lawful orders of a law enforcement officer given
while the licensee is stopped or knowingly fail to keep the licensee’s hands in plain sight after any law
enforcement officer begins approaching the licensee while stopped and before the officer leaves, unless
directed otherwise by a law enforcement officer; and the licensee shall not knowingly remove, attempt
to remove, grasp, or hold the loaded handgun or knowingly have contact with the loaded handgun by
touching it with the licensee’s hands or fingers, in any manner in violation of R.C. § 2923.12(B), after
any law enforcement officer begins approaching the licensee while stopped and before the officer leaves.
(2) A valid concealed handgun license does not authorize the licensee to carry a concealed
handgun in any manner prohibited under R.C. § 2923.12(B) or in any manner prohibited under R.C.
§ 2923.16. A valid license does not authorize the licensee to carry a concealed handgun into any of the
following places:
(a) A police station, sheriff’s office, or state highway patrol station, premises controlled
by the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation, a state correctional institution, jail,
workhouse, or other detention facility, an airport passenger terminal, or an institution that is maintained,
operated, managed, and governed pursuant to R.C. § 5119.14(A) or R.C. § 5123.03(A)(1);
(b) A school safety zone if the licensee’s carrying the concealed handgun is in violation
of R.C. § 2923.122;
(c) A courthouse or another building or structure in which a courtroom is located, in
violation of R.C. § 2923.123;
(d) Any premises or open air arena for which a D permit has been issued under R.C.
Chapter 4303 if the licensee’s carrying the concealed handgun is in violation of R.C. § 2923.121;
(e) Any premises owned or leased by any public or private college, university, or other
institution of higher education, unless the handgun is in a locked motor vehicle or the licensee is in the
immediate process of placing the handgun in a locked motor vehicle;
Weapons Control 277
(f) Any church, synagogue, mosque, or other place of worship, unless the church,
synagogue, mosque, or other place of worship posts or permits otherwise;
(g) A child day-care center, a type A family day-care home, or a type B family day-care
home, except that this division does not prohibit a licensee who resides in a type A family day-care home
or a type B family day-care home from carrying a concealed handgun at any time in any part of the home
that is not dedicated or used for day-care purposes, or from carrying a concealed handgun in a part of
the home that is dedicated or used for day-care purposes at any time during which no children, other than
children of that licensee, are in the home;
(h) An aircraft that is in, or intended for operation in, foreign air transportation, interstate
air transportation, intrastate air transportation, or the transportation of mail by aircraft;
(i) Any building that is a government facility of this state or a political subdivision of this
state and that is not a building that is used primarily as a shelter, restroom, parking facility for motor
vehicles, or rest facility and is not a courthouse or other building or structure in which a courtroom is
located that is subject to division (B)(2)(c) of this section; and
(j) A place in which federal law prohibits the carrying of handguns.
(3) (a) Nothing in this division (B) shall negate or restrict a rule, policy, or practice of a
private employer that is not a private college, university, or other institution of higher education
concerning or prohibiting the presence of firearms on the private employer’s premises or property,
including motor vehicles owned by the private employer. Nothing in this division (B) shall require a
private employer of that nature to adopt a rule, policy, or practice concerning or prohibiting the presence
of firearms on the private employer’s premises or property, including motor vehicles owned by the
private employer.
(b)1. A private employer shall be immune from liability in a civil action for any injury,
death, or loss to person or property that allegedly was caused by or related to a licensee bringing a
handgun onto the premises or property of the private employer, including motor vehicles owned by the
private employer, unless the private employer acted with malicious purpose. A private employer is
immune from liability in a civil action for any injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly
was caused by or related to the private employer’s decision to permit a licensee to bring, or prohibit a
licensee from bringing, a handgun onto the premises or property of the private employer. As used in this
division, PRIVATE EMPLOYER includes a private college, university, or other institution of higher
education.
2. A political subdivision shall be immune from liability in a civil action, to the extent
and in the manner provided in R.C. Chapter 2744, for any injury, death, or loss to person or property
that allegedly was caused by or related to a licensee bringing a handgun onto any premises or property
owned, leased, or otherwise under the control of the political subdivision. As used in this division,
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2744.01.
(c) 1. Except as provided in division (B)(3)(c)2. of this section, the owner or person in
278 Madeira - General Offenses
control of private land or premises, and a private person or entity leasing land or premises owned by the
state, the United States, or a political subdivision of the state or the United States, may post a sign in a
conspicuous location on that land or on those premises prohibiting persons from carrying firearms or
concealed firearms on or onto that land or those premises. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
a person who knowingly violates a posted prohibition of that nature is guilty of criminal trespass in
violation of R.C. § 2911.21(A)(4) and is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If a person
knowingly violates a posted prohibition of that nature and the posted land or premises primarily was a
parking lot or other parking facility, the person is not guilty of criminal trespass in violation of R.C.
§ 2911.21(A)(4) and instead is subject only to a civil cause of action for trespass based on the violation.
2. A landlord may not prohibit or restrict a tenant who is a licensee and who on or
after September 9, 2008 enters into a rental agreement with the landlord for the use of residential
premises, and the tenant’s guest while the tenant is present, from lawfully carrying or possessing a
handgun on those residential premises.
3. As used in division (B)(3)(c) of this section:
LANDLORD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5321.01.
RENTAL AGREEMENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5321.01.
RESIDENTIAL PREMISES. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5321.01, except
the term does not include a dwelling unit that is owned or operated by a college or university.
TENANT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5321.01.
(4) A person who holds a concealed handgun license issued by another state that is recognized
by the Attorney General pursuant to a reciprocity agreement entered into pursuant to R.C. § 109.69 has
the same right to carry a concealed handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun
license under R.C. § 2923.125 and is subject to the same restrictions that apply to a person who carries
a license issued under that section.
(5) A peace officer has the same right to carry a concealed handgun in this state as a person
who was issued a concealed handgun license under R.C. § 2923.125. For purposes of reciprocity with
other states, a peace officer shall be considered to be a licensee in this state.
(6) (a) A qualified retired peace officer who possesses a retired peace officer identification
card issued pursuant to division (B)(6)(b) of this section and a valid firearms requalification certification
issued pursuant to division (B)(6)(c) of this section has the same right to carry a concealed handgun in
this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license under R.C. § 2923.125 and is subject
to the same restrictions that apply to a person who carries a license issued under that section. For
purposes of reciprocity with other states, a qualified retired peace officer who possesses a retired peace
officer identification card issued pursuant to division (B)(6)(b) of this section and a valid firearms
requalification certification issued pursuant to division (B)(6)(c) of this section shall be considered to be
a licensee in this state.
Weapons Control 279
(b)1. Each public agency of this state or of a political subdivision of this state that is
served by one or more peace officers shall issue a retired peace officer identification card to any person
who retired from service as a peace officer with that agency, if the issuance is in accordance with the
agency’s policies and procedures and if the person, with respect to the person’s service with that agency,
satisfies all of the following:
a. The person retired in good standing from service as a peace officer with the
public agency, and the retirement was not for reasons of mental instability;
b. Before retiring from service as a peace officer with that agency, the person
was authorized to engage in or supervise the prevention, detection, investigation, or prosecution of, or
the incarceration of any person for, any violation of law and the person had statutory powers of arrest;
c. At the time of the person’s retirement as a peace officer with that agency, the
person was trained and qualified to carry firearms in the performance of the peace officer’s duties; and
d. Before retiring from service as a peace officer with that agency, the person
was regularly employed as a peace officer for an aggregate of 15 years or more, or, in the alternative,
the person retired from service as a peace officer with that agency, after completing any applicable
probationary period of that service, due to a service-connected disability, as determined by the agency.
2. A retired peace officer identification card issued to a person under division
(B)(6)(b)1. of this section shall identify the person by name, contain a photograph of the person, identify
the public agency of this state or of the political subdivision of this state from which the person retired
as a peace officer and that is issuing the identification card, and specify that the person retired in good
standing from service as a peace officer with the issuing public agency and satisfies the criteria set forth
in divisions (B)(6)(b)1.a. to (B)(6)(B)1.d. of this section. In addition to the required content specified
in this division, a retired peace officer identification card issued to a person under division (B)(6)(b)1.
of this section may include the firearms requalification certification described in division (B)(6)(c) of this
section, and if the identification card includes that certification, the identification card shall serve as the
firearms requalification certification for the retired peace officer. If the issuing public agency issues
credentials to active law enforcement officers who serve the agency, the agency may comply with
division (B)(6)(b)1. of this section by issuing the same credentials to persons who retired from service
as a peace officer with the agency and who satisfy the criteria set forth in divisions (B)(6)(b)1.a. to
(B)(6)(b)1.d. of this section, provided that the credentials so issued to retired peace officers are stamped
with the word “RETIRED”.
3. A public agency of this state or of a political subdivision of this state may charge
persons who retired from service as a peace officer with the agency a reasonable fee for issuing to the
person a retired peace officer identification card pursuant to division (B)(6)(b)1. of this section.
(c) 1. If a person retired from service as a peace officer with a public agency of this state
or of a political subdivision of this state and the person satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions
(B)(6)(b)1.a. to (B)(6)(b)1.d. of this section, the public agency may provide the retired peace officer with
the opportunity to attend a firearms requalification program that is approved for purposes of firearms
280 Madeira - General Offenses
requalification required under R.C. § 109.801. The retired peace officer may be required to pay the cost
of the course.
2. If a retired peace officer who satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions
(B)(6)(b)1.a. to (B)(6)(b)1.d. of this section attends a firearms requalification program that is approved
for purposes of firearms requalification required under R.C. § 109.801, the retired peace officer’s
successful completion of the firearms requalification program requalifies the retired peace officer for
purposes of division (B)(6) of this section for five years from the date on which the program was
successfully completed, and the requalification is valid during that five-year period. If a retired peace
officer who satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (B)(6)(b)1.a. to (B)(6)(b)1.d. of this section
satisfactorily completes such a firearms requalification program, the retired peace officer shall be issued
a firearms requalification certification that identifies the retired peace officer by name, identifies the
entity that taught the program, specifies that the retired peace officer successfully completed the
program, specifies the date on which the course was successfully completed, and specifies that the
requalification is valid for five years from that date of successful completion. The firearms requalification
certification for a retired peace officer may be included in the retired peace officer identification card
issued to the retired peace officer under division (B)(6)(b) of this section.
3. A retired peace officer who attends a firearms requalification program that is
approved for purposes of firearms requalification required under R.C. § 109.801 may be required to pay
the cost of the program.
(7) As used in division (B) of this section:
GOVERNMENT FACILITY OF THIS STATE OR A POLITICAL SUBDIVISION OF
THIS STATE. Means any of the following:
1. A building or part of a building that is owned or leased by the government of this
state or a political subdivision of this state and where employees of the government of this state or the
political subdivision regularly are present for the purpose of performing their official duties as employees
of the state or political subdivision;
2. The office of a deputy registrar serving pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4503 that is used
to perform deputy registrar functions.
QUALIFIED RETIRED PEACE OFFICER. Means a person who satisfies all of the
following:
1. The person satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (B)(6)(b)1.a. to (B)(6)(b)1.d.
of this section.
2. The person is not under the influence of alcohol or another intoxicating or
hallucinatory drug or substance.
3. The person is not prohibited by federal law from receiving firearms.
Weapons Control 281
RETIRED PEACE OFFICER IDENTIFICATION CARD. Means an identification card
that is issued pursuant to division (B)(6)(b) of this section to a person who is a retired peace officer.
(R.C. § 2923.126)
(C) Posting of signs prohibiting possession. Pursuant to R.C. § 2923.1212:
(1) The following persons, boards and entities, or designees, shall post in the following
locations a sign that contains a statement in substantially the following form: “Unless otherwise
authorized by law, pursuant to the Ohio Revised Code, no person shall knowingly possess, have under
the person’s control, convey or attempt to convey a deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance onto these
premises.”
(a) The Director of Public Safety or the person or board charged with the erection,
maintenance or repair of police stations, municipal jails, and the municipal courthouse and courtrooms
in a conspicuous location at all police stations, municipal jails, and municipal courthouses and
courtrooms;
(b) The Sheriff or Sheriff’s designee who has charge of the Sheriff’s office in a
conspicuous location in that office;
(c) The Superintendent of the State Highway Patrol or the Superintendent’s designee in
a conspicuous location at all state highway patrol stations;
(d) Each sheriff, chief of police or person in charge of every county, multi-county,
municipal, municipal-county, or multi-county/municipal jail or workhouse, community-based
correctional facility, halfway house, alternative residential facility or other local or state correctional
institution or detention facility within the state, or that person’s designee, in a conspicuous location at
that facility under that person’s charge;
(e) The board of trustees of a regional airport authority, chief administrative officer of an
airport facility or other person in charge of an airport facility in a conspicuous location at each airport
facility under that person’s control;
(f) The officer or officer’s designee who has charge of a courthouse or the building or
structure in which a courtroom is located in a conspicuous location in that building or structure;
(g) The Superintendent of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation or the
Superintendent’s designee in a conspicuous location in all premises controlled by that Bureau;
(h) The owner, administrator or operator of a child day-care center, a type A family
day-care home, or a type B family day-care home; or
(i) The officer of this state or of a political subdivision of this state, or the officer’s
designee, who has charge of a building that is a government facility of this state or the political
subdivision of this state, as defined in R.C. § 2923.126, and that is not a building that is used primarily
282 Madeira - General Offenses
as a shelter, restroom, parking facility for motor vehicles, or rest facility and is not a courthouse or other
building or structure in which a courtroom is located that is subject to R.C. § 2923.126(B)(3).
(2) The following boards, bodies and persons, or designees, shall post in the following
locations a sign that contains a statement in substantially the following form: “Unless otherwise
authorized by law, pursuant to R.C. § 2923.122, no person shall knowingly possess, have under the
person’s control, convey, or attempt to convey a deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance into a school
safety zone.”
(a) A board of education of a city, local, exempted village, or joint vocational school
district or that board’s designee in a conspicuous location in each building and on each parcel of real
property owned or controlled by the board;
(b) A governing body of a school for which the State Board of Education prescribes
minimum standards under R.C. § 3301.07 or that body’s designee in a conspicuous location in each
building and on each parcel of real property owned or controlled by the school; and
(c) The principal or chief administrative officer of a nonpublic school in a conspicuous
location on property owned or controlled by that nonpublic school.
(R.C. § 2923.1212) (1985 Code, § 137.09)
§ 137.10 POSSESSION OF AN OBJECT INDISTINGUISHABLE FROM A FIREARM IN A
SCHOOL SAFETY ZONE.
(A) No person shall knowingly possess an object in a school safety zone if both of the following
apply:
(1) The object is indistinguishable from a firearm, whether or not the object is capable of being
fired; and
(2) The person indicates that the person possesses the object and that it is a firearm, or the
person knowingly displays or brandishes the object and indicates that it is a firearm.
(B) (1) This section does not apply to any of the following:
(a) An officer, agent or employee of this or any other state or the United States, or a law
enforcement officer, who is authorized to carry deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance and is acting
within the scope of the officer’s, agent’s or employee’s duties, a security officer employed by a board
of education or governing body of a school during the time that the security officer is on duty pursuant
to that contract of employment, or any other person who has written authorization from the board of
education or governing body of a school to convey deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance into a school
safety zone or to possess a deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance in a school safety zone and who
conveys or possesses the deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance in accordance with that authorization;
or
Weapons Control 283
(b) Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to carry deadly weapons
or dangerous ordnance, and who is subject to and in compliance with the requirements of R.C.
§ 109.801, unless the appointing authority of the person has expressly specified that the exemption
provided in this division (B)(1)(b) does not apply to the person.
(2) This section does not apply to premises upon which home schooling is conducted. This
section also does not apply to a school administrator, teacher or employee who possesses an object that
is indistinguishable from a firearm for legitimate school purposes during the course of employment, a
student who uses an object that is indistinguishable from a firearm under the direction of a school
administrator, teacher or employee, or any other person who, with the express prior approval of a school
administrator, possesses an object that is indistinguishable from a firearm for a legitimate purpose,
including the use of the object in a ceremonial activity, a play, re-enactment or other dramatic
presentation, or a ROTC activity or another similar use of the object.
(3) This section does not apply to a person who conveys or attempts to convey a handgun into,
or possesses a handgun in, a school safety zone if, at the time of that conveyance, attempted conveyance,
or possession of the handgun, all of the following apply:
(a) The person does not enter into a school building or onto school premises and is not at
a school activity;
(b) The person is carrying a valid concealed handgun license;
(c) The person is in the school safety zone in accordance with 18 U.S.C. § 922(q)(2)(B);
and
(d) The person is not knowingly in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B)(1) or (B)(3)
through (B)(10).
(4) This section does not apply to a person who conveys or attempts to convey a handgun into,
or possesses a handgun in, a school safety zone if at the time of that conveyance, attempted conveyance,
or possession of the handgun all of the following apply:
(a) The person is carrying a valid concealed handgun license;
(b) The person is the driver or passenger in a motor vehicle and is in the school safety zone
while immediately in the process of picking up or dropping off a child; and
(c) The person is not in violation of section R.C. § 2923.16.
(C) Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal possession of an object indistinguishable from
a firearm in a school safety zone. Except as otherwise provided in this division, illegal possession of an
object indistinguishable from a firearm in a school safety zone is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If
the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this section, illegal possession of an object
indistinguishable from a firearm in a school safety zone is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
284 Madeira - General Offenses
state law.
(D) (1) In addition to any other penalty imposed upon a person who is convicted of or pleads guilty
to a violation of this section, and subject to division (D)(2) of this section, if the offender has not attained
19 years of age, regardless of whether the offender is attending or is enrolled in a school operated by
a board of education or for which the State Board of Education prescribes minimum standards under
R.C. § 3301.07, the court shall impose upon the offender a class four suspension of the offender’s
probationary driver’s license, restricted license, driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit or probationary commercial driver’s license that then is in effect from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4) and shall deny the offender the issuance of any permit or license of
that type during the period of the suspension. If the offender is not a resident of this state, the court shall
impose a class four suspension of the nonresident operating privilege of the offender from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4).
(2) If the offender shows good cause why the court should not suspend one of the types of
licenses, permits or privileges specified in division (D)(1) of this section or deny the issuance of one of
the temporary instruction permits specified in division (D)(1) of this section, the court in its discretion
may choose not to impose the suspension, revocation or denial required in division (D)(1) of this section,
but the court, in its discretion, instead may require the offender to perform community service for a
number of hours determined by the court.
(E) As used in this section, OBJECT THAT IS INDISTINGUISHABLE FROM A FIREARM
means an object made, constructed or altered so that, to a reasonable person without specialized training
in firearms, the object appears to be a firearm.
(R.C. § 2923.122(C) - (G)) (1985 Code, § 137.10)
§ 137.11 POSSESSION OF DEADLY WEAPON WHILE UNDER DETENTION.
(A) As used in this section, DETENTION and DETENTION FACILITY have the same meanings
as in R.C. § 2921.01.
(B) No person under detention at a detention facility shall possess a deadly weapon.
(C) Whoever violates this section is guilty of possession of a deadly weapon while under detention.
(1) Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(2) of this section, possession of a deadly
weapon while under detention is a felony to be prosecuted under state law.
(2) If the offender, at the time of the commission of the offense, was under detention as an
alleged or adjudicated delinquent child or unruly child and if at the time the offender commits the act for
which the offender was under detention it would not be a felony if committed by an adult, possession
of a deadly weapon while under detention is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2923.131) (1985 Code, § 137.11)
Weapons Control 285
§ 137.12 DEFACED FIREARMS.
(A) No person shall do either of the following:
(1) Change, alter, remove or obliterate the name of the manufacturer, model, manufacturer’s
serial number or other mark of identification on a firearm; or
(2) Possess a firearm knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the name of the
manufacturer, model, manufacturer’s serial number or other mark of identification on the firearm has
been changed, altered, removed or obliterated.
(B) (1) Whoever violates division (A)(1) of this section is guilty of defacing identification marks
of a firearm. Except as otherwise provided in this division (B)(1), defacing identification marks of a
firearm is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (A)(1) of this section, defacing identification marks of a firearm is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(2) Whoever violates division (A)(2) of this section is guilty of possessing a defaced firearm.
Except as otherwise provided in this division (B)(2), possessing a defaced firearm is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of
division (A)(2) of this section, possessing a defaced firearm is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(C) Division (A) of this section does not apply to any firearm on which no manufacturer’s serial
number was inscribed at the time of its manufacture.
(R.C. § 2923.201) (1985 Code, § 137.12)
§ 137.13 POSSESSING CRIMINAL TOOLS.
(A) No person shall possess or have under his or her control any substance, device, instrument or
article, with purpose to use it criminally.
(B) Each of the following constitutes prima facie evidence of criminal purpose:
(1) Possession or control of any dangerous ordnance, or the materials or parts for making a
dangerous ordnance, in the absence of circumstances indicating the dangerous ordnance, materials or
parts are intended for a legitimate use;
(2) Possession or control of any substance, device, instrument or article designed or specially
adapted for criminal use; and
(3) Possession or control of any substance, device, instrument or article commonly used for
criminal purposes, under circumstances indicating the item is intended for criminal use.
286 Madeira - General Offenses
(C) Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing criminal tools. Except as otherwise
provided in this division (C), possessing criminal tools is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
circumstances indicate that the substance, device, instrument or article involved in the offense was
intended for use in the commission of a felony, possessing criminal tools is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2923.24)
§ 137.14 POINTING AND DISCHARGING FIREARMS AND OTHER WEAPONS.
(A) Discharge of firearms on or near prohibited premises. No person shall do any of the following:
(1) Without permission from the proper officials and subject to division (B)(1) of this section,
discharge a firearm upon or over a cemetery or within 100 yards of a cemetery;
(2) Subject to division (B)(2) of this section, discharge of a firearm on a lawn, park, pleasure
ground, orchard or other ground appurtenant to a schoolhouse, church or inhabited dwelling, the
property of another or a charitable institution; or
(3) Discharge a firearm upon or over a public road or highway.
(B) Application of division (A).
(1) Division (A)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who while on the person’s own
land, discharges a firearm.
(2) Division (A)(2) of this section does not apply to a person who owns any type of property
described in that division and who, while on the person’s own enclosure, discharges a firearm.
(C) Penalty for violation of division (A). Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
discharge of a firearm on or near prohibited premises. A violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. A violation of division (A)(3) shall be punished as
follows:
(1) Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(2) of this section, a violation of division (A)(3)
of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(2) If the violation created a substantial risk of physical harm to any person, caused serious
physical harm to property, caused physical harm to any person, or caused serious physical harm to any
person, a violation of division (A)(3) is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2923.162)
(D) Hunting near township park.
(1) No person shall hunt, shoot, or kill game within one-half mile of a township park unless
Weapons Control 287
the Board of Township Park Commissioners has granted permission to kill game not desired within the
limits prohibited by this division.
(R.C. § 3773.06)
(2) Whoever violates division (D)(1) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 3773.99(A))
(E) Unlawful discharge. No person shall discharge any BB gun, air gun or firearm, or make use
of any sling, bow and arrow or crossbow, within the corporate limits of the municipality.
(F) Unlawful pointing or aiming. No person shall, intentionally and without malice, point or aim
any BB gun, air gun or firearm, or any sling, bow and arrow or crossbow at or toward another.
(G) Penalty for violations of division (E) or (F). Whoever violates division (E) or (F) of this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(H) Exceptions. This section shall not prohibit the firing of a military salute or the firing of weapons
by persons of the nation’s armed forces acting under military authority, and shall not apply to law
enforcement officials or other government officials in the proper enforcement of the law, or to any
person in the proper exercise of the right of self defense, or to any person otherwise lawfully permitted
by proper federal, state or local authorities to discharge a BB gun, air gun or firearm, or to use a sling,
bow and arrow, or crossbow in a manner contrary to the provisions of this section. Division (E) of this
section does not extend to cases in which BB guns, air guns or firearms, or slings, bows and arrows or
crossbows are used in the confines of structures or used within the confines of a person’s own property,
provided such use is under adult supervision and is approved by the municipality.
§ 137.15 LICENSE OR PERMIT TO POSSESS DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.
(A) Upon application to the Sheriff of the county or Safety Director or Police Chief of the
municipality where the applicant resides or has his or her principal place of business, and upon payment
of the fee specified in division (B) of this section, a license or temporary permit shall be issued to
qualified applicants to acquire, possess, carry or use a dangerous ordnance for the following purposes:
(1) Contractors, wreckers, quarry workers, mine operators and other persons regularly
employing explosives in the course of a legitimate business, with respect to explosives and explosive
devices acquired, possessed, carried or used in the course of such business;
(2) Farmers, with respect to explosives and explosive devices acquired, possessed, carried or
used for agricultural purposes on lands farmed by them;
(3) Scientists, engineers and instructors, with respect to a dangerous ordnance acquired,
possessed, carried or used in the course of bona fide research or instruction;
288 Madeira - General Offenses
(4) Financial institutions and armored car company guards, with respect to automatic firearms
lawfully acquired, possessed, carried or used by any such person while acting within the scope of his or
her duties; and
(5) In the discretion of the issuing authority, any responsible person, with respect to a
dangerous ordnance lawfully acquired, possessed, carried or used for a legitimate research, scientific,
educational, industrial or other proper purpose.
(B) Application for a license or temporary permit under this section shall be in writing under oath
to the Sheriff of the county or Safety Director or Police Chief of the municipality where the applicant
resides or has his or her principal place of business. The application shall be accompanied by an
application fee of $50 when the application is for a license, and an application fee of $5 when the
application is for a temporary permit. The fees shall be paid into the General Revenue Fund of the county
or municipality. The application shall contain the following information:
(1) The name, age, address, occupation and business address of the applicant, if he or she is
a natural person, or the name, address and principal place of business of the applicant if the applicant
is a corporation;
(2) A description of the dangerous ordnance for which a permit is requested;
(3) A description of the places where and the manner in which the dangerous ordnance is to
be kept, carried and used;
(4) A statement of the purposes for which the dangerous ordnance is to be acquired, possessed,
carried or used; and
(5) Such other information as the issuing authority may require in giving effect to this section.
(C) Upon investigation, the issuing authority shall issue a license or temporary permit only if all of
the following apply:
(1) The applicant is not otherwise prohibited by law from acquiring, having, carrying or using
a dangerous ordnance;
(2) The applicant is 21 years of age or over, if the applicant is a natural person;
(3) It appears that the applicant has sufficient competence to safely acquire, possess, carry or
use the dangerous ordnance, and that proper precautions will be taken to protect the security of the
dangerous ordnance and ensure the safety of persons and property; and
(4) It appears that the dangerous ordnance will be lawfully acquired, possessed, carried and
used by the applicant for a legitimate purpose.
(D) The license or temporary permit shall identify the person to whom it is issued, identify the
Weapons Control 289
dangerous ordnance involved and state the purposes for which the license or temporary permit is issued,
state the expiration date, if any, and list such restrictions on the acquisition, possession, carriage or use
of the dangerous ordnance as the issuing authority considers advisable to protect the security of the
dangerous ordnance and ensure the safety of persons and property.
(E) A temporary permit shall be issued for the casual use of explosives and explosive devices, and
other consumable dangerous ordnance, and shall expire within 30 days of its issuance. A license shall
be issued for the regular use of a consumable dangerous ordnance, which license need not specify an
expiration date, but the issuing authority may specify such expiration date, not earlier than one year from
the date of issuance, as it considers advisable in view of the nature of the dangerous ordnance and the
purposes for which the license is issued.
(F) The dangerous ordnance specified in a license or temporary permit may be obtained by the
holder anywhere in the state. Pursuant to R.C. § 2923.18(F), the holder of a license may use such
dangerous ordnance anywhere in the state. The holder of a temporary permit may use such dangerous
ordnance only within the territorial jurisdiction of the issuing authority.
(G) The issuing authority shall forward to the State Fire Marshal a copy of each license or
temporary permit issued pursuant to this section, and a copy of each record of a transaction in a
dangerous ordnance and of each report of a lost or stolen dangerous ordnance, given to the local law
enforcement authority as required by R.C. § 2923.20(A)(4) and (A)(5) or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance. The State Fire Marshal will keep a permanent file of all licenses and temporary
permits issued pursuant to this section, and of all records of transactions in, and losses or thefts of a
dangerous ordnance forwarded by local law enforcement authorities pursuant to this section.
(R.C. § 2923.18)
290 Madeira - General Offenses
CHAPTER 138: DRUG OFFENSES
Section
138.01 Definitions
138.02 Trafficking in controlled substances; gift of marihuana
138.03 Drug possession offenses
138.04 Possession of drug abuse instruments
138.05 Permitting drug abuse
138.06 Illegal cultivation of marihuana
138.07 Abusing harmful intoxicants
138.08 Illegal dispensing of drug samples
138.09 Dispensing nitrous oxide
138.10 Laboratory report required
138.11 Federal prosecution bar to municipal prosecution
138.12 Barbiturates and amphetamines (downers and uppers)
138.13 Controlled substance or prescription labels
138.14 Use, possession or sale of drug paraphernalia
138.15 Counterfeit controlled substances
138.16 Unlawful furnishing of prescription to enable persons to be issued handicapped parking
placards or license plates
138.17 Pseudoephedrine sales
138.18 Controlled substance schedules
138.19 Possession, sale and disposal of hypodermics
§ 138.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning. Words, terms and phrases and their derivatives used in this
chapter which are not defined in this section shall have the meanings given to them in the Ohio Revised
Code.
ADMINISTER. The direct application of a drug, whether by injection, inhalation, ingestion or any
other means to a person or an animal.
ADULTERATE. To cause a drug to be adulterated as described in R.C. § 3715.63.
BULK AMOUNT. Of a controlled substance means any of the following:
291
292 Madeira - General Offenses
(1) For any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance included in Schedule I, Schedule
II or Schedule III, with the exception of controlled substance analogs, marihuana, cocaine, L.S.D.,
heroin, and hashish and except as provided in division (2) or (5) of this definition, whichever of the
following is applicable:
(a) An amount equal to or exceeding ten grams or 25 unit doses of a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule I opiate or opium derivative;
(b) An amount equal to or exceeding ten grams of a compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance that is or contains any amount of raw or gum opium;
(c) An amount equal to or exceeding 30 grams or ten unit doses of a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule I hallucinogen other than
tetrahydrocannabinol or lysergic acid amide, or a Schedule I stimulant or depressant;
(d) An amount equal to or exceeding 20 grams or five times the maximum daily dose in
the usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II opiate or opium derivative;
(e) An amount equal to or exceeding five grams or ten unit doses of a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of phencyclidine;
(f) An amount equal to or exceeding 120 grams or 30 times the maximum daily dose in
the usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II stimulant that is in a final
dosage form manufactured by a person authorized by the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21
U.S.C. §§ 301 et seq., as amended) and the federal drug abuse control laws, as defined in this section,
that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II depressant substance or a Schedule II hallucinogenic
substance;
(g) An amount equal to or exceeding three grams of a compound, mixture, preparation,
or substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II stimulant, or any of its salts or isomers, that
is not in a final dosage form manufactured by a person authorized by the Federal Food, Drug and
Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. §§ 301 et seq., as amended) and the federal drug abuse control laws;
(2) An amount equal to or exceeding 120 grams or 30 times the maximum daily dose in the
usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture,
preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule III or IV substance other than an
anabolic steroid or a Schedule III opiate or opium derivative;
(3) An amount equal to or exceeding 20 grams or five times the maximum daily dose in the
usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture,
preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule III opiate or opium derivative;
Drug Offenses 293
(4) An amount equal to or exceeding 250 milliliters or 250 grams of a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule V substance; and
(5) An amount equal to or exceeding 200 solid dosage units, 16 grams, or 16 milliliters of a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule III anabolic
steroid.
CERTIFIED GRIEVANCE COMMITTEE. A duly constituted and organized committee of the
Ohio State Bar Association or of one or more local bar associations of the state that complies with the
criteria set forth in Rule V, Section 6 of the Rules for the Government of the Bar of Ohio.
COCAINE. Any of the following:
(1) A cocaine salt, isomer or derivative, a salt of a cocaine isomer or derivative, or the base
form of cocaine;
(2) Coca leaves or a salt, compound, derivative or preparation of coca leaves, including
ecgonine, a salt, isomer or derivative of ecgonine, or a salt of an isomer or derivative of ecgonine; or
(3) A salt, compound, derivative, or preparation of a substance identified in division (1) or (2)
of this definition that is chemically equivalent to or identical with any of those substances, except that
the substances shall not include decocainized coca leaves or extraction of coca leaves if the extractions
do not contain cocaine or ecgonine.
COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A JUVENILE. An offense is “committed in the vicinity of
a juvenile” if the offender commits the offense within 100 feet of a juvenile or within the view of a
juvenile, regardless of whether the offender knows the age of the juvenile, whether the offender knows
the offense is being committed within 100 feet of or within view of the juvenile, or whether the juvenile
actually views the commission of the offense.
COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A SCHOOL. An offense is “committed in the vicinity of
a school” if the offender commits the offense on school premises, in a school building, or within 1,000
feet of the boundaries of any school premises, regardless of whether the offender knows the offense is
being committed on school premises, in a school building, or within 1,000 feet of the boundaries of any
school premises.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. A drug, compound, mixture, preparation, or substance included
in Schedule I, II, III, IV or V of R.C. § 3719.41.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE ANALOG.
(1) The phrase means, except as provided in division (2) of this definition, a substance to which
both of the following apply:
294 Madeira - General Offenses
(a) The chemical structure of the substance is substantially similar to the structure of a
controlled substance in Schedule I or II; and
(b) One of the following applies regarding the substance:
1. The substance has a stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic effect on the central
nervous system that is substantially similar to or greater than the stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic
effect on the central nervous system of a controlled substance in Schedule I or II; or
2. With respect to a particular person, that person represents or intends the substance
to have a stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic effect on the central nervous system that is
substantially similar to or greater than the stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic effect on the central
nervous system of a controlled substance in Schedule I or II.
(2) The phrase does not include any of the following:
(a) A controlled substance;
(b) Any substance for which there is an approved new drug application;
(c) With respect to a particular person, any substance if an exemption is in effect for
investigational use for that person pursuant to federal law to the extent that conduct with respect to that
substance is pursuant to that exemption; or
(d) Any substance to the extent it is not intended for human consumption before the
exemption described in division (2)(c) of this definition takes effect with respect to that substance.
(3) Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 2925.03 or R.C. § 2925.11, a controlled substance
analog, to the extent intended for human consumption, shall be treated for purposes of any provision of
this Code or the Ohio Revised Code as a controlled substance in Schedule I.
COUNTERFEIT CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Any of the following:
(1) Any drug that bears, or whose container or label bears, a trademark, trade name or other
identifying mark used without authorization of the owner of rights to the trademark, trade name or
identifying mark;
(2) Any unmarked or unlabeled substance that is represented to be a controlled substance
manufactured, processed, packed or distributed by a person other than the person that manufactured,
processed, packed or distributed it;
(3) Any substance that is represented to be a controlled substance but is not a controlled
substance or is a different controlled substance; and
Drug Offenses 295
(4) Any substance other than a controlled substance that a reasonable person would believe to
be a controlled substance because of its similarity in shape, size, and color, or its markings, labeling,
packaging, distribution or the price for which it is sold or offered for sale.
CULTIVATE. Includes planting, watering, fertilizing or tilling.
DANGEROUS DRUG. Any of the following:
(1) Any drug to which either of the following applies:
(a) Under the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, is required to bear a label containing
the legend “Caution: Federal law prohibits dispensing without a prescription” or “Caution: Federal law
restricts this drug to use by or on the order of a licensed veterinarian” or any similar restrictive
statement, or may be dispensed only upon a prescription; or
(b) Under R.C. Chapter 3715 or 3719, may be dispensed only upon a prescription.
(2) Any drug that contains a Schedule V controlled substance and that is exempt from R.C.
Chapter 3719 or to which that chapter does not apply.
(3) Any drug intended for administration by injection into the human body other than through
a natural orifice of the human body.
DECEPTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
DISCIPLINARY COUNSEL. The disciplinary counsel appointed by the Board of Commissioners
on Grievances and Discipline of the Ohio Supreme Court under the Rules for the Government of the Bar
of Ohio.
DISPENSE. Means to sell, leave with, give away, dispose of or deliver.
DISTRIBUTE. Means to deal in, ship, transport or deliver, but does not include administering or
dispensing a drug.
DRUG. Any of the following:
(1) Any article recognized in the official United States pharmacopeia, national formulary or
any supplement intended for use in the diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment or prevention of disease
in humans or other animals;
(2) Any other article intended for use in the diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment or prevention
of disease in humans or other animals;
(3) Any article, other than food, intended to affect the structure or any function of the body
of humans or other animals; or
296 Madeira - General Offenses
(4) Any article intended for use as a component of any article specified in division (1), (2) or
(3) above; but does not include devices or their components, parts, or accessories.
DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Any of the following:
(1) A violation of R.C. § 2913.02(A) that constitutes theft of drugs, or any violation of R.C.
§ 2925.02, 2925.03, 2925.04, 2925.041, 2925.05, 2925.06, 2925.11, 2925.12, 2925.13, 2925.22,
2925.23, 2925.24, 2925.31, 2925.32, 2925.36 or 2925.37;
(2) A violation of an existing or former law of a municipality, state or any other state or of the
United States, that is substantially equivalent to any section listed in division (1) of this definition;
(3) An offense under an existing or former law of a municipality, state or any other state, or
of the United States, of which planting, cultivating, harvesting, processing, making, manufacturing,
producing, shipping, transporting, delivering, acquiring, possessing, storing, distributing, dispensing,
selling, inducing another to use, administering to another, using or otherwise dealing with a controlled
substance is an element; or
(4) A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in committing or attempting to
commit, any offense under division (1), (2) or (3) of this definition.
DRUG DEPENDENT PERSON. Any person who, by reason of the use of any drug of abuse, is
physically and/or psychologically dependent upon the use of such drug to the detriment of the person’s
health or welfare.
DRUG OF ABUSE. Any controlled substance, any harmful intoxicant, and any dangerous drug,
as defined in this section.
FEDERAL DRUG ABUSE CONTROL LAWS. The “Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and
Control Act of 1970,” 21 U.S.C. §§ 801 et seq., as amended.
FELONY DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Any drug abuse offense that would constitute a felony under
the laws of this state, any other state or the United States.
HARMFUL INTOXICANT. Does not include beer or intoxicating liquor, but means any of the
following:
(1) Any compound, mixture, preparation or substance the gas, fumes or vapor of which when
inhaled can induce intoxication, excitement, giddiness, irrational behavior, depression, stupefaction,
paralysis, unconsciousness, asphyxiation or other harmful physiological effects, and includes but is not
limited to any of the following:
(a) Any volatile organic solvent, plastic cement, model cement, fingernail polish remover,
lacquer thinner, cleaning fluid, gasoline or other preparation containing a volatile organic solvent;
Drug Offenses 297
(b) Any aerosol propellant;
(c) Any fluorocarbon refrigerant; or
(d) Any anesthetic gas.
(2) Gamma Butyrolactone; or
(3) 1,4 Butanediol.
HASHISH. The resin or a preparation of the resin contained in marihuana, whether in solid form
or in a liquid concentrate, liquid extract or liquid distillate form.
HYPODERMIC. A hypodermic syringe or needle, or other instrument or device for the injection
of medication.
JUVENILE. A person under 18 years of age.
LABORATORY. A laboratory approved by the State Board of Pharmacy as proper to be entrusted
with the custody of controlled substances and the use of controlled substances for scientific and clinical
purposes and for purposes of instruction.
LAWFUL PRESCRIPTION. A prescription that is issued for a legitimate medical purpose by a
licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs, that is not altered or forged, and that was not
obtained by means of deception or by the commission of any theft offense.
LICENSED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL AUTHORIZED TO PRESCRIBE DRUGS or
PRESCRIBER. An individual who is authorized by law to prescribe drugs or dangerous drugs or drug
therapy related devices in the course of the individual’s professional practice, including only the
following:
(1) A dentist licensed under R.C. Chapter 4715;
(2) A clinical nurse specialist, certified nurse-midwife, or certified nurse practitioner who holds
a certificate to prescribe issued under R.C. § 4723.48;
(3) An optometrist licensed under R.C. Chapter 4725 to practice optometry under a therapeutic
pharmaceutical agent’s certificate;
(4) A physician authorized under R.C. Chapter 4731 to practice medicine and surgery,
osteopathic medicine and surgery, or podiatric medicine and surgery;
(5) A physician assistant who holds a certificate to prescribe issued under R.C. Chapter 4730;
and
298 Madeira - General Offenses
(6) A veterinarian licensed under R.C. Chapter 4741.
L.S.D. Lysergic acid diethylamide.
MAJOR DRUG OFFENDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
MANDATORY PRISON TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
MANUFACTURE. To plant, cultivate, harvest, process, make, prepare, or otherwise engage in any
part of the production of a drug, by propagation, extraction, chemical synthesis or compounding, or any
combination of the same, and includes packaging, repackaging, labeling and other activities incident to
production.
MANUFACTURER. A person who manufactures a controlled substance, as “manufacture” is
defined by this section.
MARIHUANA. All parts of a plant of the genus cannabis, whether growing or not, the seeds of a
plant of that type; the resin extracted from a part of a plant of that type; and every compound,
manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of a plant of that type or of its seeds or resin. The
term does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oils or cake made
from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation
of the mature stalks, except the resin extracted from the mature stalks, fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized
seed of the plant that is incapable of germination. The term does not include hashish.
METHAMPHETAMINE. Methamphetamine, any salt, isomer or salt of an isomer of
methamphetamine, or any compound, mixture, preparation or substance containing methamphetamine
or any salt, isomer or salt of an isomer of methamphetamine.
MINOR DRUG POSSESSION OFFENSE. Either of the following:
(1) A violation of R.C. § 2925.11 as it existed prior to July 1, 1996, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance; or
(2) A violation of R.C. § 2925.11 as it exists on and after July 1, 1996, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, that is a misdemeanor or a felony of the fifth degree.
OFFICIAL WRITTEN ORDER. An order written on a form provided for that purpose by the
Director of the United States Drug Enforcement Administration, under any laws of the United States
making provision for the order, if the order forms are authorized and required by federal law.
PERSON. Means any individual, corporation, government, governmental subdivision or agency,
business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association or other legal entity.
PHARMACIST. A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 to engage in the practice of pharmacy.
Drug Offenses 299
PHARMACY. Except when used in a context that refers to the practice of pharmacy, means any
area, room, rooms, place of business, department, or portion of any of the foregoing, where the practice
of pharmacy is conducted.
POSSESS or POSSESSION. Having control over a thing or substance but may not be inferred
solely from mere access to the thing or substance through ownership or occupation of the premises upon
which the thing or substance is found.
PRESCRIPTION. A written, electronic or oral order for drugs or combination or mixtures of drugs
to be used by a particular individual or for treating a particular animal, issued by a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs.
PRESUMPTION FOR A PRISON TERM or PRESUMPTION THAT A PRISON TERM SHALL
BE IMPOSED. A presumption as described in R.C. § 2929.13(D) that a prison term is a necessary
sanction for a felony in order to comply with the purposes and principles of sentencing under R.C.
§ 2929.11.
PROFESSIONAL LICENSE. Any license, permit, certificate, registration, qualification, admission,
temporary license, temporary permit, temporary certificate, or temporary registration that is described
in R.C. § 2925.01(W)(1) through (W)(36) and that qualifies a person as a professionally licensed person.
PROFESSIONALLY LICENSED PERSON. Any of the following:
(1) A person who has obtained a license as a manufacturer of controlled substances or a
wholesaler of controlled substances under R.C. Chapter 3719;
(2) A person who has received a certificate or temporary certificate as a certified public
accountant or who has registered as a public accountant under R.C. Chapter 4701 and who holds an Ohio
permit issued under that chapter;
(3) A person who holds a certificate of qualification to practice architecture issued or renewed
and registered under R.C. Chapter 4703;
(4) A person who is registered as a landscape architect under R.C. Chapter 4703 or who holds
a permit as a landscape architect issued under that chapter;
(5) A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4707;
(6) A person who has been issued a certificate of registration as a registered barber under R.C.
Chapter 4709;
(7) A person licensed and regulated to engage in the business of a debt pooling company by
a legislative authority, under authority of R.C. Chapter 4710;
300 Madeira - General Offenses
(8) A person who has been issued a cosmetologist’s license, hair designer’s license,
manicurist’s license, esthetician’s license, natural hair stylist’s license, managing cosmetologist’s license,
managing hair designer’s license, managing manicurist’s license, managing esthetician’s license,
managing natural hair stylist’s license, cosmetology instructor’s license, hair design instructor’s license,
manicurist instructor’s license, esthetics instructor’s license, natural hair style instructor’s license,
independent contractor’s license or tanning facility permit under R.C. Chapter 4713;
(9) A person who has been issued a license to practice dentistry, a general anesthesia permit,
a conscious intravenous sedation permit, a limited resident’s license, a limited teaching license, a dental
hygienist’s license, or a dental hygienist’s teacher’s certificate under R.C. Chapter 4715;
(10) A person who has been issued an embalmer’s license, a funeral director’s license, a funeral
home license, or a crematory license, or who has been registered for an embalmer’s or funeral director’s
apprenticeship under R.C. Chapter 4717;
(11) A person who has been licensed as a registered nurse or practical nurse, or who has been
issued a certificate for the practice of nurse-midwifery under R.C. Chapter 4723;
(12) A person who has been licensed to practice optometry or to engage in optical dispensing
under R.C. Chapter 4725;
(13) A person licensed to act as a pawnbroker under R.C. Chapter 4727;
(14) A person licensed to act as a precious metals dealer under R.C. Chapter 4728;
(15) A person licensed as a pharmacist, a pharmacy intern, a wholesale distributor of dangerous
drugs, or a terminal distributor of dangerous drugs under R.C. Chapter 4729;
(16) A person who is authorized to practice as a physician assistant under R.C. Chapter 4730;
(17) A person who has been issued a certificate to practice medicine and surgery, osteopathic
medicine and surgery, a limited branch of medicine, or podiatry under R.C. Chapter 4731;
(18) A person licensed as a psychologist or school psychologist under R.C. Chapter 4732;
(19) A person registered to practice the profession of engineering or surveying under R.C.
Chapter 4733;
(20) A person who has been issued a license to practice chiropractic under R.C. Chapter 4734;
(21) A person licensed to act as a real estate broker or real estate salesperson under R.C.
Chapter 4735;
(22) A person registered as a registered sanitarian under R.C. Chapter 4736;
Drug Offenses 301
(23) A person licensed to operate or maintain a junkyard under R.C. Chapter 4737;
(24) A person who has been issued a motor vehicle salvage dealer’s license under R.C. Chapter
4738;
(25) A person who has been licensed to act as a steam engineer under R.C. Chapter 4739;
(26) A person who has been issued a license or temporary permit to practice veterinary medicine
or any of its branches, or who is registered as a graduate animal technician under R.C. Chapter 4741;
(27) A person who has been issued a hearing aid dealer’s or fitter’s license or trainee permit
under R.C. Chapter 4747;
(28) A person who has been issued a class A, class B, or class C license or who has been
registered as an investigator or security guard employee under R.C. Chapter 4749;
(29) A person licensed and registered to practice as a nursing home administrator under R.C.
Chapter 4751;
(30) A person licensed to practice as a speech-language pathologist or audiologist under R.C.
Chapter 4753;
(31) A person issued a license as an occupational therapist or physical therapist under R.C.
Chapter 4755;
(32) A person who is licensed as a professional clinical counselor or professional counselor,
licensed as a social worker or independent social worker, or registered as a social work assistant under
R.C. Chapter 4757;
(33) A person issued a license to practice dietetics under R.C. Chapter 4759;
(34) A person who has been issued a license or limited permit to practice respiratory therapy
under R.C. Chapter 4761;
(35) A person who has been issued a real estate appraiser certificate under R.C. Chapter 4763;
or
(36) A person who has been admitted to the bar by order of the Ohio Supreme Court in
compliance with its prescribed and published rules.
PUBLIC PREMISES. Any hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall, or other place of public
accommodation, business, amusement, or resort.
302 Madeira - General Offenses
SALE. Includes delivery, barter, exchange, transfer, or gift, or offer thereof, and each transaction
of those natures made by any person, whether as principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee.
SAMPLE DRUG. A drug or pharmaceutical preparation that would be hazardous to health or safety
if used without the supervision of a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs, or a drug
of abuse, and that, at one time, had been placed in a container plainly marked as a sample by a
manufacturer.
SCHEDULE I, II, III, IV OR V. Controlled substance Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V established
pursuant to R.C. § 3719.41, as amended pursuant to R.C. § 3719.43 or 3719.44.
SCHOOL. Any school operated by a board of education, any community school established under
R.C. Chapter 3314, or any nonpublic school for which the State Board of Education prescribes minimum
standards under R.C. § 3301.07, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training
provided by the school is being conducted at the time a criminal offense is committed.
SCHOOL BUILDING. Any building in which any of the instruction, extracurricular activities, or
training provided by a school is conducted, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or
training provided by the school is being conducted in the school building at the time a criminal offense
is committed.
SCHOOL PREMISES. Either of the following:
(1) The parcel of real property on which any school is situated, whether or not any instruction,
extracurricular activities, or training provided by the school is being conducted on the premises at the
time a criminal offense is committed; or
(2) Any other parcel of real property that is owned or leased by a board of education of a
school, the governing authority of a community school established under R.C. Chapter 3314, or the
governing body of a nonpublic school for which the State Board of Education prescribes minimum
standards under R.C. § 3301.07 and on which some of the instruction, extracurricular activities, or
training of the school is conducted, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training
provided by the school is being conducted on the parcel of real property at the time a criminal offense
is committed.
STANDARD PHARMACEUTICAL REFERENCE MANUAL. The current edition, with cumulative
changes if any, of references that are approved by the State Board of Pharmacy.
THEFT OFFENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
UNIT DOSE. An amount or unit or a compound, mixture, or preparation containing a controlled
substance that is separately identifiable and in a form that indicates that it is the amount or unit by which
the controlled substance is separately administered to or taken by an individual.
Drug Offenses 303
WHOLESALER. A person who, on official written orders other than prescriptions, supplies
controlled substances that the person has not manufactured, produced or prepared personally and includes
WHOLESALE DISTRIBUTOR OF DANGEROUS DRUGS, which means a person engaged in the sale
of dangerous drugs at wholesale and includes any agent or employee of that person authorized by that
person to engage in the sale of dangerous drugs at wholesale.
(R.C. §§ 2925.01, 3719.01, 3719.011, 3719.013, 4729.01) (1985 Code, § 138.01)
§ 138.02 TRAFFICKING IN CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES; GIFT OF MARIHUANA.
(A) No person shall knowingly do any of the following:
(1) Sell or offer to sell a controlled substance or a controlled substance analog; or
(2) Prepare for shipment, ship, transport, deliver, prepare for distribution or distribute a
controlled substance or a controlled substance analog, when the offender knows or has reasonable cause
to believe that the controlled substance or a controlled substance analog is intended for sale or resale by
the offender or another person.
(B) This section does not apply to any of the following:
(1) Manufacturers, licensed health professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists,
owners of pharmacies, and other persons whose conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719,
4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731 and 4741;
(2) If the offense involves an anabolic steroid, any person who is conducting or participating
in a research project involving the use of an anabolic steroid if the project has been approved by the
United States Food and Drug Administration; and
(3) Any person who sells, offers for sale, prescribes, dispenses, or administers for livestock
or other nonhuman species an anabolic steroid that is expressly intended for administration through
implants to livestock or other nonhuman species and approved for that purpose under the Federal Food,
Drug and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. §§ 301 et seq., as amended), and is sold, offered for sale,
prescribed, dispensed, or administered for that purpose in accordance with that Act.
(C) Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of the following:
(1) Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(2) of this section, trafficking in controlled
substances is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law; and
(2) Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the offense involves a gift of 20 grams or
less of marihuana, trafficking in marihuana is a minor misdemeanor upon a first offense and a
misdemeanor of the third degree upon a subsequent offense. If the offense involves a gift of 20 grams
or less of marihuana and if the offense was committed in the vicinity of a school or in the vicinity of a
juvenile, trafficking in marihuana is a misdemeanor of the third degree.
304 Madeira - General Offenses
(D) In addition to any prison term authorized or required by division (C) of this section and R.C.
§§ 2929.13 and 2929.14, and in addition to any other sanction imposed for the offense under this section
or R.C. §§ 2929.11 through 2929.18, the court that sentences a person who is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a violation of division (A) of this section shall do all of the following that are applicable
regarding the offender:
(1) The court shall suspend the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit of the offender
in accordance with R.C. § 2925.03(G); and
(2) If the offender is a professionally licensed person, the court immediately shall comply with
R.C. § 2925.38.
(E) (1) Notwithstanding any contrary provision of R.C. § 3719.21 and except as provided in R.C.
§ 2925.03(H), the Clerk of the Court shall pay any mandatory fine imposed pursuant to this section and
any fine other than a mandatory fine that is imposed for a violation of this section pursuant to R.C.
§ 2929.18(A) or (B)(5) to the county, township, municipality, park district, as created pursuant to R.C.
§ 511.18 or 1545.04, or state law enforcement agencies in this state that primarily were responsible for
or involved in making the arrest of, and in prosecuting, the offender. However, the Clerk shall not pay
a mandatory fine so imposed to a law enforcement agency unless the agency has adopted a written
internal control policy under division (E)(2) of this section that addresses the use of the fine moneys that
it receives. Each agency shall use the mandatory fines so paid to subsidize the agency’s law enforcement
efforts that pertain to drug offenses, in accordance with the written internal control policy adopted by
the recipient agency under division (E)(2) of this section.
(2) Prior to receiving any fine moneys under division (E)(1) of this section or R.C.
§ 2925.42(B), a law enforcement agency shall adopt a written internal control policy that addresses the
agency’s use and disposition of all fine moneys so received and that provides for the keeping of detailed
financial records of the receipts of those fine moneys, the general types of expenditures made out of
those fine moneys, and the specific amount of each general type of expenditure. The policy shall not
provide for or permit the identification of any specific expenditure that is made in an ongoing
investigation. All financial records of the receipts of those fine moneys, the general type of expenditures
made out of those fine moneys, and the specific amount of each general type of expenditure by an agency
are public records open for inspection under R.C. § 149.43. Additionally, a written internal control
policy adopted under this division is such a public record, and the agency that adopted it shall comply
with it.
(3) As used in division (E) of this section:
LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES. Includes but is not limited to the State Board of
Pharmacy and the office of a prosecutor.
PROSECUTOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01.
(F) As used in this section, DRUG includes any substance that is represented to be a drug.
(R.C. § 2925.03) (1985 Code, § 138.02)
Drug Offenses 305
§ 138.03 DRUG POSSESSION OFFENSES.
(A) No person shall knowingly obtain, possess or use a controlled substance or a controlled
substance analog.
(B) This section does not apply to any of the following:
(1) Manufacturers, licensed health professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists,
owners of pharmacies and other persons whose conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715,
4723, 4729, 4730, 4731 and 4741;
(2) If the offense involves an anabolic steroid, any person who is conducting or participating
in a research project involving the use of an anabolic steroid if the project has been approved by the
United States Food and Drug Administration;
(3) Any person who sells, offers for sale, prescribes, dispenses or administers for livestock or
other nonhuman species an anabolic steroid that is expressly intended for administration through implants
to livestock or other nonhuman species and approved for that purpose under the Federal Food, Drug and
Cosmetic Act, and is sold, offered for sale, prescribed, dispensed, or administered for that purpose in
accordance with that Act; or
(4) Any person who obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a prescription issued by a
licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs.
(C) Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of one of the following:
(1) Except as otherwise provided in divisions (C)(2), (C)(3), (C)(4) and (C)(5), if the drug
involved in the violation is a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance included in Schedule I or
II of R.C. § 3719.41, or is cocaine, L.S.D., heroin, a controlled substance analog or a compound,
mixture or preparation containing such drugs, possession of drugs is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law;
(2) If the drug involved is a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance included in Schedule
III, IV or V of R.C. § 3719.41, whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of possession of
drugs. The penalty for the offense shall be determined as follows:
(a) Except as otherwise provided in the following division, possession of drugs is a
misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the offender previously has been convicted of a drug abuse
offense, it is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law; or
(b) If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds the bulk amount, possession of
drugs is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
306 Madeira - General Offenses
(3) If the drug involved in the violation is marihuana or a compound, mixture, preparation or
substance containing marihuana other than hashish, whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty
of possession of marihuana. The penalty for the offense shall be determined as follows:
(a) Except as otherwise provided in the following divisions, possession of marihuana is
a minor misdemeanor;
(b) If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds 100 grams but is less than 200
grams, possession of marihuana is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; or
(c) If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds 200 grams, possession of
marihuana is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(4) If the drug involved in the violation is hashish or a compound, mixture, preparation or
substance containing hashish, whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of possession of
hashish. The penalty for the offense shall be determined as follows:
(a) Except as otherwise provided in the following divisions, possession of hashish is a
minor misdemeanor;
(b) If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds five grams but is less than ten
grams of hashish in a solid form or equals or exceeds one gram but is less than two grams of hashish in
a liquid concentrate, liquid extract, or liquid distillate form, possession of hashish is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree; or
(c) If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds ten grams of hashish in a solid
form or equals or exceeds two grams of hashish in a liquid concentrate, liquid extract, or liquid distillate
form, possession of hashish is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(D) Arrest or conviction for a minor misdemeanor violation of this section does not constitute a
criminal record and need not be reported by the person so arrested or convicted in response to any
inquiries about the person’s criminal record, including any inquiries contained in any application for
employment, license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection with the person’s appearance
as a witness.
(E) In addition to any prison term or jail term authorized or required by division (C) of this section
and R.C. §§ 2929.13, 2929.14, 2929.22, 2929.24 and 2929.25, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, and in addition to any other sanction that is imposed for the offense under this
section, R.C. §§ 2929.11 through 2929.18, or R.C. §§ 2929.21 through 2929.28, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the court that sentences an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty
to a violation of division (A) of this section shall do the following if applicable regarding the offender:
(1) Notwithstanding any contrary provision of R.C. § 3719.21, the Clerk of Court shall pay
a fine imposed for a violation of this section pursuant to R.C. § 2929.18(A) in accordance with and
Drug Offenses 307
subject to the requirements of R.C. § 2925.03(F). The agency that receives the fine shall use the fine as
specified in R.C. § 2925.03(F);
(2) The court shall suspend for not less than six months nor more than five years the offender’s
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit; and
(3) If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition to any other sanction imposed
for a violation of this section, the court immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
(R.C. § 2925.11) (1985 Code, § 138.03)
§ 138.04 POSSESSION OF DRUG ABUSE INSTRUMENTS.
(A) No person shall knowingly make, obtain, possess or use any instrument, article or thing the
customary and primary purpose of which is for the administration or use of a dangerous drug, other than
marihuana, when the instrument involved is a hypodermic or syringe, whether or not of crude or
extemporized manufacture or assembly, and the instrument, article or thing involved has been used by
the offender to unlawfully administer or use a dangerous drug, other than marihuana or to prepare a
dangerous drug, other than marihuana, for unlawful administration or use.
(B) This section does not apply to manufacturers, licensed health professionals authorized to
prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies and other persons whose conduct was in accordance
with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731 and 4741.
(C) Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing drug abuse instruments, a misdemeanor of
the second degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a drug abuse offense, violation of
this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(D) In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for a violation of this section, the
court shall suspend for not less than six months nor more than five years the offender’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit. If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition to
any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court immediately shall comply with R.C.
§ 2925.38.
(R.C. § 2925.12) (1985 Code, § 138.04)
§ 138.05 PERMITTING DRUG ABUSE.
(A) No person who is the owner, operator or person in charge of a locomotive, watercraft, aircraft
or other vehicle, as defined in R.C. § 4501.01, shall knowingly permit the vehicle to be used for the
commission of a felony drug abuse offense.
(B) No person, who is the owner, lessee or occupant, or who has custody, control or supervision
of premises, or real estate, including vacant land, shall knowingly permit his or her premises, or real
308 Madeira - General Offenses
estate, including vacant land, to be used for the commission of a felony drug abuse offense by another
person.
(C) Whoever violates this section is guilty of permitting drug abuse.
(1) Except as provided in division (C)(2) of this section, permitting drug abuse is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(2) Permitting drug abuse is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law if the felony
drug abuse offense in question is a violation of R.C. § 2925.02 or 2925.03.
(D) In addition to any prison term authorized or required by division (C) of this section and R.C.
§§ 2929.13 and 2929.14, and in addition to any other sanction imposed for the offense under this section
or R.C. §§ 2929.11 through 2929.18, the court that sentences a person who is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a violation of division (A) of this section shall do all of the following that are applicable
regarding the offender:
(1) The court shall suspend for not less than six months nor more than five years the offender’s
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit; and
(2) If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition to any other sanction imposed
for a violation of this section, the court immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
(E) Notwithstanding any contrary provision of R.C. § 3719.21, the Clerk of court shall pay a fine
imposed for a violation of this section pursuant to R.C. § 2929.18(A) in accordance with and subject to
the requirements of R.C. § 2925.03(F). The agency that receives the fine shall use the fine as specified
in R.C. § 2925.03(F).
(F) Any premises or real estate that is permitted to be used in violation of division (B) of this section
constitutes a nuisance subject to abatement pursuant to R.C. Chapter 3767.
(R.C. § 2925.13) (1985 Code, § 138.05)
§ 138.06 ILLEGAL CULTIVATION OF MARIJUANA.
(A) No person shall knowingly cultivate marihuana.
(B) This section does not apply to any person listed in R.C. § 2925.03(B)(1), (B)(2) or (B)(3), or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, to the extent and under the circumstances described in
that division.
(C) Whoever commits a violation of division (A) of this section is guilty of illegal cultivation of
marihuana.
Drug Offenses 309
(1) Except as otherwise provided in the following divisions, illegal cultivation of marihuana
is a minor misdemeanor or, if the offense was committed in the vicinity of a school or in the vicinity of
a juvenile, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(2) If the amount of marihuana involved equals or exceeds 100 grams but is less than 200
grams, illegal cultivation of marihuana is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree or, if the offense was
committed in the vicinity of a school or in the vicinity of a juvenile, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(3) If the amount of marihuana involved equals or exceeds 200 grams, illegal cultivation of
marihuana is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(D) In addition to any prison term authorized or required by division (C) of this section and R.C.
§§ 2929.13 and 2929.14, and in addition to any other sanction imposed for the offense under this section
or R.C. §§ 2929.11 through 2929.18, the court that sentences a person who is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a violation of division (A) of this section shall do all of the following that are applicable
regarding the offender:
(1) The court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit in
accordance with R.C. § 2925.03(G). If an offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit
is suspended in accordance with that division, the offender may request termination of, and the court may
terminate, the suspension in accordance with that division; and
(2) If the offender is a professionally licensed person, the court immediately shall comply with
R.C. § 2925.38.
(E) Arrest or conviction for a minor misdemeanor violation of this section does not constitute a
criminal record and need not be reported by the person so arrested or convicted in response to any
inquiries about the person’s criminal record, including any inquiries contained in any application for
employment, license or other right or privilege, or made in connection with the person’s appearance as
a witness.
(R.C. § 2925.04)
§ 138.07 ABUSING HARMFUL INTOXICANTS.
(A) Except for lawful research, clinical, medical, dental or veterinary purposes, no person, with
purpose to induce intoxication or similar physiological effects, shall obtain, possess or use a harmful
intoxicant.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of abusing harmful intoxicants, a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a drug abuse offense, abusing harmful
intoxicants is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
310 Madeira - General Offenses
(C) In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for a violation of this section, the
court shall suspend for not less than six months nor more than five years the offender’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit. If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition to
any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court immediately shall comply with R.C.
§ 2925.38.
(R.C. § 2925.31) (1985 Code, § 138.07)
§ 138.08 ILLEGAL DISPENSING OF DRUG SAMPLES.
(A) No person shall knowingly furnish a sample drug to another person.
(B) Division (A) of this section does not apply to manufacturers, wholesalers, pharmacists, owners
of pharmacies, licensed health professionals authorized to prescribe drugs and other persons whose
conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4725, 4729, 4730, 4731 and 4741.
(C) (1) Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal dispensing of drug samples.
(2) If the drug involved in the offense is a compound, mixture, preparation or substance
included in Schedule I or II of R.C. § 3719.41 with the exception of marihuana, illegal dispensing of
drug samples is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(3) If the drug involved in the offense is a dangerous drug or a compound, mixture, preparation
or substance included in Schedule III, IV or V of R.C. § 3719.41, or is marihuana, the penalty for the
offense shall be determined as follows:
(a) Except as otherwise provided in the following division, illegal dispensing of drug
samples is a misdemeanor of the second degree; and
(b) If the offense was committed in the vicinity of a school or in the vicinity of a juvenile,
illegal dispensing of drug samples is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(D) In addition to any prison term authorized or required by division (C) of this section and R.C.
§§ 2929.13 and 2929.14, and in addition to any other sanction imposed for the offense under this section
or R.C. §§ 2929.11 through 2929.18, the court that sentences an offender who is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a violation of division (A) of this section shall do both of the following:
(1) The court shall suspend for not less than six months nor more than five years the offender’s
driver’s or commercial driver’s license; and
(2) If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition to any other sanction imposed
for a violation of this section, the court immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
Drug Offenses 311
(E) Notwithstanding any contrary provision of R.C. § 3719.21, the Clerk of court shall pay a fine
imposed for a violation of this section pursuant to R.C. § 2929.18(A) in accordance with and subject to
the requirements of R.C. § 2925.03(F). The agency that receives the fine shall use the fine as specified
in R.C. § 2925.03(F).
(R.C. § 2925.36) (1985 Code, § 138.08)
§ 138.09 DISPENSING NITROUS OXIDE.
(A) Improper dispensing or distribution.
(1) No person who dispenses or distributes nitrous oxide in cartridges shall fail to comply with
either of the following:
(a) The recordkeeping requirements established under division (A)(3) of this section; or
(b) The labeling and transaction identification requirements established under division
(A)(4) of this section.
(2) Whoever violates division (A)(1)(a) or (A)(1)(b) of this section is guilty of improperly
dispensing or distributing nitrous oxide, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(3) Beginning July 1, 2001, a person who dispenses or distributes nitrous oxide shall record
each transaction involving the dispensing or distribution of the nitrous oxide on a separate card. The
person shall require the purchaser to sign the card and provide a complete residence address. The person
dispensing or distributing the nitrous oxide shall sign and date the card. The person shall retain the card
recording a transaction for one year from the date of the transaction. The person shall maintain the cards
at the person’s business address and make them available during normal business hours for inspection
and copying by officers or employees of the State Board of Pharmacy or of other law enforcement
agencies that are authorized to investigate violations of this code, R.C. Chapters 2925, 3719 or 4729,
or federal drug abuse control laws. The cards used to record each transaction shall inform the purchaser
of the following:
(a) That nitrous oxide cartridges are to be used only for purposes of preparing food;
(b) That inhalation of nitrous oxide can have dangerous health effects; and
(c) That it is a violation of state law to distribute or dispense cartridges of nitrous oxide
to any person under age 21, punishable as a felony of the fifth degree.
(4) (a) Each cartridge of nitrous oxide dispensed or distributed in this municipality shall bear
the following printed warning: “Nitrous oxide cartridges are to be used only for purposes of preparing
food. Nitrous oxide cartridges may not be sold to persons under age 21. Do not inhale contents. Misuse
can be dangerous to your health.”
312 Madeira - General Offenses
(b) Each time a person dispenses or distributes one or more cartridges of nitrous oxide,
the person shall mark the packaging containing the cartridges with a label or other device that identifies
the person who dispensed or distributed the nitrous oxide and the person’s business address.
(R.C. § 2925.32(B)(4), (D)(2), (F), (G))
(B) Possession in a motor vehicle.
(1) As used in this section, MOTOR VEHICLE, STREET and HIGHWAY have the same
meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
(2) Unless authorized by this code or by state law, no person shall possess an open cartridge
of nitrous oxide in either of the following circumstances:
(a) While operating or being a passenger in or on a motor vehicle on a street, highway or
other public or private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular traffic or parking; or
(b) While being in or on a stationary motor vehicle on a street, highway or other public
or private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular traffic or parking.
(3) Whoever violates this division (B) is guilty of possessing nitrous oxide in a motor vehicle,
a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 2925.33)
(1985 Code, § 138.09)
§ 138.10 LABORATORY REPORT REQUIRED.
(A) (1) In any criminal prosecution for a violation of this chapter or R.C. Chapters 2925 or 3719,
a laboratory report from the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation or a laboratory operated
by another law enforcement agency, or a laboratory established by or under the authority of an institution
of higher education that has its main campus in this state and that is accredited by the Association of
American Universities or the North Central Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools, primarily
for the purpose of providing scientific service to law enforcement agencies, and signed by the person
performing the analysis, stating that the substance that is the basis of the alleged offense has been
weighed and analyzed and stating the findings as to the content, weight and identity of the substance and
that it contains any amount of a controlled substance and the number and description of unit dosages, is
prima facie evidence of the content, identity and weight or the existence and number of unit dosages of
the substance. In any criminal prosecution for a violation of R.C. § 2925.041 or a violation of this
chapter, R.C. Chapter 2925 or R.C. Chapter 3719 that is based on the possession of chemicals sufficient
to produce a compound, mixture, preparation or substance included in Schedule I, II, III, IV or V, a
laboratory report from the Bureau or from any laboratory that is operated or established as described in
this division (A) that is signed by the person performing the analysis, stating that the substances that are
the basis of the alleged offense have been weighed and analyzed and stating the findings as to the content,
weight and identity of each of the substances, is prima facie evidence of the content, identity and weight
of the substances.
Drug Offenses 313
(2) Attached to that report shall be a copy of a notarized statement by the signer of the report
giving the name of the signer and stating that the signer is an employee of the laboratory issuing the
report and that performing the analysis is a part of the signer’s regular duties, and giving an outline of
the signer’s education, training and experience for performing an analysis of materials included under
this section. The signer shall attest that scientifically accepted tests were performed with due caution, and
that the evidence was handled in accordance with established and accepted procedures while in the
custody of the laboratory.
(B) The prosecuting attorney shall serve a copy of the report on the attorney of record for the
accused, or on the accused if the accused has no attorney, prior to any proceeding in which the report
is to be used against the accused other than at a preliminary hearing or grand jury proceeding where the
report may be used without having been previously served upon the accused.
(C) The report shall not be prima facie evidence of the contents, identity and weight or the existence
and number of unit dosages of the substance if the accused or the accused’s attorney demands the
testimony of the person signing the report, by serving the demand upon the prosecuting attorney, within
seven days from the accused or the accused’s attorney’s receipt of the report. The time may be extended
by a trial judge in the interests of justice.
(D) Any report issued for use under this section shall contain notice of the right of the accused to
demand, and the manner in which the accused shall demand, the testimony of the person signing the
report.
(E) Any person who is accused of a violation of this chapter or R.C. Chapters 2925 or 3719 is
entitled, upon written request made to the prosecuting attorney, to have a portion of the substance that
is, or of each of the substances that are, the basis of the alleged violation preserved for the benefit of
independent analysis performed by a laboratory analyst employed by the accused person, or, if the
accused is indigent, by a qualified laboratory analyst appointed by the court. Such portion shall be a
representative sample of the entire substance that is, or of each of the substances that are, the basis of
the alleged violation and shall be of sufficient size, in the opinion of the court, to permit the accused’s
analyst to make a thorough scientific analysis concerning the identity of the substance or substances. The
prosecuting attorney shall provide the accused’s analyst with the sample portion at least 14 days prior
to trial, unless the trial is to be held in a court not of record or unless the accused person is charged with
a minor misdemeanor, in which case the prosecuting attorney shall provide the accused’s analyst with
the sample portion at least three days prior to trial. If the prosecuting attorney determines that such a
sample portion cannot be preserved and given to the accused’s analyst, the prosecuting attorney shall so
inform the accused person, or the accused’s attorney. In such a circumstance, the accused person is
entitled, upon written request made to the prosecuting attorney, to have the accused’s privately employed
or court appointed analyst present at an analysis of the substance that is, or the substances that are, the
basis of the alleged violation, and, upon further written request, to receive copies of all recorded
scientific data that result from the analysis and that can be used by an analyst in arriving at conclusions,
findings or opinions concerning the identity of the substance or substances subject to the analysis.
(F) In addition to the rights provided under division (E) of this section, any person who is accused
of a violation of this chapter or R.C. Chapters 2925 or 3719 that involves a bulk amount of a controlled
314 Madeira - General Offenses
substance, or any multiple thereof, or who is accused of a violation of R.C. § 2925.11 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, other than a minor misdemeanor violation, that involves marihuana, is
entitled, upon written request made to the prosecuting attorney, to have a laboratory analyst of the
accused’s choice, or, if the accused is indigent, a qualified laboratory analyst appointed by the court,
present at a measurement or weighing of the substance that is the basis of the alleged violation. Also,
the accused person is entitled, upon further written request, to receive copies of all recorded scientific
data that result from the measurement or weighing and that can be used by an analyst in arriving at
conclusions, findings or opinions concerning the weight, volume or number of unit doses of the
substance subject to the measurement or weighing.
(R.C. § 2925.51)
(G) In addition to the financial sanctions authorized or required under R.C. §§ 2929.18 and 2929.28
and to any costs otherwise authorized or required under any provision of law, the court imposing
sentence upon an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a drug abuse offense may order the
offender to pay to the state, municipal or county law enforcement agencies that handled the investigation
and prosecution all of the costs that the state, municipal corporation or county reasonably incurred in
having tests performed under this section or R.C. § 2925.51 or in any other manner on any substance
that was the basis of, or involved in, the offense to determine whether the substance contained any
amount of a controlled substance if the results of the tests indicate that the substance tested contained any
controlled substance. No court shall order an offender under this section to pay the costs of tests
performed on a substance if the results of the tests do not indicate that the substance tested contained any
controlled substance. The court shall hold a hearing to determine the amount of costs to be imposed
under this section. The court may hold the hearing as part of the sentencing hearing for the offender.
(R.C. § 2925.511)
(1985 Code, § 138.10)
§ 138.11 FEDERAL PROSECUTION BAR TO MUNICIPAL PROSECUTION.
No person shall be prosecuted for a violation of this chapter if the person has been acquitted or
convicted under the federal drug abuse control laws of the same act or omission which, it is alleged,
constitutes a violation of this chapter.
(R.C. §§ 2925.50, 3719.19) (1985 Code, § 138.11)
§ 138.12 BARBITURATES AND AMPHETAMINES (DOWNERS AND UPPERS).
(A) No person shall, with intent to produce intoxication, elation, paralysis, irrational conduct or the
changing, distortion or disturbance of the thinking process, judgment, balance or coordination, use any
barbiturate or amphetamine, as defined in R. C. § 3719.23. However, this section shall not apply to the
use of any barbiturate or amphetamine by licensed manufacturers, wholesalers, pharmacists, owners of
pharmacies, physicians and other persons for research, clinical or medicinal purposes authorized by
federal law or state law, or any rules or regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
Drug Offenses 315
(B) No person shall induce or attempt to induce another person to unlawfully use any barbiturate
or amphetamine; or employ, induce or use a minor to unlawfully transport, carry, dispense, produce or
manufacture any barbiturate or amphetamine; or induce or attempt to induce a minor to violate any of
the provisions of this section.
(C) Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(1985 Code, § 138.12) (Ord. 1169, passed 6-10-1974)
§ 138.13 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE OR PRESCRIPTION LABELS.
(A) Whenever a manufacturer sells a controlled substance, and whenever a wholesaler sells a
controlled substance in a package the wholesaler has prepared, the manufacturer or wholesaler shall
securely affix to each package in which the controlled substance is contained a label showing in legible
English the name and address of the vendor and the quantity, kind and form of controlled substance
contained therein. No person, except a pharmacist for the purpose of dispensing a controlled substance
upon a prescription, shall alter, deface or remove any label so affixed.
(B) No person shall alter, deface or remove any label affixed pursuant to R.C. § 3719.08 as long
as any of the original contents remain.
(R.C. § 3719.08(A), (E))
(C) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted of a violation of this section, or R.C. § 3719.07 or 3719.08, or a drug
abuse offense, a violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the
violation involves the sale, offer to sell or possession of a Schedule I or II controlled substance, with the
exception of marihuana, and if the offender, as a result of the violation, is a major drug offender, then
R.C. § 3719.99(D) applies.
(R.C. § 3719.99(C))
(1985 Code, § 138.13)
§ 138.14 USE, POSSESSION OR SALE OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
(A) As used in this section, DRUG PARAPHERNALIA means any equipment, product or material
of any kind that is used by the offender, intended by the offender for use, or designed for use, in
propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing,
processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing,
injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body, a controlled substance in
violation of this chapter. The term includes but is not limited to any of the following equipment, products
or materials that are used by the offender, intended by the offender for use, or designed by the offender
for use, in any of the following manners:
316 Madeira - General Offenses
(1) A kit for propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting any species of a plant that is a
controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived;
(2) A kit for manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing a
controlled substance;
(3) Any object, instrument or device for manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing,
processing or preparing methamphetamine.
(4) An isomerization device for increasing the potency of any species of a plant that is a
controlled substance;
(5) Testing equipment for identifying, or analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of, a
controlled substance;
(6) A scale or balance for weighing or measuring a controlled substance;
(7) A diluent or adulterant, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose or
lactose, for cutting a controlled substance;
(8) A separation gin or sifter for removing twigs and seeds from, or otherwise cleaning or
refining, marihuana;
(9) A blender, bowl, container, spoon or mixing device for compounding a controlled
substance;
(10) A capsule, balloon, envelope or container for packaging small quantities of a controlled
substance;
(11) A container or device for storing or concealing a controlled substance;
(12) A hypodermic syringe, needle or instrument for parenterally injecting a controlled substance
into the human body; or
(13) An object, instrument or device for ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the
human body, marihuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil, such as a metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone,
plastic or ceramic pipe, with or without a screen, permanent screen, hashish head or punctured metal
bowl; water pipe; carburetion tube or device; smoking or carburetion mask; roach clip or similar object
used to hold burning material, such as a marihuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to
be held in the hand; miniature cocaine spoon or cocaine vial; chamber pipe; carburetor pipe; electric
pipe; air driver pipe; chillum; bong; or ice pipe or chiller.
(B) In determining if any equipment, product or material is drug paraphernalia, a court or law
enforcement officer shall consider, in addition to other relevant factors, the following:
Drug Offenses 317
(1) Any statement by the owner or by anyone in control of the equipment, product or material,
concerning its use;
(2) The proximity in time or space of the equipment, product or material, or of the act relating
to the equipment, product or material, to a violation of any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter
2925;
(3) The proximity of the equipment, product or material to any controlled substance;
(4) The existence of any residue of a controlled substance on the equipment, product or
material;
(5) Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of the owner, or of anyone in control, of the
equipment, product or material, to deliver it to any person whom he or she knows intends to use the
equipment, product or material to facilitate a violation of any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter
2925. A finding that the owner or anyone in control of the equipment, product or material is not guilty
of a violation of any other provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2925 does not prevent a finding that
the equipment, product or material was intended or designed by the offender for use as drug
paraphernalia;
(6) Any oral or written instruction provided with the equipment, product or material concerning
its use;
(7) Any descriptive material accompanying the equipment, product or material and explaining
or depicting its use;
(8) National or local advertising concerning the use of the equipment, product or material;
(9) The manner and circumstances in which the equipment, product or material is displayed
for sale;
(10) Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of the sales of the equipment, product or
material to the total sales of the business enterprise;
(11) The existence and scope of legitimate uses of the equipment, product or material in the
community; and
(12) Expert testimony concerning the use of the equipment, product or material.
(C) (1) Subject to division (D)(2) of this section, no person shall knowingly use, or possess with
purpose to use, drug paraphernalia.
(2) No person shall knowingly sell, or possess or manufacture with purpose to sell, drug
paraphernalia, if he or she knows or reasonably should know that the equipment, product or material will
be used as drug paraphernalia.
318 Madeira - General Offenses
(3) No person shall place an advertisement in any newspaper, magazine, handbill or other
publication that is published and printed and circulates primarily within this state, if he or she knows that
the purpose of the advertisement is to promote the illegal sale in this municipality or in this state of the
equipment, product or material that the offender intended or designed for use as drug paraphernalia.
(D) (1) This section does not apply to manufacturers, licensed health professionals authorized to
prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies and other persons whose conduct is in accordance
with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731 and 4741. This section shall not be construed
to prohibit the possession or use of a hypodermic as authorized by R.C. § 3719.172.
(2) Division (C)(1) of this section does not apply to a person’s use, or possession with purpose
to use, any drug paraphernalia that is equipment, a product or material of any kind that is used by the
person, intended by the person for use, or designed for use in storing, containing, concealing, injecting,
ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body marihuana.
(E) Notwithstanding R.C. Chapter 2981, any drug paraphernalia that was used, possessed, sold or
manufactured in violation of this section shall be seized, after a conviction for that violation, shall be
forfeited, and upon forfeiture shall be disposed of pursuant to R.C. § 2981.12(B).
(F) (1) Whoever violates division (C)(1) of this section is guilty of illegal use or possession of drug
paraphernalia, a minor misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(2) Except as provided in division (F)(3) of this section, whoever violates division (C)(2) of
this section is guilty of dealing in drug paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(3) Whoever violates division (C)(2) of this section by selling drug paraphernalia to a juvenile
is guilty of selling drug paraphernalia to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(4) Whoever violates division (C)(3) of this section is guilty of illegal advertising of drug
paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(G) In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for a violation of this section, the
court shall suspend for not less than six months nor more than five years the offender’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit. If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition to
any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court immediately shall comply with R.C.
§ 2925.38.
(R.C. § 2925.14)
(H) Illegal use or possession of marihuana drug paraphernalia.
(1) As used in this division (H), DRUG PARAPHERNALIA has the same meaning as in
division (A) of this section.
Drug Offenses 319
(2) In determining if any equipment, product or material is drug paraphernalia, a court or law
enforcement officer shall consider, in addition to other relevant factors, all factors identified in division
(B) of this section.
(3) No person shall knowingly use, or possess with purpose to use, any drug paraphernalia that
is equipment, a product or material of any kind that is used by the person, intended by the person for
use, or designed for use in storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise
introducing into the human body marihuana.
(4) This division (H) does not apply to any person identified in division (D)(1) of this section,
and it shall not be construed to prohibit the possession or use of a hypodermic as authorized by R.C.
§ 3719.172.
(5) Division (E) of this section applies with respect to any drug paraphernalia that was used or
possessed in violation of this section.
(6) Whoever violates division (H)(3) of this section is guilty of illegal use or possession of
marihuana drug paraphernalia, a minor misdemeanor.
(7) In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for a violation of this section,
the court shall suspend for not less than six months or more than five years the offender’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit. If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition to
any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court immediately shall comply with R.C.
§ 2925.38.
(R.C. § 2925.141)
(1985 Code, § 138.14)
§ 138.15 COUNTERFEIT CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES.
(A) No person shall knowingly possess any counterfeit controlled substance.
(B) Whoever violates division (A) of this section shall be guilty of possession of counterfeit
controlled substances, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(C) Notwithstanding any contrary provision of R.C. § 3719.21, the Clerk of court shall pay a fine
imposed for a violation of this section pursuant to R.C. § 2929.18(A) in accordance with and subject to
the requirements of R.C. § 2925.03(F). The agency that receives the fine shall use the fine as specified
in R.C. § 2925.03(F).
(R.C. § 2925.37(A), (G), (M)) (1985 Code, § 138.15)
Statutory reference:
Trafficking and other felony counterfeit controlled substance offenses, see R.C. § 2925.37(H)
 through (K)
320 Madeira - General Offenses
§ 138.16 UNLAWFUL FURNISHING OF PRESCRIPTION TO ENABLE PERSONS TO BE
ISSUED HANDICAPPED PARKING PLACARDS OR LICENSE PLATES.
(A) No physician or chiropractor shall do either of the following:
(1) Furnish a person with a prescription in order to enable the person to be issued a removable
windshield placard, temporary removable windshield placard or license plates under R.C. § 4503.44,
knowing that the person does not meet any of the criteria contained in R.C. § 4503.44(A)(1); or
(2) Furnish a person with a prescription described in division (A)(1) of this section and
knowingly misstate on the prescription the length of time the physician or chiropractor expects the person
to have the disability that limits or impairs the person’s ability to walk in order to enable the person to
retain a placard issued under R.C. § 4503.44 for a period of time longer than that which would be
estimated by a similar practitioner under the same or similar circumstances.
(R.C. §§ 4731.481, 4734.161)
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. §§ 4731.99(F), 4734.99(B))
(1985 Code, § 138.16)
§ 138.17 PSEUDOEPHEDRINE SALES.
(A) Unlawful purchases.
(1) As used in divisions (A), (B), (C) and (D) of this section:
CONSUMER PRODUCT. Any food or drink that is consumed or used by humans and any
drug, including a drug that may be provided legally only pursuant to a prescription, that is intended to
be consumed or used by humans.
EPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture or preparation that contains any quantity
of ephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers or salts of optical isomers.
EPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains ephedrine.
PSEUDOEPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture or preparation that contains
any quantity of pseudoephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers or salts of optical isomers.
PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product consisting that contains
pseudoephedrine.
RETAILER. A place of business that offers consumer products for sale to the general
public.
Drug Offenses 321
SINGLE-INGREDIENT PREPARATION. A compound, mixture, preparation or substance
that contains a single active ingredient.
TERMINAL DISTRIBUTOR OF DANGEROUS DRUGS. Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 4729.01.
(2) (a) 1. No individual shall knowingly purchase, receive, or otherwise acquire an amount
of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product that is greater than either of the following unless the
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product is dispensed by a pharmacist pursuant to a valid
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs and the conduct of the
pharmacist and the licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs is in accordance with R.C.
Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731 or 4741:
a. Three and six tenths grams within a period of a single day;
b. Nine grams within a period of 30 consecutive days.
2. The limits specified in divisions (A)(2)(a)1.a. and (A)(2)(a)1.b. of this section
apply to the total amount of base pseudoephedrine or base ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product, respectively. The limits do not apply to the product’s overall weight.
(b) It is not a violation of division (B)(1) of this section for an individual to receive or
accept more than an amount of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product specified in division
(A)(2)(a)1.a. or (A)(2)(a)1.b. of this section if the individual is an employee of a retailer or terminal
distributor of dangerous drugs, and the employee receives or accepts from the retailer or terminal
distributor of dangerous drugs the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product in a sealed container
in connection with manufacturing, warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading or unloading of
the product.
(3) (a) No individual under 18 years of age shall knowingly purchase, receive, or otherwise
acquire a pseudoephedrine product, or ephedrine product unless the pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product is dispensed by a pharmacist pursuant to a valid prescription issued by a licensed
health professional authorized to prescribe drugs and the conduct of the pharmacist and the licensed
health professional authorized to prescribe drugs is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723,
4729, 4730, 4731 or 4741.
(b) Division (A)(3)(a) of this section does not apply to an individual under 18 years of age
who purchases, receives, or otherwise acquires a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product from
any of the following:
1. A licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs or pharmacist who
dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to that
individual and whose conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731
or 4741;
322 Madeira - General Offenses
2. A parent or guardian of that individual who provides the pseudoephedrine product
or ephedrine product to the individual;
3. A person, as authorized by that individual’s parent or guardian, who dispenses,
sells, or otherwise provides the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the individual;
4. A retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs who provides the
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to that individual if the individual is an employee of the
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs and the individual receives or accepts from the retailer
or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product in a sealed
container in connection with manufacturing, warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading or
unloading of the product.
(4) No individual under 18 years of age shall knowingly show or give false information
concerning the individual’s name, age, or other identification for the purpose of purchasing, receiving,
or otherwise acquiring a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product.
(5) No individual shall knowingly fail to comply with the requirements of R.C. § 3715.051(B).
(6) Whoever violates division (A)(2)(a) of this section is guilty of unlawful purchase of a
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(7) Whoever violates division (A)(3)(a) of this section is guilty of underage purchase of a
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree if it could be committed by an adult.
(8) Whoever violates division (A)(4) of this section is guilty of using false information to
purchase a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor
of the first degree if it could be committed by an adult.
(9) Whoever violates division (A)(5) of this section is guilty of improper purchase of a
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 2925.55)
(B) Unlawful retail sales.
(1) (a) 1. Except as provided in division (B)(1)(b) of this section, no retailer or terminal
distributor of dangerous drugs or an employee of a retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs
shall knowingly sell, offer to sell, hold for sale, deliver, or otherwise provide to any individual an
amount of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product that is greater than either of the following:
a. Three and six tenths grams within a period of a single day;
b. Nine grams within a period of 30 consecutive days.
Drug Offenses 323
2. The maximum amounts specified in divisions (B)(1)(a)1.a. and (B)(1)(a)1.b. of this
section apply to the total amount of base pseudoephedrine or base ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product, respectively. The maximum amounts do not apply to the product’s overall
weight.
(b)1. Division (B)(1)(a) of this section does not apply to any quantity of pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product dispensed by a pharmacist pursuant to a valid prescription issued by a
licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs if the conduct of the pharmacist and the
licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719,
4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, or 4741.
2. It is not a violation of division (B)(1)(a) of this section for a retailer, terminal
distributor of dangerous drugs, or employee of either to provide to an individual more than an amount
of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product specified in division (B)(1)(a)1.a. or (B)(1)(a)1.b. of
this section under either of the following circumstances:
a. The individual is an employee of the retailer or terminal distributor of
dangerous drugs, and the employee receives or accepts from the retailer, terminal distributor of
dangerous drugs, or employee the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product in a sealed container
in connection with manufacturing, warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading, or unloading
of the product;
b. A stop-sale alert is generated after the submission of information to the
national precursor log exchange under the conditions described in R.C. § 3715.052(A)(2).
(2) (a) Except as provided in division (B)(2)(b) of this section, no retailer or terminal
distributor of dangerous drugs or an employee of a retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs
shall sell, offer to sell, hold for sale, deliver, or otherwise provide a pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product to an individual who is under 18 years of age.
(b) Division (B)(2)(a) of this section does not apply to any of the following:
1. A licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs or pharmacist who
dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to an individual
under 18 years of age and whose conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729,
4730, 4731 or 4741;
2. A parent or guardian of an individual under 18 years of age who provides a
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the individual;
3. A person who, as authorized by the individual’s parent or guardian, dispenses,
sells, or otherwise provides a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to an individual under 18
years of age;
324 Madeira - General Offenses
4. The provision by a retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, or employee
of either of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product in a sealed container to an employee of the
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs who is under 18 years of age in connection with
manufacturing, warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading, or unloading of the product.
(3) No retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall fail to comply with the
requirements of R.C. § 3715.051(A) or R.C. § 3715.052(A)(2).
(4) No retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall fail to comply with the
requirements of R.C. § 3715.052(A)(1).
(5) Whoever violates division (B)(1)(a) of this section is guilty of unlawfully selling a
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(6) Whoever violates division (B)(2)(a) of this section is guilty of unlawfully selling a
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to a minor, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(7) Whoever violates division (B)(3) of this section is guilty of improper sale of a
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(8) Whoever violates division (B)(4) of this section is guilty of failing to submit information
to the national precursor log exchange, a misdemeanor for which the offender shall be fined not more
than $1,000 per violation.
(R.C. § 2925.56)
(C) Transaction scans.
(1) As used in this division and division (D) of this section:
CARD HOLDER. Means any person who presents a driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or an identification card to a seller, or an agent or employee of a seller, to purchase or receive any
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product from the seller, agent, or employee.
IDENTIFICATION CARD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2927.021.
SELLER. Means a retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs.
TRANSACTION SCAN. Means the process by which a seller or an agent or employee of
a seller checks by means of a transaction scan device the validity of a driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or an identification card that is presented as a condition for purchasing or receiving any
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product.
TRANSACTION SCAN DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2927.021.
Drug Offenses 325
(2) (a) A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may perform a transaction scan by means
of a transaction scan device to check the validity of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
identification card presented by a card holder as a condition for selling, giving away, or otherwise
distributing to the card holder a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product.
(b) If the information deciphered by the transaction scan performed under division
(C)(2)(a) of this section fails to match the information printed on the driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or identification card presented by the card holder, or if the transaction scan indicates that the
information so printed is false or fraudulent, neither the seller nor any agent or employee of the seller
shall sell, give away, or otherwise distribute any pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the
card holder.
(c) Division (C)(2)(a) of this section does not preclude a seller or an agent or employee
of a seller as a condition for selling, giving away, or otherwise distributing a pseudoephedrine product
or ephedrine product to the person presenting the document from using a transaction scan device to check
the validity of a document other than a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification card
if the document includes a bar code or magnetic strip that may be scanned by the device.
(3) Rules adopted by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles under R.C. § 4301.61(C) apply to the
use of transaction scan devices for purposes of this division (C) and division (D) of this section.
(4) (a) No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall electronically or mechanically record
or maintain any information derived from a transaction scan, except the following:
1. The name, address, and date of birth of the person listed on the driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a card holder;
2. The expiration date, identification number, and issuing agency of the driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a card holder.
(b) No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use the information that is derived from
a transaction scan or that is permitted to be recorded and maintained under division (C)(4)(a) of this
section except for purposes of division (D) of this section, R.C. § 2925.58 or R.C. § 3715.052(A)(1).
(c) No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use a transaction scan device for a
purpose other than the purpose specified in division (C)(2)(a) of this section.
(d) No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall sell or otherwise disseminate the
information derived from a transaction scan to any third party, including but not limited to selling or
otherwise disseminating that information for any marketing, advertising, or promotional activities, but
a seller or agent or employee of a seller may release that information pursuant to a court order or as
specifically authorized by division (D) of this section or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code.
326 Madeira - General Offenses
(5) Nothing in this division (C) or division (D) of this section relieves a seller or an agent or
employee of a seller of any responsibility to comply with any other applicable state or federal laws or
rules governing the sale, giving away, or other distribution of pseudoephedrine products or ephedrine
products.
(6) Whoever violates division (C)(2)(b) or (C)(4) of this section is guilty of engaging in an
illegal pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product transaction scan, and the court may impose upon
the offender a civil penalty of up to $1,000 for each violation. The Clerk of the Court shall pay each
collected civil penalty to the County Treasurer for deposit into the County Treasury.
(R.C. § 2925.57)
(D) Affirmative defenses.
(1) A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may not be found guilty of a charge of a
violation of division (B) of this section in which the age of the purchaser or other recipient of a
pseudoephedrine product is an element of the alleged violation if the seller, agent, or employee raises
and proves as an affirmative defense that all of the following occurred:
(a) A card holder attempting to purchase or receive a pseudoephedrine product presented
a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification card.
(b) A transaction scan of the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card
that the card holder presented indicated that the license or card was valid.
(c) The pseudoephedrine product was sold, given away, or otherwise distributed to the
card holder in reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and the completed transaction scan.
(2) In determining whether a seller or an agent or employee of a seller has proven the
affirmative defense provided by division (D)(1) of this section, the trier of fact in the action for the
alleged violation of division (B) of this section shall consider any written policy that the seller has
adopted and implemented and that is intended to prevent violations of division (B) of this section. For
purposes of division (D)(1)(c) of this section, the trier of fact shall consider that reasonable reliance upon
the identification presented and the completed transaction scan may require a seller or an agent or
employee of a seller to exercise reasonable diligence to determine, and that the use of a transaction scan
device does not excuse a seller or an agent or employee of a seller from exercising reasonable diligence
to determine, the following:
(a) Whether a person to whom the seller or agent or employee of a seller sells, gives away,
or otherwise distributes a pseudoephedrine product is 18 years of age or older;
(b) Whether the description and picture appearing on the driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or identification card presented by a card holder is that of the card holder.
Drug Offenses 327
(3) In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense provided by division (D)(1) of this
section is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a deputy registrar who issued an identification card
under R.C. §§ 4507.50 through 4507.52 shall be permitted to submit certified copies of the records of
that issuance in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of or contractors with the Bureau of Motor
Vehicles in the action.
(R.C. § 2925.58)
(E) Retailer’s duties.
(1) As used in divisions (E) and (F) of this section:
CONSUMER PRODUCT. Any food or drink that is consumed or used by humans and any
drug, including a drug that may be provided legally only pursuant to a prescription, that is intended to
be consumed or used by humans.
DRUG. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
EPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation that contains any quantity
of ephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers or salts of optical isomers.
EPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains ephedrine.
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL. An officer or employee of any agency or authority
of the United States, a state, a territory, a political subdivision of a state or territory, or an Indian tribe,
who is empowered by the law to investigate or conduct an official inquiry into a potential violation of
law or prosecute or otherwise conduct a criminal, civil, or administrative proceeding arising from an
alleged violation of law.
LICENSED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL AUTHORIZED TO PRESCRIBE DRUGS. Has
the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
NATIONAL PRECURSOR LOG EXCHANGE or EXCHANGE. The electronic system
for tracking sales of pseudoephedrine products and ephedrine products on a national basis that is
administered by the National Association of Drug Diversion Investigators or a successor organization.
PHARMACIST. A person licensed under Chapter 4729. of the Revised Code to engage
in the practice of pharmacy.
PHARMACY. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
PRESCRIBER. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
PRESCRIPTION. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
328 Madeira - General Offenses
PROOF OF AGE. A driver’s license, a commercial driver’s license, a military
identification card, a passport, or an identification card issued under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to 4507.52 that
shows a person is 18 years of age or older.
PSEUDOEPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation that contains
any quantity of pseudoephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers, or salts of optical isomers.
PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains pseudoephedrine.
RETAILER. A place of business that offers consumer products for sale to the general
public.
SINGLE-INGREDIENT PREPARATION. A compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance that contains a single active ingredient.
STOP-SALE ALERT. A notification sent from the national precursor log exchange to a
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs indicating that the completion of a sale of a
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product would result in a violation of R.C. § 2925.56(A)(1) or
federal law.
TERMINAL DISTRIBUTOR OF DANGEROUS DRUGS. Has the same meanings as in
R.C. § 4729.01.
WHOLESALER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
(2) A retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs that sells, offers to sell, holds for sale,
delivers, or otherwise provides a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the public shall do
all of the following:
(a) Segregate pseudoephedrine products or ephedrine products from other merchandise so
that no member of the public may procure or purchase such products without the direct assistance of a
pharmacist or other authorized employee of the retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs;
(b) With regard to each time a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product is sold or
otherwise provided without a valid prescription:
1. Determine, by examination of a valid proof of age, that the purchaser or recipient
is at least 18 years of age;
2. a. Using any information available, including information from the national
precursor log exchange if the information is accessible, make a reasonable attempt to ensure that no
individual purchases or receives an amount of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product that is
greater than either of the following:
Drug Offenses 329
i. Three and six tenths grams within a period of a single day; or
ii. Nine grams within a period of 30 consecutive days.
b. The maximum amounts specified in divisions (E)(2)(b)2.a.i. and
(E)(2)(b)2.a.ii. of this section apply to the total amount of base pseudoephedrine or base ephedrine in
the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, respectively. The maximum amounts do not apply
to the product’s overall weight.
(c) Maintain a log book of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product purchases, in
accordance with R.C. § 3715.051;
(d) If required to comply with section R.C. § 3715.052, submit the information specified
in divisions (A)(1)(a) to (A)(1)(d) of that section to the national precursor log exchange.
(3) Prescriptions, orders and records maintained pursuant to this section and stocks of
pseudoephedrine products and ephedrine products shall be open for inspection to federal, state, county,
and municipal officers, and employees of the State Board of Pharmacy whose duty it is to enforce the
laws of this state or of the United States relating to controlled substances. Such prescriptions, orders,
records and stocks shall be open for inspection by the State Medical Board and its employees for
purposes of enforcing R.C. Chapter 4731.
(R.C. § 3715.05)
(F) Theft or loss; reporting requirements.
(1) Each retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, pharmacy, prescriber, or wholesaler
that sells, offers to sell, holds for sale, delivers or otherwise provides any pseudoephedrine product and
that discovers the theft or loss of any pseudoephedrine product in an amount of more than nine grams
per incident of theft or loss shall notify all of the following upon discovery of the theft or loss:
(a) The State Board of Pharmacy, by telephone immediately upon discovery of the theft
or loss;
(b) Law enforcement authorities. If the incident is a theft and the theft constitutes a felony,
the retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, pharmacy, prescriber, or wholesaler shall report
the theft to the law enforcement authorities in accordance with R.C. § 2921.22.
(2) Within 30 days after making a report by telephone to the State Board of Pharmacy pursuant
to division (F)(1)(a) of this section, a retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, pharmacy,
prescriber or wholesaler shall send a written report to the State Board of Pharmacy.
(3) The reports required under this section shall identify the product that was stolen or lost, the
amount of the product stolen or lost, and the date and time of discovery of the theft or loss.
(R.C. § 3715.06)
(1985 Code, § 138.17)
330 Madeira - General Offenses
§ 138.18 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE SCHEDULES.
Controlled Substance Schedules I, II, III, IV and V, as established in R.C. § 3719.41 and amended
by R.C. §§ 3719.43 and 3719.44, are hereby adopted by reference, and shall be treated as if set forth
in full herein.
(1985 Code, § 138.18)
Statutory reference:
For comprehensive lists of drugs identified under each of the following Schedules, see R.C.
 § 3719.41, as amended by R.C. §§ 3719.43 and 3719.44:
Schedule I
(A) Narcotics - opiates
(B) Narcotics - opium derivatives
(C) Hallucinogens
(D) Depressants
(E) Stimulants
Schedule II
(A) Narcotics - opium and opium derivatives
(B) Narcotics - opiates
(C) Stimulants
(D) Depressants
(E) Hallucinogenic substances
(F) Immediate precursors
Schedule III
(A) Stimulants
(B) Depressants
(C) Narcotic antidotes
(D) Narcotics - narcotic preparations
(E) Anabolic steroids
(F) Hallucinogenic substances
Schedule IV
(A) Narcotic drugs
(B) Depressants
(C) Fenfluramine
(D) Stimulants
(E) Other substances
Schedule V
(A) Narcotic drugs
(B) Narcotics - narcotic preparations
(C) Stimulants
Drug Offenses 331
§ 138.19 POSSESSION, SALE AND DISPOSAL OF HYPODERMICS.
(A) Possession of a hypodermic is authorized for the following:
(1) A manufacturer or distributor of, or dealer in hypodermics, or medication packaged in
hypodermics, and any authorized agent of employee of that manufacturer, distributor or dealer, in the
regular course of business;
(2) A terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, in the regular course of business;
(3) A person authorized to administer injections, in the regular course of the person’s
profession or employment;
(4) A person, when the hypodermic in his or her possession was lawfully obtained and is kept
and used for the purpose of self-administration of insulin or other drug prescribed for the treatment of
disease by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs;
(5) A person whose use of a hypodermic is for legal research, clinical, educational or medicinal
purposes;
(6) A farmer, for the lawful administration of a drug to an animal; and
(7) A person whose use of a hypodermic is for lawful professional, mechanical, trade or craft
purposes.
(B) No manufacturer or distributor of, or dealer in, hypodermics or medication packaged in
hypodermics, or their authorized agents or employees, and no terminal distributor of dangerous drugs,
shall display any hypodermic for sale. No person authorized to possess a hypodermic pursuant to division
(A) of this section shall negligently fail to take reasonable precautions to prevent any hypodermic in the
person’s possession from theft or acquisition by any unauthorized person.
(R.C. § 3719.172(A), (B))
(C) Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. If
the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of division (B) of this section, R.C. § 3719.05,
3719.06, 3719.13, 3719.172(B) or 3719.31, or a drug abuse offense, a violation of division (B) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 3719.99(E))
Statutory reference:
Felony offenses, see R.C. § 3719.172(C) and (D)
332 Madeira - General Offenses
CHAPTER 139: MISCELLANEOUS
Section
139.01 Abuse of corpse
139.02 Reserved
139.03 Unvented heaters
139.04 Abandoned refrigerators
139.05 Littering public ways
139.06 Maintaining a nuisance
139.07 Depositing poison
139.08 Littering by projectiles
139.09 Sidewalks to be kept free of rubbish
139.10 Erecting sign across street
139.11 Adulterating candy or food
139.12 Radio reception interference
139.13 Selling or discharging fireworks prohibited
139.14 Curfew; prohibited activities
139.15 Deposit of dead animals or offal
139.16 Hauling uncovered garbage
139.17 Interference with right of person to engage in housing transactions because of race,
religion or the like
139.18 Ethnic intimidation
139.19 Curfew for minors
§ 139.01 ABUSE OF CORPSE.
(A) No person, except as authorized by law, shall treat a human corpse in a way that he or she
knows would outrage reasonable family sensibilities.
(B) No person, except as authorized by law, shall treat a human corpse in a way that would outrage
reasonable community sensibilities.
(C) Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of abuse of a corpse, a misdemeanor of
the second degree. Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of gross abuse of a corpse, a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2927.01) (1985 Code, § 139.01)
333
334 Madeira - General Offenses
§ 139.02 RESERVED.
§ 139.03 UNVENTED HEATERS.
(A) The use of a brazier, salamander, space heater, room heater, furnace, water heater or other
burner or heater using wood, coal, coke, fuel oil, kerosene, gasoline, natural gas, liquid petroleum gas
or similar fuel, and tending to give off carbon monoxide or other harmful gases must comply with the
following provisions:
(1) When used in living quarters, or in any enclosed building or space in which persons are
usually present, shall be used with a flue or vent so designed, installed and maintained as to vent the
products of combustion outdoors; except in storage, factory or industrial buildings which are provided
with sufficient ventilation to avoid the danger of carbon monoxide poisoning; and
(2) When used as a portable or temporary burner or heater at a construction site, or in a
warehouse, shed, or structure in which persons are temporarily present, shall be vented as provided in
division (A)(1) of this section or used with sufficient ventilation to avoid the danger of carbon monoxide
poisoning.
(B) This section does not apply to domestic ranges, laundry stoves, gas logs installed in a fireplace
with an adequate flue, or hot plates, unless the same are used as space or room heaters.
(C) No person shall negligently use, or, being the owner, person in charge or occupant of premises,
negligently permit the use of a burner or heater in violation of the standards for venting and ventilation
provided in this section.
(D) Division (A) above does not apply to any kerosene-fired space or room heater that is equipped
with an automatic extinguishing tip-over device, or to any natural gas-fired or liquid petroleum gas-fired
space or room heater that is equipped with an oxygen depletion safety shut-off system, and that has its
fuel piped from a source outside the building in which it is located, that are approved by an authoritative
source recognized by the State Fire Marshal in the State Fire Code adopted by him or her under R.C.
§ 3737.82.
(E) The State Fire Marshal may make rules to ensure the safe use of unvented kerosene, natural gas
or liquid petroleum gas heaters exempted from division (A) above when used in assembly buildings,
business buildings, high hazard buildings, institutional buildings, mercantile buildings and type R-1 and
R-2 residential buildings, as these groups of buildings are defined in rules adopted by the Board of
Building Standards under R.C. § 3781.10. No person shall negligently use, or, being the owner, person
in charge or occupant of premises, negligently permit the use of a heater in violation of any rules adopted
under this division.
Miscellaneous 335
(F) The State Fire Marshal may make rules prescribing standards for written instructions containing
ventilation requirements and warning of any potential fire hazards that may occur in using a kerosene,
natural gas or liquid petroleum gas heater. No person shall sell or offer for sale any kerosene, natural
gas or liquid petroleum gas heater unless the manufacturer provides with the heater written instructions
that comply with any rules adopted under this division.
(G) No product labeled as a fuel additive for kerosene heaters and having a flash point below 100°F
or 37.8°C shall be sold, offered for sale or used in any kerosene space heater.
(H) No device that prohibits any safety feature on a kerosene, natural gas or liquid petroleum gas
space heater from operating shall be sold, offered for sale or used in connection with any kerosene,
natural gas or liquid petroleum gas space heater.
(I) No person shall sell or offer for sale any kerosene-fired, natural gas or liquid petroleum
gas-fired heater that is not exempt from division (A) above, unless it is marked conspicuously by the
manufacturer on the container with the phrase “Not Approved For Home Use.”
(J) No person shall use a cabinet-type, liquid petroleum gas-fired heater having a fuel source within
the heater, inside any building, except as permitted by the State Fire Marshal in the State Fire Code
adopted by him or her under R.C. § 3737.82.
(R.C. § 3701.82)
(K) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 3701.99(B))
(1985 Code, § 139.03)
§ 139.04 ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS.
(A) No person shall abandon, discard or knowingly permit to remain on premises under the person’s
control, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other
airtight or semi-airtight container which has a capacity of one and one-half cubic feet or more and an
opening of 50 square inches or more and which has a door or lid equipped with a hinge, latch or other
fastening device capable of securing such door or lid, without rendering the equipment harmless to
human life by removing such hinges, latches or other hardware which may cause a person to be confined
therein. This section shall not apply to an icebox, refrigerator or other airtight or semi-airtight container
located in that part of a building occupied by a dealer, warehouse or repairer.
(R.C. § 3767.29)
(B) Whoever violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 3767.99(B))
(1985 Code, § 139.04)
336 Madeira - General Offenses
§ 139.05 LITTERING PUBLIC WAYS.
(A) No owner, occupant or tenant of any house, building or lot within the city shall discharge, cast,
throw, place or deposit any boxes, baskets, crates, barrels, coops or containers or any merchandise or
rubbish in and upon any street, alley, sidewalk, gutter or other public ground.
(B) Whoever violates this section shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(1985 Code, § 139.05) (Ord. 1169, passed 6-10-1974; Ord. 1306, passed 6-13-1977)
§ 139.06 MAINTAINING A NUISANCE.
(A) No person shall erect, continue to use or maintain a building, structure or place for the exercise
of a trade, employment or business or for keeping or feeding an animal which, by occasioning noxious
exhalations or noisome or offensive smells, becomes injurious to the health, comfort or property of
individuals or of the public.
(B) No person shall cause or allow offal, filth or noisome substances to be collected or remain in
any place to the damage or prejudice of others or of the public.
(C) No person shall unlawfully obstruct or impede the passage of a navigable river, harbor or
collection of water, or corrupt or render unwholesome or impure a watercourse, stream of water or
unlawfully divert such watercourse from its natural course or state to the injury or prejudice of others.
(D) Persons who are engaged in agriculture-related activities, as agriculture is defined in R.C.
§ 519.01, and who are conducting those activities outside the municipality, in accordance with generally
accepted agricultural practices, and in such a manner so as not to have a substantial, adverse effect on
the public health, safety or welfare, are exempt from divisions (A) and (B) above and from any
ordinances, resolutions, rules, or other enactments of the municipality that prohibit excessive noise.
(R.C. § 3767.13)
(E) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 3767.99(C))
(1985 Code, § 139.07)
§ 139.07 DEPOSITING POISON.
(A) No person shall leave or deposit dangerous drugs, poisons or substances containing dangerous
drugs or poisons in a common, street, alley, lane, or thoroughfare or a yard or enclosure occupied by
another. Whoever violates this section shall be liable to the person injured for all damages sustained as
a result of leaving or depositing the dangerous drugs, poisons or other substances.
(R.C. § 3719.30)
Miscellaneous 337
(B) Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this section or a drug abuse
offense, a violation of this section is a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 3719.99(F))
(1985 Code, § 139.08) (Ord. 1169, passed 6-10-1974; Ord. 1306, passed 6-13-1977)
§ 139.08 LITTERING BY PROJECTILES.
(A) No person shall shoot, force or throw by means of an air gun or other arm or implement, a lead,
iron or other hard substance upon a street, alley, lane, public place or onto the property of another.
(B) Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(1985 Code, § 139.09) (Ord. 1306, passed 6-13-1977)
§ 139.09 SIDEWALKS TO BE KEPT FREE OF RUBBISH.
Whoever, being the owner, agent, lessee, occupant or person otherwise in charge or control of any
premises abutting a public street, shall, after notification by a police officer, fail to remove from the
sidewalk area along such premises with reasonable promptness all debris, rubbish, litter and other matter
which may at any time accumulate or be deposited thereon from any cause whatever, shall be guilty of
a minor misdemeanor. Each day’s failure to remove shall constitute a separate offense. For the purpose
of this section, the SIDEWALK AREA shall mean the entire area from the property line to the
established curb line or paving.
(1985 Code, § 139.10) (Ord. 1306, passed 6-13-1977)
Cross-reference:
Littering, see § 139.05
§ 139.10 ERECTING SIGN ACROSS STREET.
No person, firm or corporation shall erect a sign or banner across a public street within the city. The
failure of the person, firm or corporation erecting such sign to remove it upon notice of the City
Manager shall be a minor misdemeanor.
(1985 Code, § 139.11) (Ord. 1306, passed 6-13-1977)
§ 139.11 ADULTERATING CANDY OR FOOD.
(A) No person shall place pins, needles, razor blades, drugs of abuse, harmful or hazardous
substances or other dangerous objects in any food or confection with intent to harm the consumer or user
thereof, nor shall any person knowingly furnish any food or confection containing such substance or
object to another.
338 Madeira - General Offenses
(B) The presence of any such substance or object in any food or confection is prima facie evidence
that such substance or object was intentionally placed therein.
(C) Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(1985 Code, § 139.12) (Ord. 1169, passed 6-10-1974; Ord. 1306, passed 6-13-1977)
§ 139.12 RADIO RECEPTION INTERFERENCE.
(A) No person, firm or corporation shall knowingly use or cause to be used to maintain and operate,
or cause to be maintained and operated, any device, appliance, equipment or apparatus in such manner
as to cause electrostatic or electromagnetic waves or high frequency oscillations or radiations which
interfere with radio broadcast receiving apparatus or wireless receiving apparatus. However a person
duly licensed to practice medicine, osteopathy, dentistry or any limited branch or branches of medicine
or surgery, duly licensed by the state, in the course of the practice of his or her profession, may operate
or cause to be operated under his or her direct supervision, any machine necessary to give such
treatment, provided that all reasonable methods of preventing interference with radio broadcasting
reception, either through insulation, screening of the roofs or premises in which such operation shall be
conducted, or other reasonable and approved methods of interference prevention shall be installed and
used.
(B) Whoever shall violate the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(1985 Code, § 139.13) (Ord. 1306, passed 6-13-1977)
§ 139.13 SELLING OR DISCHARGING FIREWORKS PROHIBITED.
(A) The term FIREWORKS, as used in this section, shall mean all rockets, roman candles, bombs,
balloons, wheels and other substances and devices for pyrotechnic display; all firecrackers, blank
cartridges, torpedoes and concussion canes, pistols and other devices for the explosion of caps or
cartridges, or any substance designed or intended to produce a visible or audible pyrotechnic effect, by
combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation.
(B) No person, firm or corporation shall offer for sale at retail, or sell at retail, or loan, barter,
deliver, give away or possess within the city, any fireworks as defined in division (A) of this section,
except to holders of permits as provided in division (D) hereof.
(C) No person, firm or corporation shall purchase at retail, or receive, use, fire, set off, discharge,
set in motion or ignite, within the limitation of the city, any fireworks as defined in division (A) above
except as provided in division (D) hereof.
(D) Special permission may be granted to persons, firms or corporations for the purpose of
fireworks as defined in division (A), and for their use at a public gathering or in a public parade,
provided an application is filed with the City Manager, setting forth the name of the applicant, the time
and the place of the exhibition or parade. The City Manager, on being satisfied that the fireworks will
Miscellaneous 339
be used as stipulated in the application, and being satisfied that all reasonable precautions will be
exercised with regard to the protection of all property and the safety of all persons, may issue a permit
which shall allow the use of the fireworks at the time and place set out in the application.
(E) Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of divisions (B) or (C) of this
section shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(1985 Code, § 139.14) (Ord. 1169, passed 6-10-1974; Ord. 1306, passed 6-13-1977)
Cross-reference:
Fire prevention code, see Chapter 91
Statutory reference:
Definitions, R.C. § 3743.01
Permit to use fireworks, R.C. § 3743.54
Sale and use of fireworks, R.C. § 3743.65
§ 139.14 CURFEW; PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
(A) The Manager, or in the absence of the Manager, the Mayor, or in the absence of the Manager
and Mayor, the Vice-Mayor of the city, when engaged in suppressing a riot, mob action or other
substantial civil disorders, or when he or she has concluded that a state of emergency exists because there
is a clear and present danger of riot, mob action or other substantial civil disorders within the city, may
impose a curfew throughout the area threatened by such actions by prohibiting or regulating the sale,
offering for sale, dispensing or transportation of alcoholic beverages, explosives, guns, other weapons
and gasoline in, to or from the area subject such curfew.
(B) In any complaint, action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of any part of this section,
it shall not be necessary to negative any exception contained in such sections, and the burden of proof
of any such exception shall be upon the defendant.
(C) Whoever violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(1985 Code, § 139.15) (Ord. 1169, passed 6-10-1974; Ord. 1306, passed 6-13-1977)
§ 139.15 DEPOSIT OF DEAD ANIMALS OR OFFAL.
(A) No person shall put the carcass of a dead animal, or the offal from a slaughterhouse, butcher’s
establishment, packing house or fish house, or spoiled meat, spoiled fish or other putrid substance or the
contents of a privy vault, upon or into a lake, river, bay, creek, pond, canal, road, street, alley, lot,
field, meadow, public ground, market place or common.
(B) No owner or occupant of such place shall knowingly permit such thing to retain therein to the
annoyance of any citizen or neglect to remove or abate the nuisance occasioned thereby within 24 hours
after knowledge of the existence thereof, or after notice thereof in writing from the City Manager.
340 Madeira - General Offenses
(C) Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(1985 Code, § 139.16) (Ord. 1169, passed 6-10-1974)
§ 139.16 HAULING UNCOVERED GARBAGE.
(A) No person shall haul, convey or transport any garbage, paper or refuse of any kind whatsoever
over or upon the streets, thoroughfares, alleys and ways of the city, without having the garbage, paper
or refuse securely covered and confined by tarpaulin, or otherwise.
(B) Whoever shall violate the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(1985 Code, § 139.17) (Ord. 1169, passed 6-10-1974)
§ 139.17 INTERFERENCE WITH RIGHT OF PERSON TO ENGAGE IN HOUSING
TRANSACTIONS BECAUSE OF RACE, RELIGION OR THE LIKE.
(A) No person, whether or not acting under color of law, shall by force or threat of force willfully
injure, intimidate or interfere with, or attempt to injure, intimidate or interfere with any of the following:
(1) Any person because of race, color, religion, sex, familial status, as defined in R.C.
§ 4112.01, national origin, military status as defined in that section, disability as defined in that section,
or ancestry and because that person is or has been selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying,
contracting or negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing or occupation of any housing
accommodations, or applying for or participating in any service, organization or facility relating to the
business of selling or renting housing accommodations;
(2) Any person because that person is or has been doing, or in order to intimidate that person
or any other person or any class of persons from doing either of the following:
(a) Participating, without discrimination on account of race, color, religion, sex, familial
status, as defined in R.C. § 4112.01, national origin, military status as defined in that section, disability
as defined in that section, or ancestry, in any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities
described in division (A)(1) of this section; or
(b) Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or protection so to participate.
(3) Any person because that person is or has been, or in order to discourage that person or any
other person from, lawfully aiding or encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination
on account of race, color, religion, sex, familial status as defined in R.C. § 4112.01, national origin,
military status as defined in that section, disability as defined in that section, or ancestry, in any of the
activities, services, organizations or facilities described in division (A)(1) of this section, or participating
lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly opposing any denial of the opportunity to so participate.
Miscellaneous 341
(B) Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2927.03) (1985 Code, § 139.18)
§ 139.18 ETHNIC INTIMIDATION.
(A) No person shall violate R.C. § 2903.21, 2903.22, 2909.06 or 2909.07, or R.C.
§ 2917.21(A)(3), (A)(4) or (A)(5), by reason of the race, color, religion or national origin of another
person or group of persons.
(B) Whoever violates this section is guilty of ethnic intimidation. Ethnic intimidation is an offense
of the next higher degree than the offense the commission of which is a necessary element of ethnic
intimidation. In the case of an offense that is a misdemeanor of the first degree, ethnic intimidation is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2927.12) (1985 Code, § 139.19)
§ 139.19 CURFEW FOR MINORS.
(A) Purpose. There is a legitimate governmental interest in addressing the number of crimes
committed by juvenile offenders, as well as protecting the citizens and property of the city. Further,
there is a legitimate governmental interest in protecting the peace and quiet of the community from the
disturbances that juvenile offenders may cause. Therefore, the Council of the city has determined that
it is necessary for the public peace, health, safety and welfare to institute a curfew for minors.
(B) Definitions.
ADULT PERSON. A person, 18 years or older, who is authorized by a parent or guardian of
the minor to have the care and custody of such minor.
BODILY INJURY. Injury that creates a substantial health risk that necessitates immediate
medical attention from a medical professional.
EMERGENCY. An unforeseen combination of circumstances, or the resulting state, that call
for immediate action. The term includes but is not limited to a fire, natural disaster, an automobile
accident or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent or mitigate bodily injury or loss of life.
EMPLOYMENT ACTIVITY. Any bona fide or legal service performed for wages or salary
under contract, written, expressed or implied.
ESTABLISHMENT. Any privately-owned place of business operated for a profit to which the
public is invited, including but not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment.
GUARDIAN. A person who, under court order, is the guardian of a minor, or a public or
private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court.
342 Madeira - General Offenses
LAWFUL ACTIVITY. Includes or is substantially equivalent to the following:
(a) Involvement in employment activity;
(b) Attending an activity organized and supervised by adults sponsored by a county, state
municipality or township, school district, civic organization or other similar organization which takes
responsibility for the minor, or attending an official school or religious activity; or
(c) Proceeding to or coming from lawful activities described in (a) or (b) above without
any detour or stop.
MINOR. Any person under 18 years of age who is not married or otherwise emancipated.
PARENT. A person who is the natural parent, adoptive parent or stepparent of a minor.
PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has
access, and includes but is not limited to streets, highways, parks and the common areas of schools,
hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transportation facilities, shops, shopping centers, malls and
restaurants, including the parking lots thereto.
SUNDAY THROUGH THURSDAY, FRIDAY, SATURDAY. The time commencing on the
evening of the stated day, through and including the morning of the following day, with the exception
that curfew times beginning after 12:00 midnight actually begin on the early morning of the following
day through and including the morning of that same following day. Thus, Friday between 1:00 a.m. and
6:00 a.m. means Saturday morning between 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. and Saturday between 1:00 a.m.
and 6:00 a.m. means Sunday morning between 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(C) Prohibition. No minor shall be upon or in the public streets, parks, buildings or establishments,
or upon or in public places, open lands or vacant lots within the city, Sunday through Thursday, between
the hours of 12:00 a.m. (midnight) and 6:00 a.m. of the following morning, and Friday and Saturday
between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following morning, except as provided in division
(E) of this section.
(D) Exceptions. This section does not apply to a minor who is:
(1) Accompanied by a parent, guardian, or custodian;
(2) Accompanied by an adult specified by a parent, guardian, or custodian;
(3) Carrying out an errand or other lawful activity as directed by a parent, guardian or
custodian; or
(4) Occupying the sidewalk of the place where the minor resides, or the sidewalk of a place
where the minor has permission from his or her parent or guardian to be, or the sidewalk of a next-door
neighbor not communicating an objection to a police officer; or
Miscellaneous 343
(5) Participating in, going to or returning from:
(a) Lawful employment;
(b) A lawful athletic, educational, entertainment, religious or social event; or
(c) Interstate travel.
(E) Duty of parent, guardian or other adult. No parent, guardian or other adult having the care and
custody of a minor shall knowingly permit such minor to be upon or in the public streets, parks,
buildings or establishments or upon or in public places, open lands or vacant lots within the city between
the hours prohibited in division (C) of this section; provided, however, this division shall not apply to
exceptions set forth in division (D) of this section.
(F) Penalty. Any minor who violates this section shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor and dealt
with in accordance with juvenile court law and procedure. Any parent, guardian or other adult person
having the care and custody of a minor who violates division (E) of this section shall be guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(1985 Code, § 139.20) (Ord. 05-35, passed 4-10-2006)
344 Madeira - General Offenses

CITY OF MADEIRA ZONING CODE
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE TABLE OF CONTENTS
i
7722743.2
CHAPTER 150: ZONING CODE ................................................................................................................. 1
CHAPTER 151: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS ................................................................................... 97
CHAPTER 152: BUILDING CODE AND REGULATIONS .................................................................. 124
CHAPTER 153: EXCAVATING, FILLING AND GRADING OF LAND ............................................. 133
CHAPTER 154: PLANNING COMMISSION ......................................................................................... 140
CHAPTER 155: COMPREHENSIVE PARK AND RECREATION PLAN ........................................... 142
CHAPTER 156: SWIMMING POOL CONSTRUCTION ....................................................................... 143
CHAPTER 157: HOUSE AND BUILDING NUMBERING REGULATIONS ...................................... 147
CHAPTER 158: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ......................................................................... 150
CHAPTER 159: SIGNS ............................................................................................................................ 167
CHAPTER 160: FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION ................................................................................. 189
CHAPTER 161: ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW OFFICE ....................................................................... 215
CHAPTER 162: HOME SALES ............................................................................................................... 219
CHAPTER 163: CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT REGULATIONS .................................................. 220
CHAPTER 164: LOCATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES REGULATED ................. 229
CHAPTER 165: SCHEDULE OF FEES FOR LAND USAGE APPLICATIONS AND APPEALS ...... 246
CHAPTER 166: MAIN STREET CORE DISTRICT ZONING REGULATIONS .................................. 248
CHAPTER 167: RESIDENTIAL-SCALE BUSINESS OVERLAY DISTRICT REGULATIONS ........ 286
CHAPTER 168: BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS ................................................................................. 315
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
1
7722743.2
CHAPTER 150: ZONING CODE
150.01 Zoning boundaries
150.02 Continued use
150.03 Lot definition
150.04 Building limitation
150.05 Conversion of existing accessory buildings
150.06 Rear line definition
150.07 Corner lot definition
150.08 Lot width definition
150.09 Residence “AAA” District uses
150.10 Residence “AA,” “A,” “A-2” and “B” District uses
150.11 Reserved
150.12 Home offices in residential districts
150.13 Conditional uses in residential districts
150.14 Business “A” District uses
150.15 Business “B” District uses
150.16 Outdoor dining regulations
150.17 Manufacturing district uses
150.18 Recreation district uses
150.19 Existing nonconforming uses
150.20 Reconstruction limit for nonconforming use
150.21 Setbacks
150.22 Lot area reduction limit
150.23 Residence zone fencing
150.24 Parking
150.25 Parking and storing of commercial vehicles in residential districts
150.26 Dimensional variance
150.27 Use change restrictions
150.28 Permits required
150.29 Lot requirements
150.30 Panhandle lots
150.31 Continued validity
150.32 Violations
150.33 Dish-type satellite and receiving stations
150.34 Double letter uses
150.35 Approval for use variance
150.37 Cellular or wireless communication systems
150.38 Transitional overlay district
150.39 Transitional overlay district #2
150.40 Transitional overlay district #3
150.41 Porches, decks and other structures that are attached to the principal residence
150.42 Transitional residential overlay district
150.99 Penalty
Cross-reference: Architectural Review Office, see Ch. 161 Sign, see Ch. 159
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
2
7722743.2
§ 150.01 ZONING BOUNDARIES
(A) For the purposes of this Zoning Code, the city is hereby divided into 15 classes of districts as follows:
(1) Residence “AAA;
(2) Residence “AA;”
(3) Residence “A;”
(4) Residence “A-2;”
(5) Residence “B;”
(6) Recreation “R;”
(7) Business “A;”
(8) Business “B;”
(9) Manufacturing;
(10) CBD;
(11) TD;
(12) TD #2;
(13) TD #3;
(14) Main Street Core District; and
(15) Residential Scale Business District.
(B) The boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown on the map, entitled Zoning Map of the City of Madeira, Ohio. Except where such boundaries are streets or are fixed by exact dimensions shown on such map, they are intended to follow lot lines as they exist at the time of the enactment of this Zoning Code. However, where such a boundary line divides a lot, the entire lot shall be deemed to be within the least restrictive of the districts between or among which it would otherwise be divided, provided that no such less restrictive district shall be extended in such a manner more than 25 feet.
(1985) Code, § 150.01) (Ord. 1084, passed 1-17-1972; Ord. 1352, passed 6-5-1978)
§ 150.02 CONTINUED USE
Except as hereinafter provided, no building, structure or premises shall be used, and no building or part thereof or other structure shall be erected, reconstructed, enlarged or altered, contrary to the regulations herein specified for the district in which such premises, building or structure is located; provided that
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
3
7722743.2
nothing in this Zoning Code, except as provided in § 150.17, shall require the change of the use made of a building or premises at such time of enactment, or of the height, location, yards or courts of any such existing building.
(1985 Code, § 150.02) (Ord. 1084, passed 1-17-1972) Penalty, see § 150.99
§ 150.03 LOT DEFINITION
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
LOT
A piece or parcel of land whose area, in addition to the parts thereof now or hereafter occupied by a building and its accessory structures, is sufficient to furnish the yards and courts required for compliance with this Zoning Code as to all future construction.
(1985 Code, § 150.03) (Ord. 1084, passed 1-17-1972)
§ 150.04 BUILDING LIMITATION.
Every building hereafter erected shall be erected upon a lot or lots, and not more than a single detached dwelling house shall be erected upon any one lot in any residence district, nor shall any building be converted to use as a dwelling so as to create habitation for more than one family (as that term is defined in § 150.09) upon any one lot in any residence district, other than as permitted for firehouses.
(1985 Code, § 150.04) (Ord. 1084, passed 1-17-1972; Ord. 87-02, passed 2-2-1987)
§ 150.05 CONVERSION OF EXISTING ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.
(A) Purpose. There are three primary purposes for authorizing certain existing accessory buildings to be converted to permit habitation that is accessory and incidental to the habitation of the principal dwelling.
(1) The limited conversion of existing accessory buildings for habitation is intended to enable an extension of the residential use of a lot that is compatible with existing residence district uses. This means that the habitation of an existing accessory building is intended and shall be limited to uses that are incidental and accessory to the occupation of the principal building for residential purposes. Furthermore, this means that a property owner who chooses to extend the habitation to an existing accessory building shall not permit the occupation of such building unless it is consistent with one or more of the limited uses set forth in this section. CONVERSION, as used in this section, does not mean or require that an applicant prove that a portion of the existing accessory building is actually used or has been used for habitation previously.
(2) The conversion of certain existing accessory buildings is intended to slow the assemblage of existing parcels for subdivision development and thus slow the acceleration of increased density within residential districts. This purpose is consistent with maintaining existing green space in residential districts.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
4
7722743.2
(3) Permitting the extension of habitation to certain existing accessory buildings will provide an incentive to preserve some of the historical aspects of the city. In lieu of the removal and/or replacement, immediate neighbors can benefit by the continuity of buildings that reflect and maintain the historical fabric of the community. As used in this section HISTORICAL ASPECTS and HISTORICAL FABRIC are intended to mean the reasonable preservation of the exterior appearance of the accessory building. The terms are not intended to be a total prohibition from replacing siding, painting, replacing windows or roofing. However, any expansion of the volume of the building, as measured by the exterior walls shall not be considered consistent with this historical purpose, nor shall such expansion be permitted as part of any requested conversion.
(B) Conversion of Existing Accessory Buildings. Existing accessory buildings may be converted to use primarily for habitation as a dwelling on the condition that all the criteria set forth below are met, as determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals, after a public hearing, which shall be advertised and noticed in the same manner as requests for variances. The conditions imposed by this section are crucial, necessary and designed to protect the fundamental single-family residential nature of the city and in furtherance of the aforesaid purposes. As mandated in the City Charter, the Board of Zoning Appeals is not authorized to grant a variance in any cases in which the deviation from an existing zoning ordinance is so substantial that it is equivalent to a change in the zoning district. It is hereby determined that any relaxation of the conditions or any deviation from the terms set forth herein is contrary to the spirit and intent of this section and shall be deemed a use variance equivalent to a zoning change. The conditions are as follows.
(1) The accessory building to be converted was constructed prior to 1959.
(2) The conversion must not alter the exterior of the building in such a manner that will make its appearance either incompatible with the principal building or detract from any historical significance identified with the existing accessory building, nor shall the conversion expand the existing envelope or footprint of the building.
(3) The conversion of the existing accessory building shall be intended to provide use of the accessory building that is subservient and incidental to the residential use of the principal dwelling. The occupant(s) of the converted accessory building shall provide services to promote and sustain the residential use of the principal dwelling by its occupants. Such valid uses shall include but not be limited to childcare for children living on the premises, maintenance of yard and improvements on the lot, temporary occupation by guests and assisted-living care. The converted accessory building shall not be used as a rental unit, business or home occupation, pool house or party room.
(4) The applicant shall provide on its application historical information regarding the lot and buildings and describe how conversion will help sustain those existing historical elements of the property. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall review and condition any approval on the continued preservation of historical features of the accessory building so identified. However, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall not impose requirements that require significant changes to the exterior of the accessory building.
(5) The intended conversion of the existing accessory building shall not reduce the number or square footage of pre-existing enclosed parking areas for motor vehicles.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
5
7722743.2
(6) The owners (as listed on the County Auditor’s records) of the lot and any occupants (other than minors) of the principal and accessory unit shall provide to the city by delivery to the City Manager, with the initial application and, thereafter, on an annual basis, an affidavit confirming that the use of the converted accessory building remains in conformity to the requirements of this section. The city shall provide the form of the affidavit to the property owners who shall complete and return it within 30 days of receipt.
(7) The owner(s) of the lot who applies for the conversion of the accessory building shall include with the application, a statement recognizing, that if approved, the use of the converted accessory building is limited and if it is not used for a permitted use, it shall remain uninhabited. This shall be in the form of an affidavit filed with the application and reaffirmed on an annual basis in the affidavit required by division (B)(6) above.
(8) The existing accessory building shall meet the existing setback, area coverage of building and height limitations applicable to other accessory buildings within the particular zoning district. Additionally, the lot on which the accessory building is located must meet the minimum area requirements of a lot for the zoning district within which it is located.
(9) The lot at all times must be in compliance with federal, state and local laws, and conform to, and demonstrate compliance with utility regulations. The owners of the lot shall ensure that the accessory building and the principal building shall be serviced by the same utility meter and not by separate meters.
(10) No separate mailing address or identification of either the principal building or the accessory building as an apartment unit, or any other category or subcategory shall be utilized for postal services or deliveries. There shall not be separate mailboxes or mail slots or other devices, signs or directions for delivery of mail to more than a single container, device or location on the lot or adjacent public right-of-way.
(11) The owner(s) of the lot who applies for the conversion of an accessory building, if approved, and who subsequently sells the property, shall note the restrictions contained in this section in the Residential Property Disclosure Form required pursuant to R.C. § 5302.30. Such notation shall be in paragraph 2 of Section K on page 3 of the form and shall state as follows: “Property is subject to the City of Madeira Code of Ordinances § 150.05.”
(C) No Additional Accessory Buildings. Approval of the conversion of an accessory building for dwelling purposes shall not be construed to permit or create the right to any additional accessory buildings.
(D) Penalties. In the event that the owner(s) or occupant(s) of a lot violates any provisions of the section, including but not limited to failing to submit an affidavit required under division (B)(6) above, misrepresents the activities on the affidavit or submits an affidavit that does not meet the requirements of this section, or fails to notify the purchaser of the property of the restrictions contained in this section as provided in division (B)(11) above, the owner(s) or occupant(s) shall be subject to all civil or criminal penalties provided in §§ 150.32 and 150.99 of this code.
(1985 Code, § 150.041) (Ord. 07-34, passed 11-12-2007) Penalty, see § 150.99
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
6
7722743.2
§ 150.06 REAR LINE DEFINITION
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
REAR LINE OF ANY IRREGULAR LOT
A line entirely within the lot, ten feet long and parallel to and at the maximum distance from the street.
(1985 Code, § 150.05) (Ord. 1084, passed 1-17-1972)
§ 150.07 CORNER LOT DEFINITION
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
CORNER LOT
Any lot abutting upon intersecting streets at their intersections, or upon two parts of the same street where they form an interior angle of less than 135 degrees.
(1985 Code, § 150.06) (Ord. 1084, passed 1-17-1972)
§ 150.08 LOT WIDTH DEFINITION
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
WIDTH OF A LOT
The average length of all lines within the lot parallel to the street. (1985 Code, § 150.07)
§ 150.09 RESIDENCE “AAA” DISTRICT USES
(A) Purpose. It is the primary purpose of the Residence “AAA” District to establish and maintain an area for high quality single-family detached homes with a relatively low population and building density. A secondary purpose is to permit specifically identified institutional uses that are determined to be compatible with single-family district uses, but only if certain conditions and restrictions are met.
(B) Primary Permitted Use. The primary permitted uses of land in this district are for one single-family residential dwelling unit per lot, or for vacant unimproved land.
(1) A SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING UNIT shall mean a building designed exclusively for the occupancy by one non-transient family or housekeeping unit. DWELLING shall mean a building designed exclusively to be used for residential purposes, but not including a tent, cabin, trailer, trailer coach, recreational vehicle or camper on a truck.
(2) FAMILY shall mean a person living alone, or two or more persons customarily living together as a single housekeeping unit and using common cooking facilities, but shall not include a group occupying a hotel, club, boarding or lodging house, motel, sorority house, fraternity house or group home.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
7
7722743.2
(3) The dimensional requirements for single-family “AAA” District Uses are set forth in § 150.29.
(C) Permitted Accessory Uses for Single-Family Dwellings. Accessory uses, buildings or other structures customarily incidental to the use of a lot for single-family dwelling purposes may be established, erected or constructed, provided that such accessory uses shall not involve the conduct of any business, trade or industry or any private way or walk giving access to such activity, or any billboard, sign or poster other than authorized herein. Permitted accessory uses for single-family dwellings include the following:
(1) Gardening and Pets. Gardening, hobby greenhouses, the raising of vegetables or fruits and the keeping of household pets exclusively for the use or personal enjoyment of residents of the premises and not for commercial purposes shall be permitted subject to any setback or other limitations imposed within this Zoning Code or the Building Code of the city;
(2) Parking Facilities. Garages, carports or other parking spaces for the exclusive use of residents of the premises and their guests, subject to the rules and regulations of this section;
(3) Swimming Pools. Swimming pools, exclusively for the use of the residents and their guests, and subject to the provisions of the applicable Building Code;
(4) Signs. All signs allowed in a residential district are subject to the provisions of Chapter
(5) Home Occupations. Home occupations shall be subject to the provisions in § 150.12;
(6) Accessory Buildings and Structures. Accessory buildings and structures customarily incidental to any use permitted in this district and located on the same lot with the main use to which they are accessory shall be permitted provided that they comply with the following.
(a) Purpose. The purpose of the regulations under this division is to control the size and number of accessory buildings or structures located on lots in residential districts, and to eliminate conditions which may be detrimental to the residential character and property values of real estate located in such residential districts.
(b) Accessory Building or Structure Defined. An ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE is one which is detached from the principal building. Its use is related, subordinate and customarily incidental to the use of the principal building on the same lot.
(c) Limits and Regulations. Accessory buildings and structures shall be related, subordinate and customarily incidental to the use of the principal building or structure located on the same lot. They shall have the same ownership as the principal building or structure located on the same lot and shall only service the needs of the occupants of the principal building or structure located on the same lot. No accessory buildings, uses, or structures in a residential district shall include any business activity unless specifically permitted and regulated by express provision of the Zoning Code.
(i) Location. Accessory buildings and structures shall be located only in a side or a rear yard, and shall be located a minimum of four feet from side and rear lot
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
8
7722743.2
lines; except that in a case of lots occupied by a country club, swimming club, tennis club, or the like, accessory buildings and structures shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from every property line of such club.
(ii) Height.
a. Residence AAA, AA, A and A2. Accessory buildings and structures shall not exceed a maximum height of 20 feet from grade as regulated in § 150.29(D).
b. Residence B. Accessory buildings and structures shall not exceed a maximum height of 15 feet from grade as regulated in § 150.29(D).
(iii) Maximum Square Footage. The combined square footage for all accessory buildings and accessory structures located on the same lot shall not exceed the square footage as shown in the table below (for overall maximum lot coverage refer to § 150.29): Zoning District Maximum Square Footage
AAA
800 sq. ft.
AA
800 sq. ft.
A-2
600 sq. ft.
A
600 sq. ft.
B
160 sq. ft.
(d) Structures for Children’s Play or Which Contain Pets or Animals. Playsets, treehouses, dog houses/runs, chicken coops, or other structures used for play or to contain pets or animals shall not be located in a front yard, and must conform to setback requirements of the relevant district.
(7) Permit Process. No person shall construct, expand or reconstruct any accessory building or structure regulated by this Zoning Code without first obtaining a zoning certificate from the City Manager certifying compliance with these provisions. If the City Manager determines that the proposed structure does not comply with the zoning code, then the applicant may appeal the decision to the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(D) Secondary Permitted Uses. Secondary permitted uses for this district are the conditional uses authorized by § 150.13, upon application and approval by the Planning Commission set forth therein pursuant to the standards and conditions.
(E) Recreational Vehicles. Motor homes, automobile trailers, house trailers, motorcycle trailers, boat trailers, boats, camping trailers, campers and similar units, whether truck- or chassis-mounted or unmounted, shall be permitted on any of the premises of this District, but may not be occupied for residence, business, demonstration or any other purposes.
(1985 Code, § 150.08) (Ord. 1084, passed 1-17-1972; Ord. 87-02, passed 2-2-1987; Ord. 88-44, passed 11-7-1988; Ord. 88-45, passed 11-7-1988; Ord. 88-58, passed 1-25-1989; Ord. 94-52, passed 1-22-1996; Ord. 02-40, passed 1-13-2003; Ord. 05-06, passed 3-28-2005; Ord. 13-10 passed 3-11-2013)
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
9
7722743.2
§ 150.10 RESIDENCE AA, A, A-2 AND B DISTRICT USES
In any Residence AA, A, A-2 and B District, no building, structure or premises shall be used, and no building or structure shall be erected that is intended or designed to be used, in whole or in part, except for one or more of the following specified uses: uses permitted and as regulated in Residence AAA Districts. The only distinctions between Residence AAA, AA, A-2 and B Districts are in terms of the lot requirements hereinafter set forth.
(1985 Code, § 150.09) (Ord. 1084, passed 1-17-1972) Penalty, see § 150.99
§ 150.11 RESERVED
§ 150.12 HOME OFFICES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
(A) The use of dwellings in residential districts for businesses shall not be permitted unless specifically authorized by this section. Home offices in residential dwellings will have a deleterious effect on the enjoyment of property for residential purposes unless the activity is strictly limited, regulated and enforced. The activity is intended to be regulated in a manner that conceals it from adjoining properties and does not permit a business or activity that intrudes on the enjoyment of other residential dwellings in the area. Specifically, increased vehicular or pedestrian traffic, exterior lighting, expanded parking surfaces, outside storage, retail sales or any such use which creates dust, noise or offensive odors are intended to be prohibited by this section if those activities are connected with the home office(s). On the other hand, it is recognized that many types of home offices are an integral part of residential activities. Home offices which do not generate the inappropriate secondary effects stated above are not intended to be discouraged. However, unless the home office(s) is specifically identified in division (B) of this section, and the activity is consistent with the conditions in division (C) of this section, the home office(s) shall be prohibited unless a variance is granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals after the determination that the proposed home office use meets the conditions provided in division (C) of this section.
(B) Home offices are permitted for the following type of occupations:
(1) Financial planner;
(2) Software designer;
(3) Personal trainer;
(4) Counselor;
(5) Manufacturers/sales representatives;
(6) Insurance agents;
(7) Realtors;
(8) Accountants;
(9) Teachers;
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
10
7722743.2
(10) Attorneys;
(11) Architects;
(12) Secretarial services;
(13) Food preparation for catering service;
(14) Artists and crafts;
(15) Brokers;
(16) Writers;
(17) Childcare consistent with Class B childcare;
(18) Photographer; and
(19) Other similar occupations that are consistent with these guidelines established herein, as demonstrated by the applicant, and have been approved by the Planning Commission.
(C) A home office, even as it is set forth in division (B) of this section shall not be permitted unless it complies with all of the following conditions:
(1) Members of the immediate family residing within the residence and one nonresident may work, practice or assist in such office(s) or occupation(s), but, in no case may more than two residents of the actual home where the home office is occurring (whether or not one is the employee of the other) work, practice or assist in the office or occupation;
(2) Any such office or occupation must be conducted wholly within a space not exceeding 20% of the floor area of one story of that residence;
(3) The residential character of the exterior of the property shall not be changed, nor shall any structural alterations or construction features be made or used which are not customary in dwellings, and no display or sign pertaining to such use shall be visible from any street;
(4) The number of vehicles attracted to the premises, or to a street in the immediate vicinity of the premises, as a result of the home office(s), shall not exceed two at any one time, including the nonresident employee, but excluding delivery vehicles temporarily stopped for purposes of pick-up or delivery, and not more than four persons, excluding residents of a dwelling, may enter such dwelling as patrons, clients or otherwise attracted to the premises as a result of the home office(s) in a single day, and not more than 20 such persons in a single week. Any entrance to any office or area of any home office(s) shall be from within the dwelling;
(5) No merchandise, product or commodity may be sold on the premises;
(6) No bulk storage of merchandise, products, commodities or equipment is permitted, nor shall any vehicle connected with the office(s), other than up to two passenger vehicles, be parked on the premises;
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
11
7722743.2
(7) Any device equipping the office or occupation shall be only of the type normally used or found in a single-family dwelling, and no mechanical equipment shall be used which creates any dust, noise, odor, light, glare, vibration or electrical disturbance beyond the lot; and
(8) Multiple offices or occupations are permitted, provided that the aggregate impact or effect complies with all the regulations herein.
(D) PROHIBITED HOME OFFICES include but are not limited to activities such as a barber or beauty shop, shoe repair, automotive repair, motorcycle repair, lawnmower repair, heavy equipment repair, commercial breeding, raising or selling of animals or any similar activities.
(1985 Code, § 150.101) (Ord. 02-40, passed 1-13-2003)
§ 150.13 CONDITIONAL USES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
(A) Permitted Uses. The primary permitted use in this residential district is to promote and encourage the use of property for single-family dwellings. Certain other types of uses may be integrated into this District but will be compatible with the primary single-family use only if the impact of certain activities and improvements are specifically mitigated by regulations and conditions. The activities and improvements of institutional uses which may be incompatible with single-family dwelling use include traffic, ingress and egress, large parking surfaces, noise, lights, large buildings, hours of usage and other activities that may be inconsistent and have a negative impact upon the primary permitted use of single-family dwellings. Failure to regulate these activities and improvements may result in the reduction of the desirability of single-family dwellings and corresponding reduction in property values. The conditional uses permitted in this residential zoning district are those uses which traditionally have complemented and enhanced the desirability of a residential community provided the intensity of the use of the facilities is not permitted to become so disproportionate as to cause a reduction in the desirability and value of single-family dwellings within the vicinity. The conditional uses permitted in residential districts are limited to the following:
(1) Religious places of worship;
(2) Government buildings and utilities;
(3) Educational institutions, but not trade schools;
(4) City parks and playgrounds;
(5) Libraries opened to the public;
(6) Firehouses for serving the city, including living quarters for necessary firefighting personnel;
(7) Residential facilities that are either foster homes or family foster homes as defined in R.C. § 2159.011(B), family homes and group homes licensed pursuant to R.C. § 5123.19, and adult family homes and adult group homes licensed pursuant to R.C. § 3722.02; and
(8) A public museum which is open to the public and displays items of local interest.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
12
7722743.2
(B) Standards and Procedures For Conditional Use Permit in Residential Districts. The Planning Commission shall not grant a conditional use permit unless it shall, in each specific case, make specific findings of fact directly, based on the particular evidence presented to it, that support the conclusions that:
(1) Outdoor lighting shall be reflected away from adjacent residential property and installed at the lowest height that is consistent with safety and security intended to be provided by such lighting;
(2) The minimum lot size shall be three acres, unless the Planning Commission specifically determines that a smaller sized parcel is suitable for the proposed use, that the smaller size will not cause an unreasonable intrusion of institutional activity into property used for residential uses in the vicinity, and is in harmony with the other conditions set forth in this section regulating conditional uses;
(3) No parking areas or above ground structures shall be closer than 25 feet to adjacent residential areas;
(4) Screening and buffering along the common boundary or portion thereof shall be provided in accordance with the following regulations and shall be approved as part of the development plan required by this section.
(a) Intent. It is not intended that such a landscaped buffered area be required to screen out all activity or buildings on the subject property. The Planning Commission may authorize a reduction in the size of the buffer area if it is recommended by the ARO and the Planning Commission determines such reduction will not be inconsistent with the purpose of this section.
(b) When Required. Screening and buffering shall be required for parking lots, access drives or loading and service areas when adjacent to a residential use or district.
(c) Width of Buffer Yard. Each required buffer yard shall have a minimum width of 25 feet.
(d) Type of Screening. A brick, stone or decorative masonry wall of acceptable design along the common boundary, or portion thereof, shall be required. The spaces between the wall and the lot line of the adjoining premises in any residential district shall be landscaped with grass, hardy shrubs or evergreen ground cover and maintained in good condition. In lieu of a wall, a solid, continuous, visual screen along the common boundary or portion thereof with one or more of the items listed below can be substituted, only when it is determined by the Planning Commission that such screening can be equally as effective as the solid wall.
(i) Existing natural vegetation; or
(ii) New screening materials consisting of one or a combination of the following:
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
13
7722743.2
a. A landscaped mound or berm at least three feet in height, and planted with an evergreen hedge or dense planting of evergreen shrubs not less than six feet in height measured from the natural grade;
b. A dense vegetative planting incorporating trees and/or shrubs of a variety which shall be equally effective in winter and summer; or
c. A solid fence.
(e) Location. The location of the wall, fence or vegetation shall be placed within the buffer yard to maximize the screening effect as determined by the Architectural Review Officer.
(f) Height of Screening. The height of the screening, measured from the natural grade, shall not be less than six feet in height and shall be maintained in good condition without any advertising thereon. When the screening or a portion thereof is intended to be achieved with vegetation, the required height shall be a minimum of 42 inches at planting, with a height of six feet achieved no later than 24 months after the initial installation. Whenever the required screening is located along the common side lot line of the area extending from the front of the building line of the residential use to the street, the required screening shall not exceed a height of four feet.
(5) The location of curb cuts for the ingress and egress of motor vehicles shall be approved by the City Engineer and the City Manager. The location and width of such access points shall consider the following. Potential high traffic areas shall be located away from adjacent residential property in order to minimize the intrusion of motor vehicle noise, lights and high traffic volume into the adjacent residential areas;
(6) All buildings shall maintain a front, rear and side yard setback of not less than 50 feet. Buildings in excess of 35 feet in height shall be required to be set back one additional foot for every foot that the building height is in excess of 35 feet. The maximum height of any building shall be 50 feet, including steeples, other appurtenances or any other architectural features. The height of any building shall also be reviewed and commented on by the Fire Department;
(7) Interior landscaping of parking lots shall be provided in accordance with the following requirements:
(a) When any parking area is designed to accommodate 20 or more vehicles, a minimum of 5% of that portion of the parking lot shall be planted as landscaped areas, developed and reasonably distributed throughout such portion so as to provide visual and climatic relief from broad expanses of pavement:
(i) Landscaped islands shall be developed and distributed throughout the parking lot to define major circulation aisles and driving lanes and provide visual and climatic relief from the broad expanses of pavement;
(ii) Each island shall be a minimum of six feet in any horizontal dimension;
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
14
7722743.2
(iii) Within the landscaped islands, there shall be provided one major shade tree for the first 20 parking spaces and one additional shade tree for every ten additional parking spaces, provided there is no impairment to the visibility of motorists or pedestrians. Each tree, at the time of installation, having a clear trunk height of at least six feet and a minimum caliper of two inches;
(iv) Shrubs or low, spreading plant materials may be planted within the required landscaped islands provided there is no impairment to the visibility of motorists or pedestrians; and
(v) Landscaping needed to meet the perimeter landscape requirement shall not be counted toward interior landscaping.
(b) For the purpose of this section, the area of a parking lot shall be the total vehicular surface area including circulation aisles.
(8) The ARO shall determine the type and location of landscaping that is necessary and appropriate to be placed at the exterior of buildings in order to minimize the visual impact of large expanses of all areas of buildings. The Planning Commission shall determine that the application is consistent with the recommendations of the ARO;
(9) Adequate utility, drainage and other necessary facilities will be provided per city stormwater regulations to assure that other parcels in the vicinity shall not be unreasonably burdened with surface water runoff from the subject parcel;
(10) Adequate access roads or entrance or exit drives will be provided and will be designed so as to prevent traffic hazards and to minimize traffic conflicts in congestion in public streets and alleys;
(11) The location and size of the conditional use, the nature and intensity of the operation involved or conducted in connection with it, the size of the site in relation to it, and the location of the site with respect to streets giving access to it, shall be such that it will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the district in which it is located;
(12) The location, nature and height of buildings, structures, walls and fences of the site and the nature and the extent of landscaping and screening on the site shall be such that the use will not unreasonably hinder or discourage the appropriate development, use and enjoyment of adjacent land, buildings and structures for the primary permitted use of this district, single-family residential use; and
(13) The proposed conditional use will not cause substantial injury to the value of other property in the neighborhood in which it is located and will contribute to and promote the convenience and welfare of the public.
(C) Authorization For Conditional Uses. The Planning Commission may allow as conditional uses only those uses classified as conditional uses in this Zoning District.
(D) Hearings on Conditional Use Permit. The Planning Commission shall hold a hearing on an application for conditional use within 45 days after the application has been filed unless otherwise
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
15
7722743.2
agreed by the applicant. Planning Commission shall make a reasonable effort to substantially comply with the following standards for notice of such hearing. Public notice of such hearing shall be published at least once in the newspaper of general circulation in the city not less than ten days before such hearing. The property which is the subject of the proposed conditional use shall be posted with a sign indicating that such application has been filed. Notices shall contain the date, time and place of the hearing and a brief description of the relief sought. Written notice shall be given at least ten days before the hearing to owners of property within 400 feet of the perimeter of the parcel or parcels of land in the application. The Planning Commission may give such additional notice as may be deemed appropriate. Any party in interest may appear and be heard at the hearing in person, by agent, or by attorney. However, any failure to send, post or receive any of the notices set forth herein shall not be basis for denying the application for a conditional use, nor shall it be a basis for reversing or voiding a decision of Planning Commission.
(E) Conditions and Restrictions. In granting a conditional use, the Planning Commission may impose such conditions, safeguards and restrictions upon the premises benefitted by the conditional use as may be necessary to comply with the standards set forth herein and to reduce or minimize any potentially injurious effect of such conditional uses upon other property in the neighborhood and to carry out the general purpose and intent of this Zoning Code.
(F) Decision and Records. The Planning Commission shall render a written decision on an application for conditional use without unreasonable delay after the close of the hearing, and in all cases within 45 days from the close of the hearing. The decision of the Planning Commission shall contain specific findings of fact and shall clearly set forth any such conditions, safeguards or restrictions imposed. The Planning Commission shall maintain complete records of all actions of the Planning Commission with respect to applications for conditional uses.
(G) Conditional Uses. No use of a building, structure or land that is designated as a conditional use shall hereafter be changed to another conditional use until a new conditional use permit has been secured in accordance with these procedures. Any use which is a permitted use when established but changed to a conditional use by amendments to this Zoning Code shall be classified as a conditional use and shall have all the rights and limitations of a conditional use. No expansions of buildings, new buildings or additional parking areas shall be constructed on any existing conditional use without also submitting a plan for approval that demonstrates reasonable efforts to bring existing parking areas, access ways, buffer/landscaping areas and buildings into conformity with the criteria and guidelines stated herein. No existing conditional use shall be altered, modified or enlarged unless a new conditional use permit has been secured in accordance with the procedures set forth herein. A conditional use which is voluntarily discontinued for a period of 180 days or more shall not be reestablished unless a new conditional use permit has been secured in accordance with the provisions of this Zoning Code.
(1985 Code, § 150.102) (Ord. 02-40, passed 1-13-2003)
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
16
7722743.2
§ 150.14 BUSINESS “A” DISTRICT USES
(A) Permitted Uses.
(1) Offices for professional use such as accountants, attorneys, counseling, consulting, doctors, architects, dentists, engineers, opticians, real estate, insurance and manufacturers’ representatives;
(2) Commercial uses such as retail, restaurants, bars, banks, media studios and dry cleaners (where dry cleaning is not done on-site) and bakeries employing less than six bakers;
(3) Libraries, museums, theaters; and
(4) Daycares, preschools, nursery schools and childcare businesses.
(B) Conditional Uses. Outdoor dining pursuant to § 150.16.
(1985 Code, § 150.12) (Ord. 1084, passed 1-17-1972; Ord. 1636, passed 11-7-1983; Ord. 12-12, passed 5-14-2012)
§ 150.15 BUSINESS “B” DISTRICT USES
(A) Permitted Uses.
(1) All uses permitted in the Business “A” Zoning District;
(2) Products retailed and sold on the premises, may be manufactured, finished or assembled on the premises, provided that such products are of the type sold primarily to the general or consumer public, at retail and in relatively small quantities per sale;
(3) Facilities for boarding only small animals, that are not closer than 200 feet of any residence or business district; and
(4) No use that may be obnoxious or offensive by reason of the emission of odor, dust, smoke, gas, fumes, water-carried waste, noise or vibration in connection therewith.
(B) Conditional Uses. Outdoor dining pursuant to § 150.16.
(1985 Code, § 150.13) (Ord. 1084, passed 1-17-1972; Ord. 1636, passed 11-7-1983; Ord. 12-12, passed 5-14-2012)
§ 150.16 OUTDOOR DINING REGULATIONS
(A) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to permit, subject to certain guidelines and standards, outdoor dining as an accessory use to buildings occupied by a business that serves food or drink for on-premises consumption.
(B) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
17
7722743.2
ENCROACHMENT
Stands, tables, umbrellas, chairs, displays, signs, banners, flags, objects related to the business or other items of private property placed on sidewalks or other areas of the public right-of-way to provide or enhance outdoor dining.
OUTDOOR DINING
An area not enclosed in a building and which is intended as an accessory area to a restaurant or other retail establishment which provides food and/or drink to customers for consumption on the premises. Specifically not regulated by this section are city parks, residential districts, city-authorized special events such as street dances and street block parties, and activities on property primarily used for institutional purposes such as schools, churches, governmental uses and private clubs such as swim, golf and tennis clubs.
PREMISES
The real estate owned, leased or rented by the licensed indoor dining establishment.
(C) Criteria. Outdoor dining shall be permitted as an accessory use only if all of the following criteria are met:
(1) The primary activity of the business offering the outdoor dining is the sale of prepared food and/or drink for consumption by purchasers;
(2) The seating capacity of the outdoor dining area does not exceed the approved seating capacity of the indoor dining area;
(3) The outdoor dining area meets all applicable laws and regulations, including Board of Health Regulations, Department of Liquor Control Regulations and building and zoning regulations of the city;
(4) The outdoor dining area shall not be open before 7:00 a.m. on any day, nor after 11:00 p.m. on any day;(5) The outdoor dining area shall be located on a surface which can be readily cleaned or hosed down;
(5) Outdoor dining equipment must be constructed of non-reflective materials;
(6) No part of the outdoor dining area may be within 100 feet of any residential district;
(7) No cooking utilities, including grills, shall be permitted in the outdoor dining area. Cooking facilities shall be contained within the principal building unless specific written authorization is granted by the City Manager for special events;
(8) Signage in the outdoor dining areas shall be in compliance with the Sign Code. Specifically, signs on umbrellas and other items in the outdoor dining area are not permitted unless they are in compliance with the Code. However, directional signs may be permitted if specifically approved by the ARO as conducive for safety;
(9) Noise, music or sounds emanating from the outdoor dining area shall be in accordance with existing regulations prohibiting excessive noise in the city. Outdoor music shall not be significantly audible off premises;
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
18
7722743.2
(10) The outdoor dining facilities area must be kept clear of litter and maintained in a safe, sanitary and first-rate condition, including tables, chairs, umbrellas and any screening;
(11) The outdoor dining plan of the premises shall be consistent with, any other development plans, conditions, variances or other special restrictions that apply to the property;
(12) All outdoor dining equipment, including tables, chairs and umbrellas must be stored indoors or off the premises when the outdoor dining area is closed for the season; and
(13) The outdoor dining area shall be in accordance with the standards and criteria approved in writing by the ARO and countersigned by the applicant which shall be incorporated into the outdoor dining plan. The ARO shall consider all of the following criteria before approving or denying the outdoor dining plan:
(a) The arrangement of the outdoor dining area shall facilitate pedestrian traffic patterns and not unreasonably impede the exit from the principal building or access to nearby businesses or residences. Low fences and plants in containers may be required where appropriate;
(b) Appropriate waste receptacles with affixed lids shall be provided. All waste receptacles shall be approved by the ARO in the outdoor dining plan;
(c) The outdoor dining area shall not be unreasonably distracting to vehicular traffic. The ARO shall consider lighting, proximity to roadways, color schemes and desirability of screening or fencing the outdoor dining area;
(d) The type of activity that will occur in the outdoor dining area;
(e) The ARO shall not approve any lighting of the outdoor dining area that is distracting or unnecessarily impacts on adjoining properties or roadways;
(f) The ARO shall consider the zoning setback requirements of the district and evaluate the proposed outdoor dining facility to insure that there are no encroachments of permanent improvements in the required setbacks. The ARO shall also consider the visual and aesthetic impact of chairs, tables, umbrellas and other items placed within a required setback area, including the aesthetic elements set forth in the existing CBD regulations;
(g) The ARO shall not approve any plan that will cause any public sidewalk to be unreasonably impeded by the proposed plan. Any permit which approves the use of any public right-of-way (including sidewalks) shall be revocable at any time, without cause, by the city;
(h) The ARO shall consult, as appropriate, with the Fire Chief, Police Chief, Building Inspector or City Manager for advice and recommendations; and
(i) The ARO shall determine that the plan provides for sufficient screening of lights, noise and other activity in outdoor dining area from nearby residences. Consultation with affected residents is encouraged.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
19
7722743.2
(D) Outdoor Dining Plan.
(1) Each application for an outdoor dining area must be specifically approved in writing by the ARO and City Manager. The approval of the City Manager shall signify that the plan has been approved by the ARO and that it meets the criteria set forth in divisions (C)(1) through (C)(14) above. The approval of the ARO shall signify approval of those items listed under (C)(14) above. No final approval shall be granted for any plan that does not comply with the City Zoning Code. No variances shall be permitted except by appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(2) An outdoor dining plan must be submitted as part of the application for the permit approval. The plan shall include the following items:
(a) A sketch to scale of the premises clearly defining the area proposed for outdoor dining including any encroachment into a public right-of-way and/or sidewalks. The sketch must depict the proposed location of each item to be placed within the area, such as chairs, tables and umbrellas;
(b) Pictures or other adequate description of chairs, tables, umbrellas, fencing, screening, plantings and other changes proposed for the area;
(c) Description of service to be provided in the outdoor dining area, including the proposed hours of operation; whether alcoholic beverages will be served, consumed or mixed in the area; and the type of food to be served or brought into the area;
(d) Explanation of availability of parking, any agreements to share parking between property owners, and any proposed changes to traffic patterns (pedestrian and/or vehicular); and
(e) If the applicant is not the owner of the premises, an authorization of the owner of premises to apply for the outdoor dining permit is required.
(3) The City Manager shall cause each outdoor dining plan to be investigated regarding the adequacy of parking in the vicinity for serving any increased parking need generated by the outdoor dining area. This investigation shall include an evaluation of the existing needs of other businesses in the vicinity. Additional parking, up to the same ratio required for the indoor dining facility, may be required. No outdoor dining plan shall be approved if it proposes a reduction in any existing parking. A permit need not be renewed if outdoor dining creates unreasonable parking problems during a previous permit period.
(E) Permit. Application for a permit shall be made to the City Manager with the proposed outdoor dining plan.
(1) No outdoor dining area shall be allowed without a permit, or as otherwise approved by variance.
(2) A permit shall be issued only if the application complies with this chapter, and the required fee has been paid.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
20
7722743.2
(3) Each permit shall be annual and shall expire on December 31 of the calendar year in which it is issued.
(4) The fee for the initial outdoor dining permit shall be $25. Annual renewals of the permit shall be $10 unless modifications to the plan have been made, in which case the permit fee shall be $25.
(F) Violation and Enforcement. The permit may be revoked upon written notice if the outdoor dining area is determined to violate the regulations of this chapter or the terms and criteria approved by the ARO and/or City Manager. The permit holder will have ten days to correct the specified violations unless there is determined to be a public hazard which will require the immediate removal or correction of the violation. Failure to correct the violations shall cause the permit to be revoked.
(G) Appeal. If application for a permit for an outdoor dining area is denied by ARO and/or City Manager, the applicant may appeal the decision to the Board of Zoning Appeals within 30 days from the denial. Such appeal shall be filed in writing with the City Manager.
Code, § 150.131) (Ord. 97-03, passed 2-10-1997) Penalty, see
§ 150.17 MANUFACTURING DISTRICT USES
In any manufacturing district, no building, structure or premises shall be used, and no building or structure shall be erected that is intended or designed to be used, in whole or in part, for any of the following specified uses:
(A) Dwellings, tourist homes, apartment hotels, hotels and motels;
(B) Abattoirs and slaughterhouses or fertilizer manufacture;
(C) Ammonia, bleaching powder and chlorine manufacture;
(D) Asbestos manufacture;
(E) Asphalt manufacture or refining;
(F) Babbit metal manufacture;
(G) Bag cleaning;
(H) Blast furnace, cupola, metal smelting furnace or metal melting furnace;
(I) Boiler shops, structural steel fabricating shops, steel car or locomotive shops, railway repair shops and metal-working shops operating machine driven hammers or chisels;
(J) Brewing or distilling liquors;
(K) Brick, tile or terra cotta manufacture;
(L) Metal powder manufacture;
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
21
7722743.2
(M) Carbon, lampblack or graphite manufacture;
(N) Celluloid or pyroxylin manufacture or explosive or flammable cellulose or pyroxylin or other explosive products manufacture;
(O) Coal tar manufacture, tar distillation or mineral dye manufacture, except as accessory to a permitted use, and upon condition that any emission of odor, dust, smoke, gas, fumes, water-carried waste, noise or vibration in connection therewith is so controlled as not to be obnoxious or offensive;
(P) Coal yards, coke ovens or distillation of coal;
(Q) Crematory;
(R) Creosote manufacture or treatment;
(S) Disinfectant or insecticide manufacture, preparation or compounding on a commercial scale;
(T) Emery cloth or sandpaper manufacture, except where dust or grit is not allowed to escape from the building;
(U) Enameling, japanning or lacquering, except:
(1) Where incidental to permitted uses;
(2) In repair operations in a garage; or
(3) Where used in jewelry, artwork or novelty manufacture.
(V) Excelsior and fiber manufacture;
(W) Explosive or fireworks manufacture, or the storage or loading of explosives in bulk;
(X) Fat rendering, tallow, grease or lard refining, or manufacture of candles from fats;
(Y) Felt manufacture, except where dust is not allowed to escape from the building;
(Z) Fertilizer manufacture from organic material or bone distillation or compounding on a commercial scale;
(AA) Flour milling;
(BB) Foundry or forge shop, except as accessory to a permitted use;
(CC) Gas manufacture;
(DD) (DD) Storage above ground of gasoline or other combustible liquids in quantities in excess of 60 gallons per type of liquid stored;
(EE) Glucose manufacture;
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
22
7722743.2
(FF) Glue or size manufacture or processes involving recovery from fish or animal offal, or fish smoking or curing;
(GG) Gypsum, cement, plastic or plaster of paris manufacture;
(HH) Incineration, or reduction or dumping of offal, dead animals, garbage or refuse on a commercial basis, including loading and transfer platforms;
(II) Lime or lime products manufacture;
(JJ) Match manufacture;
(KK) Nitrating processes;
(LL) Oil cloth, oiled clothing manufacture or the impregnation of any fabric by oxidizing oils;
(MM) Ore reduction, or the smelting or corrosion of lead, aluminum, copper, iron, tin or zinc ores;
(NN) Paint, oil, shellac, varnish or enamel manufacture;
(OO) Penal or correctional institutions, or institutions for the care and treatment of drug or drink addicts or the insane;
(PP) Petroleum refining;
(QQ) Poison manufacture, except for pharmaceutical or medical purposes;
(RR) Potash refining;
(SS) Pulp or paper manufacture;
(TT) Radium or other radioactive material extraction;
(UU) The curing, dressing or tanning of raw or green salted hides or skins;
(VV) Rock crushing;
(WW) Rolling or blooming mills;
(XX) Rubber and gutta-percha manufacture from crude or scrap material, or the manufacture of articles therefrom or from balata;
(YY) Salt works;
(ZZ) Sand blasting or cutting, except where the dust is controlled by effective devices;
(AAA) Sewage disposal plants;
(BBB) Soap, soda ash, caustic soda or washing compound manufacture;
(CCC) Starch, glucose or dextrine manufacture;
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
23
7722743.2
(DDD) Stock yards, stables, livery stables and riding academies or stables;
(EEE) Stone or monument works;
(FFF) Storage, baling or treatment of junk, iron, rags, bottles or scrap paper;
(GGG) Sugar refining;
(HHH) Sulphurous, sulphuric, nitric, picric, hydrochloric or other corrosive acid manufacture, or use of any such acid (except as incidental to a manufacturing process), or the storage of any such acid for sale, shipment or distribution;
(III) Tar or asphalt roofing or waterproofing manufacture;
(JJJ) Turpentine manufacture;
(KKK) Vinegar manufacture;
(LLL) Wood distillation;
(MMM) Wool pulling, or scouring or shoddy manufacture;
(NNN) Night clubs, cocktail lounges, saloons, roadhouses, dance halls, billiard halls, pool halls, skating rinks and other such business establishments and places of recreation or entertainment;
(OOO) (1) The use of house trailers, mobile homes, mobile offices, mobile shops, automobile trailers, truck trailers, camping trailers, campers, boats, motor homes, temporary structures and similar units (whether truck or chassis mounted or not), when occupied for residence, demonstration or business purposes (except when under construction or modification as part of a permitted manufacturing operation);
(2) Parking lots for the above and for trucks, truck trailers, horse trailers, motorcycle trailers, boat trailers, tractors of any type, road machinery or similar units, unless such are required as an accessory to a permitted use, in which event there shall exist and be maintained on the same premises a fence or wall, of such height (not less than six feet) and so made or constructed, and so placed, as to completely obscure such property from ordinary view at grade from the premises adjoining the premises on which such property is stored. To the extent, however, that such property is obscured by natural objects or topographical features or by structures, no such fence or wall shall be necessary. Any and all fences and/or walls shall be of commonly accepted type and construction for such applications and the type and construction shall be subject to approval of the City Manager. Appeals from the City Manager’s decision in this regard shall be to the Board of Zoning Appeals and the decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be final. Fences and walls shall be maintained in good condition, and wherever possible the decorative side of such fence or wall shall face away from the objects obscured from view; and
(3) None of the above vehicles, mobile units or boats may be parked on the street for longer than necessary to load and/or unload and in no event longer than 24 hours at any one time.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
24
7722743.2
(PPP) Junk yards, dumps or scrap car storage, automobile junk yards, used automobile part yards and storage of wrecked automobiles and automobiles undergoing scrap or salvage operations;
(QQQ) The use of alpha ray, beta ray, gamma ray, X-ray or other radiation devices, except as an accessory to a permitted use and then only when properly shielded and controlled in accordance with standards as established from time to time by the United States, the United States Atomic Energy Commission, the state, the county, the city or any agency or instrumentality of any of the foregoing authorities;
(RRR) The operation of nuclear reactors;
(SSS) Unenclosed storage of materials, goods, articles, machinery, equipment, appliances, vehicles, junk or other objects, unless such are required as an accessory to a permitted use and unless there exists and is maintained on the same premises, screening, as specified in division (OOO)(2) above. Section 150.19, entitled “Existing Nonconforming Use,” shall not apply to this division (SSS) shall apply and be in force as of the day after this Zoning Code becomes effective. A violator of this division may be permitted a maximum of six months, at the discretion of the City Manager, and after notification of the violation, to comply with any and all of the provisions of this division (SSS);
(TTT) Drive-in theaters; and
(UUU) Any use that may be hazardous, obnoxious or offensive, by reason of the emission of odor, dust, smoke, gas, fumes, water-carried waste, refuse matter, noise or vibration in connection therewith, to a degree equaling or exceeding that to which any of the uses specifically prohibited above in this section would be hazardous, obnoxious or offensive. The standard by which any use that is not specifically prohibited by this section is to be judged for the purposes of this division (UUU) shall be that of the use that is, of those that are specifically prohibited by this section, the least hazardous, obnoxious or offensive by reason of the factors listed above in this division (UUU).
(1985 Code, § 150.14) (Ord. 1084, passed 1-17-1972; Ord. 1636, passed 11-7-1983; Ord. 97-03, passed 2-10-1997) Penalty, see § 150.99
§ 150.18 RECREATION DISTRICT USES
In any recreation district no building, structure, facility or premises shall be used, and no building or structure shall be erected that is intended or designed to be used, in whole or in part, except for one or more of the following specified uses:
(A) Meeting place for nonprofit organizations such as VFW, American Legion, Knights of Columbus and the like;
(B) Facilities for use of members of the above organizations, such as tennis courts, basketball courts, handball courts, swimming pools, picnic areas and the like; and
(C) Any new facilities must comply with existing ordinances regarding setbacks and the like for which this recreation district is located. If such facilities are contained in more than one district, the more stringent requirement will govern.
(1985 Code, § 150.141) (Ord. 1084, passed 1-17-1972; Ord. 1352, passed 6-5-1978)
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
25
7722743.2
§ 150.19 EXISTING NONCONFORMING USES
Any building, structure or use existing at the time of the enactment of this Zoning Code may be continued even though such building, structure or use does not conform with the provisions of this Zoning Code for the district in which it is located. Such existing nonconforming use may be hereafter extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of enactment of this Zoning Code. No building or premises containing a nonconforming use shall hereafter be extended unless such extension shall conform with the provisions of this Zoning Code for the district in which it is located, except as may hereinafter be provided. No building, structure or premises shall be vacant for more than 90 days, or with regard to which a nonconforming use is changed, abandoned or discontinued and then superseded by a use permitted in the district in which it is located, shall again be devoted to any use prohibited in such district. No building, structure or premises used as a residence in a zone in which such use is nonconforming, the use of which has been voluntarily discontinued for more than 90 days or with regard to which a nonconforming use is changed or abandoned or is superseded, shall again be devoted to any use prohibited in such district. (1985 Code, § 150.15) (Ord. 1084, passed 1-17-1972; Ord. 1186, passed 2-17-1975; Ord. 1636, passed 11-7-1983) Penalty, see § 150.99
§ 150.20 RECONSTRUCTION LIMIT FOR NONCONFORMING USE
Any nonconforming building or structure, or one or more of a group of nonconforming buildings or structures related to one industry and under one ownership, damaged by fire, flood, earthquake, or other act of God, may be reconstructed and used as before such calamity. All reconstruction of any building or structure and the use of such premises, due to damage by fire, flood, earthquake and other act of God must be completed within one year following such calamity. Nothing in this Zoning Code shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any part of the building or structure declared unsafe by the City Manager, or prevent compliance with the lawful requirements of the City Manager. Whenever a district shall be changed hereafter, any lawful use then existing therein may be continued, subject to the same provisions as apply under this Zoning Code to presently existing nonconforming uses.
(1985 Code, § 150.16) (Ord. 1084, passed 1-17-1972; Ord. 1186, passed 2-17-1975) Penalty, see § 150.99
§ 150.21 SETBACKS
(A) In any business district which borders on a federal highway or a state highway, there is required a setback of 30 feet from the street or highway right-of-way. Within this 30-foot setback there shall also be provided a ten-foot-wide planting strip.
(B) In any business or manufacturing district, which borders a county highway, there is hereby required a setback of 18 feet from the street or highway right-of-way. Within said 18-foot setback, there shall also be provided a ten-foot wide planting strip.
(1985 Code, § 150.17) (Ord. 1084, passed 1-17-1972; Ord. 88-12, passed 5-2-1988; Ord. 88-61, passed 1-3-1989; Ord. 10-16, passed 9-13-2010)
§ 150.22 AREA REDUCTION LIMIT
No lot shall be hereafter so reduced in area as to make its width or the area of any open space thereof less than the minimum width, area, and open space requirements then prescribed by this Zoning Code relative to
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
26
7722743.2
the type of structure constructed thereon (or the type of structure for the construction of which thereon any valid building permit is then issued and outstanding) in the zone in which such lot is then located.
(1985 Code, § 150.18) (Ord. 1084, passed 1-17-1972)
§ 150.23 RESIDENCE ZONE FENCING
Within the limits of a front or side yard in any residence district, no fence or wall shall be more than four feet high or occupy more than one-fourth of the air space through which it passes. Within the limits of a rear yard in any residence district, no fence or wall shall be more than six and one-half feet high. These provisions do not apply, however, to retaining walls. Any and all fences and/or walls shall be of commonly accepted type and construction for such applications and the type and construction shall be subject to approval of the City Manager. Appeals from the City Manager’s decision in this regard shall be to the Board of Zoning Appeals and the decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be final. Fences and walls shall be maintained in good condition and the decorative side of such fence shall face away from the residence on such lot.
(1985 Code, § 150.19) (Ord. 1084, passed 1-17-1972) Penalty, see § 150.99
§ 150.24 PARKING
For the purposes of this Zoning Code, a PARKING LOT shall be deemed to be and mean a parcel of land devoted to the unenclosed multiple parking of motor vehicles, and a PARKING SPACE shall be deemed to be and mean a permanently surfaced driveway permitting the satisfactory ingress and egress of a standard automobile.
(A) Parking space or spaces shall be provided on each lot on which a residence structure is hereafter erected, and the number of such spaces that shall be so provided shall be at least two in the case of a single-family dwelling. No driveway entrance, in any district, shall hereafter be constructed with, or altered to, a width of less than ten feet or more than 26 feet at the curb or roadway, and no driveway shall hereafter be constructed with, or widened to, a width greater at the property line than at the curb or roadway. Driveway entrances shall not hereafter on any lot be constructed or widened to occupy more than an aggregate of 26 feet of such lot’s frontage on the same street. On any lot that has or shall have more than one driveway entrance from all abutting streets combined, no such entrance or part thereof shall hereafter be provided within ten feet from the adjacent side line of the nearest such entrance on the same lot. However, in districts other than residential the limit of 26 feet may be increased upon approval of the City Manager, if, in his or her judgment, such increase is necessary or desirable to provide easy and safe entrance and exit of motor vehicular traffic.
(B) Before any building hereafter erected within any business district or manufacturing district, or any part of such building, is put to any use that customarily requires the receiving or distributing of material or merchandise by vehicle, at least one off-street space, suitable for truck use, not less than ten feet in width and 25 feet in length, shall be provided within or contiguous to such building.
(C) There shall be provided, at the time any building or structure or addition thereto, is erected, or at the time any use is extended or changed, off-street parking spaces for motor vehicles in accordance with the requirements hereinafter specified. Each such space shall contain an area of not less than 160 square feet, exclusive of access drives and aisles, shall be of usable shape and condition, and shall be
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
27
7722743.2
provided with an access drive not less than ten feet in width. Such requirements shall apply whether or not such building, structure, addition or use is nonconforming and whether or not such requirements have been, or were required to be, met with regard to any prior use of the premises. Where any such structure is an addition to an existing structure, or where any such building, structure or use is on the same premises with an existing building, structure or use, and where such requirements do not apply to such existing building, structure or use, such requirements shall be calculated in terms of the area, facilities or population as the case may be, of such additional building, structure or use, in and of itself, but where such requirements do apply with regard to such existing building, structure or use, such requirements shall be additive and no such additional building, structure or use shall be permitted unless the total of such requirement, as applicable both to such existing and such additional building, structure or use, has been or is met.
(D) The required off-street parking spaces shall in each case be located on the same premises as the principal building in connection with which they are required, or on adjoining premises, or, in any manufacturing district, on premises within 300 feet from such building. Such distance shall be measured from the nearest point of the parking facility to the nearest point of the premises occupied by such building.
(E) For the purpose of determining off-street parking requirements under this Zoning Code, FLOOR AREA shall mean gross floor area, excluding any area used for parking within the principal building and any area in such building used for incidental service storage, mechanical equipment, ventilators and heating systems and similar uses.
(F) In churches and other places of assembly in which those in attendance occupy benches, pews or similar seating facilities, each 18 inches of such seating facilities shall be counted as one seat for the purpose of determining off-street parking requirements under this Zoning Code.
(G) Where a place of assembly has both fixed seats and open assembly area, such requirements shall be computed separately for each and added together.
(H) When the number of required off-street parking spaces, computed in accordance with this Zoning Code, includes a fraction that is in and of itself greater than one-half, such fraction shall be deemed to require an entire additional parking space.
(I) Whenever the floor area or fixed seating facilities of a building are increased, or land use is extended, additional off-street parking spaces shall be provided for such increase, and the number of such required spaces shall be computed in accordance with this Zoning Code.
(J) (1) In the case of mixed uses, the requirements for off-street parking facilities shall be the sum of the requirements for the various uses computed separately.
(2) Where a use is not specifically mentioned, the requirements for the use that is so mentioned and that is similar to the use not so mentioned shall apply.
(3) Off-street parking facilities provided for one use shall not be considered as meeting the requirements for any other use, except as hereinafter specified relative to joint use.
(K) Off-street parking requirements shall be as follows:
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
28
7722743.2
(1) For permitted residential, institutional, community facility and other uses: USE SPACES REQUIRED
Assembly halls or rooms without fixed seats; exhibition halls (except church assembly rooms)
1 for each 50 square feet of floor area used for assembly, dancing or dining
Banks and similar financial institutions; medical and dental floor area on the first floor, clinics; medical and dental offices
1 for each 150 square feet of and 1 for each 400 square feet on each other floor
Business, insurance and professional offices
l for each 125 square feet of floor area
Churches
l for each 5 seats in principal assembly area
Clubs, lodges, fraternal and similar organizations
l for each bedroom and 1 for each 50 square feet of floor area used for assembly, dancing or dining
Funeral homes and mortuaries
1 for each 50 square feet of floor area
Hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes and nonprofit independent living units for the elderly
1 for each 2 beds or living units and 1 for each day shift employee
USE SPACES REQUIRED
Libraries, museums, art galleries and educational research centers
1 for each 500 square feet of floor area
Schools; public, parochial and other
Elementary and junior high
l for each 3 seats in an auditorium, or 1 for every 20
classroom seats, whichever is greater
Senior high
l for each 3 seats in an auditorium, or 1 for each 10
classroom seats in all grades
(2) For permitted business, commercial, manufacturing, industrial, recreational uses: USE SPACES REQUIRED
Banquet halls
1 for each 50 square feet of floor area used for assembly or recreation
Bowling alleys
5 for each lane
General retail, wholesale and service establishments of all kinds, other than retail food stores
5 for the first 2,000 square feet or less of floor area and 1 for each 300 square feet of floor area in excess of 2,000
Greenhouses, nurseries and truck gardens
1 for each 500 square feet of selling area
Manufacturing plants, laboratories, food products
industries and other industrial uses (except public utility buildings)
1 for each 500 square feet of floor area or 2 for each 3 employees on the maximum shift, whichever is greater
Nightclubs, saloons, cocktail lounges
1 for each employee plus 1 space for every 30 square feet of customer occupied area, or 1 for every 2 seats, whichever provides the greatest number of spaces, plus 5 additional spaces for carry-out services when provided
Public utility buildings primarily devoted to storage or
mechanical equipment, gas and electric stations, dial
exchange buildings and water pumping stations
1 for each 5,000 square feet of floor area
Restaurants, cafes, lunch rooms and cafeterias and other eating places
1 for each employee plus 1 space for each 50 square feet of customer occupied area, or 1 for every 3 seats, whichever provides the greatest number of spaces, plus 5 additional spaces for carry-out service when provided
Retail food stores, including delicatessens, grocery stores, meat-fruit-vegetable markets and supermarkets
5 for the first 2,000 square feet or less of floor area and 1 for each 150 square feet of floor area in excess of 2,000
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
29
7722743.2
Tennis courts
3 for each court
Theaters and similar uses, including commercial arenas
1 for each 4 seats
(L) Every parcel of land hereafter used as a public or private parking lot, regardless of whether or not the parking spaces provided therein are required by this Zoning Code, shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the following requirements, and shall not be used for parking at any time during which such requirements are not met.
(1) Screening. Off-street parking areas for more than one vehicle and that are within 100 feet of, or across the street from, any premises situated in any residence district (unless such premises are developed with a nonresidential use), shall have on the same premises a fence or wall, of such height (not less than six feet) and so made or constructed, and so placed, as to completely obscure such vehicles from the ordinary view at grade from the residence district premises adjoining the premises on which such vehicles are parked. To the extent, however, that such vehicles are obscured by natural objects or topographical features or by structures, no such fence or wall shall be necessary. Any and all fences and/or walls shall be of commonly accepted type and construction for such applications and the type and construction shall be subject to the approval of the City Manager. Appeals from the City Manager’s decision in this regard shall be to the Board of Zoning Appeals and the decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be final. Such fence, wall or shrubbery shall be maintained in good condition and the decorated side of the fence shall face outside. A violator of this division may be permitted a maximum of six months, at the discretion of the City Manager, and after notification of the violation, to comply with any and all of the provisions of this division (L)(1).
(2) Surface. Parking lots and access drives thereto shall at minimum be surfaced with an asphaltic or cement binder, or other comparable dust-preventive material.
(3) Lighting. Any and all lighting used to illuminate any parking lot shall be equipped so as to reflect light away from all premises in any adjoining residence district(s).
(M) Every parking space provided in compliance with this Zoning Code shall be accessible to and from a public way abutting some part of the premises, and shall be so situated and arranged as to permit the practicable and reasonable expeditious turnaround of standard automobiles when all such parking spaces on such premises are filled.
(N) Parking lots shall not be permitted in any residential district.
(1985 Code, § 150.20) (Ord. 1084, passed 1-17-1972; Ord. 1226, passed 2-2-1976; Ord. 1530, passed 6-20-1981; Ord. 1636, passed 11-7-1983; Ord. 89-48, passed 12-4-1989) Penalty, see § 150.99
§ 150.25 PARKING AND STORING OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
(A) Purpose. The parking and storage of motor vehicles in residential districts should be consistent and incidental to the residential use of those properties. The purpose of this section is to prohibit the parking and storage of large commercial vehicles which are not providing a service that is incidental to the residential use of the property. Large commercial vehicles, unless providing a service, detract
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
30
7722743.2
from the residential atmosphere of such districts by creating visual clutter and projecting an image more consistent with commercial or industrial usage.
(B) Prohibition. No person shall cause to stand, park, store or permit the standing, parking or storage of any commercial vehicle in or upon any driveway, side yard, front yard or rear yard, unless enclosed within a garage within any residential zoning district.
(C) Exception. The foregoing prohibition shall not apply to commercial vehicles which are temporarily parked incidental to providing maintenance, construction, repair, or delivery services at or upon the premises, including the delivery or loading of property or passengers.
(D) Definition. COMMERCIAL VEHICLE means:
(1) Any vehicle, no matter what its gross vehicle weight, used or designed to be used for business or commercial purposes and which, in addition, negatively infringes upon the residential character of a residential district. These vehicles include but are not limited to a bus, cement truck, panel truck, semi-tractor, semi-trailer or any other non-recreational trailer used for commercial purposes, stake bed truck, step van, tank truck, tar truck, dump truck; or
(2) Any other vehicle that is designed or rated by the manufacturer for more than 8,800 pounds gross vehicle weight and is licensed by the State Bureau of Motor Vehicles as either a truck or a commercial vehicle.
(E) Enforcement. For the purpose of enforcement with respect to the foregoing, citations or summons shall be issued for such violations through the Police or Building Departments. Any appeal regarding the within sections shall be submitted to the Board of Zoning Appeals which shall not grant a variance unless a hardship is demonstrated by the applicant. If the Board of Zoning Appeals does grant a variance, it shall impose sufficient conditions for the screening of such vehicle from adjacent properties and for minimizing the duration that such vehicle may be parked or stored on the premises as well as such other conditions to mitigate the impact of the vehicle on the residential area. The mere fact that the commercial vehicle is essential to one’s employment or occupation shall not constitute hardship. (1985 Code, § 150.201) (Ord. 94-42, passed 1-16-1995; Ord. 03-27, passed 4-10-2004) Penalty, see § 150.99
§ 150.26 DIMENSIONAL VARIANCE
(A) The purpose of this section is to establish the standards of review to be used by the Board of Zoning Appeals in evaluating any request for a dimensional variance from the provisions of this Zoning Code. As used herein, a dimensional or area variance shall not include variances that deviate from the activities regulated within the various zoning districts. Dimensional or area variances shall be considered those variances from a zoning regulation that establish minimum or maximum areas, heights, distances, separation, volume or any other measurement which is expressed in terms of a geometric measurement.
(B) The Board of Zoning Appeals shall consider an application for a variance only after a properly completed application and fees have been submitted to the City Administration not less than twenty-eight (28) days prior to the meeting of the Board of Zoning Appeals at which the variance is to be considered. The specific form shall include all information determined by Board of Zoning Appeals and the City Manager to be necessary and appropriate for a full and fair consideration of the
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
31
7722743.2
application for a variance. The information necessary for an application shall include at least the following, unless waived by the City Manager for the reason that it is not essential to the consideration of the variance request and is unduly expensive or burdensome for the applicant to prepare:
(1) Name, address and phone number of owner(s) of property;
(2) Name, address and phone number of applicant and relationship to owner (i.e., same, builder, purchaser and the like);
(3) If applicant and owner are not the same, authorization of the owner for the applicant to request the variance;
(4) Street address of subject parcel;
(5) Designate zoning district of the subject property and adjoining property;
(6) Signatures of owner and applicant;
(7) Plat of property depicting existing structures and all proposed structures on the subject property as well as location of structures on adjoining property. Such plat should indicate all relevant distances as well as identify any existing deviations from the current Zoning Code, whether those deviations are nonconforming uses, Zoning Code violations or dimensional variances;
(8) If appropriate, the existing topography and any changes proposed to be made;
(9) A determination or evaluation of whether a proposed variance would result in any change of surface water drainage in either direction or volume;
(10) Drawing of the proposed improvement, including accurate renderings of the proposed final improvement; and
(11) Such additional information as may be determined by the City Manager to be helpful in the evaluation and processing of the application.
(C) Where the strict application of any provision of this Zoning Code establishing minimum or maximum dimensional requirements would cause practical difficulties upon the owner of specific property, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the power, upon application by or on behalf of such owner and after public hearing, notice of which has been given as described in § 3 of Art. VII of the Charter of the city, to modify such provision or to interpret such meaning, provided that no such modification or interpretation shall be made that is not in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this Zoning Code and provided the Board of Zoning Appeals considers each of the following factors, in addition to any other factors deemed appropriate under the circumstances, before deciding whether to grant a variance.
(1) Will the property in question yield a reasonable return or can there be any beneficial use of the property without the variance?
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
32
7722743.2
(2) Is the variance necessary to preserve a substantial property right (the reasonable enjoyment and use of the property) which is already possessed by the owners of other properties in the same area?
(3) Are there exceptional or extraordinary conditions which apply to the subject property that do not apply generally to other properties in the same area?
(4) Would the essential character of the neighborhood be substantially altered or would adjoining properties suffer a substantial detriment as a result of the variance?
(5) Would the variance adversely affect the delivery of government services (e.g., water, sewer, garbage)?
(6) Were the applicable zoning restrictions in place when the property was purchased or acquired by the applicant? Did the applicant have a reasonable means of determining what zoning restrictions were in effect at the time the property was acquired?
(7) Can the property owner’s predicament feasibly be obviated through some method other than a variance (such as a zoning change or redesign of the proposed plan)?
(8) Can the spirit and intent behind the zoning requirement be observed and substantial justice done if the variance is granted?
(D) In accordance with the Charter, no variance shall be granted unless a majority of the members appointed to the Board of Zoning Appeals vote affirmatively to grant the variance.
(E) The Board of Zoning Appeals may impose conditions when granting a variance, but such conditions must have a substantial relationship (essential nexus) to a public purpose or regulations specifically set forth in the Zoning Code. In establishing such a condition, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall set forth in writing the condition and describe the relationship between the variance being granted and the condition being imposed.
(1985 Code, § 150.21) (Ord. 1084, passed 1-17-1972; Ord. 88-45, passed 11-7-1988; Ord. 95-24, passed 4-3-1995)
Cross-reference: Review of zoning variance request by Architectural Review Office, see § 161.09
§ 150.27 USE CHANGE RESTRICTIONS
It shall be unlawful for any person to use or permit the use of any building or premises or part thereof, hereafter erected, changed, converted, enlarged, put to use, or changed in use, wholly or partly, contrary to the provisions of this Zoning Code.
(1985 Code, § 150.22) (Ord. 1084, passed 1-17-1972) Penalty, see § 150.99
§ 150.28 PERMITS REQUIRED
(A) No construction, alteration or addition shall be performed unless a permit has been issued by the City Manager.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
33
7722743.2
(B) No permit for construction, alteration or addition shall be issued by the City Manager unless the plans and specifications and intended use fully conform to the provisions of this Zoning Code. (1985 Code, § 150.23) (Ord. 1084, passed 1-17-1972; Ord. 88-46, passed 11-7-1988) Penalty, see § 150.99
§ 150.29 LOT REQUIREMENTS
(A) The following terms shall, for the purposes of this Zoning Code, have the following meanings.
HEIGHT OF BUILDING
This shall be calculated by determining the difference in elevation from the ground level, at the designated point, to the highest elevation of the roof of the building (excluding any chimney or antenna). The designated point at which to measure the ground level elevation shall be at the horizontal center of the side of a building nearest a public street where the side of the building intersects with the ground level. Generally, this will be the front of the building. On a corner lot if the building is equidistant from each street, it shall be the side with the lower ground elevation. The natural or existing topography shall be used to determine elevation of the ground level at the location unless the City Manager determines that a higher ground elevation is appropriate because of unusual difficulties with topography or site development.
LOT COVERAGE
The percentage of the lot area which is covered by buildings.
YARD, FRONT
A yard extending across the full width of a lot between any part of the residence or principal building located thereon and the front lot line.
YARD, REAR
A yard extending the full width of a lot between any part of the residence or principal building located thereon and the rear lot line.
YARD, SIDE
A yard extending from a front yard to a rear yard between any part of the residence or principal building and the nearest side lot line.
YARDS ON CORNER LOTS
The depth of the front yard on a corner lot shall be not less than the required setback from the front lot line. The width of the side yard on the side street shall be not less than the required front yard setback for said side street.
(B) For the purposes of this Zoning Code, the depth of a front or rear yard, on any lot, shall be deemed to be the horizontal distance between the front or rear lot line, as the case may be, and the part of the building, on such lot, nearest to such line, and the width of a side yard shall be the horizontal distance between the relevant side lot line and the part of the building, on such lot, nearest thereto.
(C) The lot requirements listed in Table C.1 shall apply to the designated districts and to each lot therein, as respectively applicable thereto. All figures are in feet unless otherwise stated. All setback measurements shall be to the farthest projections of the foundation wall of the principal building or dwelling but excluding physical projections permitted in § 150.29(E). See exhibits in § 150.29(F).
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
34
7722743.2
Table C.1
Residence District Lot and Principal Building or Dwelling Requirements
AAA AA A A-2 B
Minimum lot width
150
80
75
60
50
Minimum lot width at right-of-way
60
30
30
25
25
Minimum width at front yard setback
150
80
70
60
42
Minimum side yard setback
25
12
9
9
6
Minimum total side yard setback
50
24
20
20
12
Minimum rear yard setback
60
40
40
30
30
Minimum front yard setback
50
50
50
40
40
Maximum height of principal building or dwelling
35
35
35
28
28
Maximum lot coverage
35%
35%
35%
35%
28%
Minimum lot area sq. ft.
43,500
20,000
11,700
11,700
7,000
Minimum sq. ft. for new residential construction
(includes livable basements but not garages)
2,000
2,000
2,000
2,000
N/A
For requirements for accessory structures see § 150.09(C)(6)
(D) In any residence district where aerobic household sewage disposal systems are permitted (see § 151.087), the minimum lot size shall be 20,000 square feet with a minimum width of 80 feet (excluding handle of panhandle lot).
(E) The physical elements of a principal building or dwelling, or elements affixed to a principal building or dwelling, may project into the front, side, or rear yard setback as listed in Table E.1. All figures are in feet, unless otherwise stated. All measurements shall be to the farthest projection of the applicable element. Elements not listed below shall not be permitted to project into any front, side, or rear yard setback.
Table E.1
Permitted Projections into Setbacks
Physical Element Maximum Depth Maximum Width Maximum Total Coverage (per side)
Eaves, cornices, and gutters
2
N/A
N/A
Chimneys, flues, cantilevered walls, and bow/bay windows, window wells
2
6
25%
Landings, stoops, and stairs *
4
N/A
N/A
Mechanical equipment (A/C units, generators, heat pumps, etc.) **
10
N/A
N/A
Sills and belt courses
6 inches
N/A
N/A
* See § 150.41 regarding landings and stoops
** Mechanical equipment shall only be permitted to project into the rear yard setback
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
35
7722743.2
(F) Exhibits.
(1)
(2)
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
36
7722743.2
(3)
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
37
7722743.2
(4)
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
38
7722743.2
(5)
Combined total
to be at least 12’
6’ min. setback =6’ setback
Combined total
to be at least 12’
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
39
7722743.2
(6)
(1985 Code, § 150.24) (Ord. 1084, passed 1-17-1972; Ord. 1636, passed 11-7-1983; Ord. 88-27, passed 6-4-1988; Ord. 88-45, passed 11-7-1988; Ord. 96-67, passed 12-2-1996; Ord. 04-24, passed 9-13-2004; Ord. 13-10 passed 3-11-2013)
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
40
7722743.2
§ 150.30 PANHANDLE LOTS
(A) Generally. Panhandle lots are not generally accepted as a form of land development for single-family residential dwelling units. Such lots do not enhance an urban residential community unless their development and use are strictly regulated to ensure they do not negatively impact on the surrounding property, access points, service of utilities, or public safety requirements. Terrain or topography must not be so difficult as to create severe problems with access or building sites. Special consideration must be given to the control of surface water runoff. Front, rear and side yard designations present special problems as well as the presentation of the dwelling and accessory buildings to adjoining properties. Panhandle lots are not deemed to be appropriate for the development of lots other than in residential districts. Creation of panhandle lots can create an excessive number of curb cuts, which may have negative aesthetic and safety considerations.
(B) Definition. For purposes of this Zoning Code and subdivision regulations, a PANHANDLE LOT shall be considered any lot that has all the following characteristics:
(1) It does not front on a public right-of-way except by a strip of property which is narrower than the required frontage or width of lots in the zoning district;
(2) The majority of the area of the panhandle lot is situated immediately behind one or more lots (front lots) relative to the right-of-way to which the panhandle lot has access. The front lot does have sufficient width and frontage; and
(3) The intended use of the panhandle lot is for a single dwelling, separate and apart from the front lot.
(C) Approval of Application. The Planning Commission is hereby authorized to approve applications for development of a dwelling on a panhandle lot and/or subdividing parcels in a manner that creates a panhandle lot and associated front lot, only if a review of the documentation and information required by division (D) below shows that the application is complete and that the dwellings and/or subdivided lots which are proposed meet the criteria and standards set forth in division (F) and (G) below, and the subject property is located in either a Residence “AAA,” “AA” or “A” single-family district and the front and rear lots are used or shall be used as residences.
(D) Application.
(1) Application forms for panhandle lots and/or dwellings shall contain the following information:
(a) Name, address and phone number of owner(s) of property;
(b) Name, address and phone number of applicant and relationship to owner (i.e., same, builder, purchaser and the like);
(c) Street address of subject parcel;
(d) Such additional information as may be determined by the City Manager to be helpful in the evaluation and processing of the applications;
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
41
7722743.2
(e) Existing zoning district of subject property and adjoining property; and
(f) Signatures of owner and applicant.
(2) The additional information and documentation listed below shall be submitted with and considered part of the application:
(a) Legal description of original tract, as well as legal description of the proposed panhandle (rear) lot and the front lot;
(b) Plat in a form satisfactory for recording at County Recorder’s office.
(c) Plat(s) or drawings to scale (one or more) depicting the following:
(i) Distances of Lot Lines and Area of Lots. Rear lot shall show area both with and without panhandle portion of the property included;
(ii) Topography. Contour lines shall depict each two-foot change in elevation. Topography shall be shown for the existing site as well as the site as it will exist after construction of residential dwelling and other improvements;
(iii) Existing Utilities on, Adjacent or Available for Serving Property. The proposed paths for accessing said utilities to any proposed buildings on front and rear lots;
(iv) Existing and Proposed Surface Storm Water Drainage Patterns. Any significant changes in direction or quantities must be identified and certification provided by a qualified engineer that such surface water can be tied into existing storm sewers or non-erosive drainage systems or held by adequate retention/detention basins on the property;
(v) Easements. Existing easements on or serving subject property;
(vi) Screening. Location and description of existing and any proposed screening;
(vii) Location. Location of the area within the panhandle lot which meets all zoning requirements and is suitable for building a principal building. Distances to lot lines must also be depicted;
(viii) Footprint. Footprint of the proposed dwelling and indication of the direction the front of the dwelling would face;
(ix) Yards. Proposed front yard, side yards and rear yards;
(x) Existing Buildings and Structures. Location of any existing building and structures and distances from all relevant lot lines;
(xi) Dimensions. All adjoining lots shall be depicted with dimensions, location of existing structures, driveways, parking areas, access points and significant drainage courses (natural or human-made);
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
42
7722743.2
(xii) Driveway. Distance from the proposed driveway at curb cut to nearest drives in either direction on same side of street; and
(xiii) Sewers. Documentation from Metropolitan Sewer District showing that front and rear lots will be served by existing sewers.
(d) Detailed architectural drawings of the primary building which demonstrate, at a minimum, the exterior appearance and construction materials, the building elevations with dimensions, building orientation on the lot, height from the roof peak to the final grade, exterior dimensions with outline and orientation of the buildings on the planned lot.
(E) Procedure.
(1) Applications for panhandle lots and/or dwellings along with supporting documentation shall be submitted to the City Manager. All information and documentation listed in division (D) above must be presented. The City Manager shall cause that information to be reviewed for completeness. If it is determined to be incomplete, the applicant shall be notified. No further review shall be undertaken until all information has been submitted or a specific waiver is granted by the City Manager for good cause. However, Planning Commission may require by majority vote that the omitted information be provided before making a decision upon the application.
(2) Once the completed applications and documentation have been received, City Manager shall seek reports from following officials:
(a) Police Chief and Fire Chief or their authorized designee shall review for purpose of determining whether police and fire services may be reasonably provided.
(b) Police Chief may comment regarding location of curb cut. Any safety issues relating to line of sight concerns or other traffic or visibility issues may be identified.
(c) City Engineer and Architectural Review Officer shall comment upon any potential development problems or concerns, such as surface water drainage, grading, elevations, screening, utilities and siting of proposed dwelling unit and accessory buildings. The Architectural Review Officer shall also review the proposed residence pursuant to the criteria below.
(d) The plan and specifications presented to the Planning Commission must be consistent with the review comments and recommendations of the Architectural Review Officer. The Planning Commission may, but is not required, to accept or impose alterations to such Architectural Review Officer-approved plans if the Planning Commission determines that such alterations shall improve the compatibility of the proposed buildings and structures on the front and rear lots, with the existing buildings on other lots in the vicinity. The Planning Commission should determine that such alterations shall improve the compatibility of the proposed buildings and structures on the front and rear lots, with the existing buildings on other lots in the vicinity.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
43
7722743.2
(e) If additional information is desirable for assisting the reviewing officials, the applicant shall be notified. No further action shall be taken until such information is received.
(f) The City Manager may, in addition, request a legal opinion regarding any facet of the proposed subdivision.
(g) Such reports will generally be expected to be completed within two weeks of the request. However, additional time may be granted to any reviewing official by the City Manager.
(3) Upon receipt of the reviewing officials’ reports, the City Manager shall review them. The applicant shall be advised regarding the contents of the reports and may withdraw the application, resubmit an amended application or proceed with the application. If applicant elects to proceed, he or she shall provide 15 copies of all plats to the City Manager. Thereupon, the City Manager shall distribute the information to members of the Planning Commission. No application shall be considered by the Planning Commission sooner than three weeks after the submission of the final information to the City Manager. The City Manager shall note in his report to the Planning Commission any omissions in the application or documentation and identify any areas of special concern. The City Manager shall notify all property owners within 200 feet of subject property of all hearings. All notices, advertisements and public hearings shall be in conformity with the procedures for consideration of variances by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(F) Criteria for Panhandle Lots. Planning Commission shall approve the creation of a panhandle lot only if the proposed plan meets the following criteria:
(1) The area, lot layout and/or land contours are such that a subdivision with streets and sidewalks, as defined in the city subdivision rules and regulations, would be impractical for economic, engineering, land planning reasons or because such a subdivision plan would be otherwise inconsistent with the intent of the zoning or subdivision code;
(2) The lot or lots that would front the dedicated street if the panhandle lot is approved (hereinafter referred to as the front lot or lots) shall, after being subdivided, meet all the requirements of the district in which they are situated;
(3) The proposed rear lot (i.e., the panhandle lot) shall meet all zoning requirements for the district in which it is located except that:
(a) The minimum area requirements shall be as follows:
(i) Zoning District A: 400% of the minimum zoning requirements of the district or 100% of the area of the remaining front lot, whichever is larger in size;
(ii) Zoning district AA: 300% of the minimum zoning requirements of the district or 100% of the area of the remaining front lot, whichever is larger in size; and
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
44
7722743.2
(iii) Zoning District AAA: 200% of the minimum zoning requirements of the district or 100% of the area of the remaining front lot, whichever is larger in size.
(b) In calculating the area of a panhandle lot for purposes of determining whether it meets the minimum area requirements, the access strip to the rear lot shall not be considered part of the area of the rear lot. In other words, only that portion of the lot which conforms to the minimum width requirements of lots in the district shall be included in determining area.
(c) Any portion of a lot (front or rear) which is located in a public right-of-way easement shall not be included when calculating minimum area.
(4) No additional panhandle lots shall be created behind a rear lot.
(5) The minimum width of the entrance to rear lots (the entire length of the panhandle) shall be 20 feet. In order to assure that the drive to the rear lot shall support all emergency vehicles, the depth/thickness of the drive shall be not less than the depth/thickness required for a public street, as set forth in the city’s subdivision rules and regulations. However, curbs and gutters shall not be required unless such a condition is imposed by the Planning Commission to mitigate drainage problems. In addition, adequate pavement must be provided for turning vehicles, including emergency vehicles, around on the rear lot. The improved surface of the driveway shall be at least 12 feet in width, unless a greater width is directed and authorized by the Architectural Review Officer or, ultimately, the Planning Commission. It shall be maintained in good repair. The Architectural Review Officer and Planning Commission may require that landscaping, walls, drainage areas and other improvements be placed and maintained in the unpaved areas of the panhandle.
(6) A single access to public right-of-way, shared by the front lot and the panhandle lot, shall be required, unless it is not practicable for reasons of safety, aesthetics, economics, engineering or because this requirement would be inconsistent with accepted land planning concepts. The driveway to a rear lot shall limit changes of direction, so as to permit the easy entrance and exit of emergency vehicles. An alternative access to the rear lot over the panhandle may be approved for reasons of safety, aesthetics, benefit to adjoining properties or other reasons that are consistent with valid land planning and zoning within this community. Planning Commission shall provide in the record of its proceeding the reasons for granting the alternative and any requirements which are a condition of granting the second entrance drive. The location of any curb cut must be identified on plans approved by Planning Commission.
(7) Except as provided otherwise herein, all zoning and subdivision requirements, such as sewer connections, shall apply to front and rear lots. No panhandle lot shall be created unless sewer connections are available for front and rear lots.
(8) A minimum of two outdoor parking spaces must be provided in addition to a minimum of two garaged parking spaces. None of these spaces shall be located in the panhandle portion of the lot.
(9) If either the Fire Chief, Police Chief or City Engineer identify any specific concerns for safety, such as may be caused by the location of curb cuts, the topography of the access drive,
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
45
7722743.2
or such other factors as may raise concern regarding public health, safety and welfare, including the rendering of public safety services to the proposed front or rear lots, the Planning Commission may deny the application for this reason alone if it determines that such safety issue is a valid concern. In any event, this section does not create liability on the part of the city for any damages that may arise as a result of the granting of any application for the creation of a panhandle lot. Any review of such applications is intended only for the safety, health and welfare of the general public, and is not intended as a representation of safety to any specific party or person.
(10) Adequate provisions, as specifically approved by Planning Commission, must be shown to ensure the proper disposal of surface water runoff from the front and rear lots. Planning Commission shall decide which type of drainage system is acceptable. It may consider the relative costs, relative impact on adjoining property, capacity of systems and ease the cost of maintenance of systems.
(11) Motor Vehicles.
(a) No parking of motor vehicles shall be permitted on any shared portion of a common access unless within the designated parking spaces on improved paved surfaces. PAVED SURFACES means either asphalt or cement surface or other improved surface which is specifically approved by Planning Commission. Consistent with concerns for the health, safety, morals and general welfare of residents, including preserving and protecting the orderly development and the character and integrity of single-family neighborhoods, controlling surface water drainage, minimizing light and air obstructions to neighboring properties, ensuring access for safety services vehicles, and preventing reduction in property values, no exterior parking of boats, (including but not limited to jet skis, canoes and sailboats) trailers or recreational vehicles, as defined in division (F)(11)(b), shall be permitted on either front or rear (panhandle) lot except for loading, unloading or cleaning, but in no event for more than 96 hours during any 14 consecutive days.
(b) For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE
A vehicular portable structure designed and constructed to be primarily used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational, camping and vacation uses, including but not limited to the following:
(i) MOTOR HOME. A self-propelled recreational vehicle constructed with permanently installed facilities for cold storage, cooking and consuming of food, and for sleeping.
(ii) TRAVEL TRAILER. A non-self-propelled recreational vehicle that includes a tent-type fold-out camping trailer, as defined in R.C. § 4517.01.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
46
7722743.2
(iii) TRUCK CAMPER. A non-self-propelled recreational vehicle, without wheels for road use, and designed to be placed upon and attached to a motor vehicle.
(12) If there are nonconforming uses on a proposed front lot, Planning Commission, as conditions for approval of a new panhandle lot, may require that one or more of the non-conforming uses be either discontinued or reduced (mitigated). Planning Commission may approve then new panhandle lot without conditions for discontinuance or mitigation if it deems the conditions(s) would not promote reasonable compatibility with the neighborhood, or would not be economically feasible under the circumstances. No building permit shall be issued of the panhandle lot unless adequate assurance is provided to the city that all conditions imposed by the Planning Commission will be met.
(G) Criteria for Panhandle Dwellings. Planning Commission shall approve the development of a dwelling on a panhandle lot only if the proposed plan meets the following criteria:
(1) The Architectural Review Officer shall review the application, including the architectural plans, to ensure that the proposed new building(s) and structures are compatible and complement the existing buildings in the vicinity, including architectural style, exterior construction materials, size of building, and the height and relative elevation of the buildings. In addition, the Architectural Review Officer shall review the application to ensure that the principal building meets the minimum square footage required by this Zoning Code and, also, that the proposed building is no larger than 120% of the largest conforming building on a lot contiguous to the proposed panhandle lot, including the principal building (existing or proposed) on the front lot.
(2) The front of the dwelling on the rear lot shall face toward and be substantially parallel to the rear yard line of the front lot, unless the Planning Commission determines that a different alignment is preferable and will have no greater impact on the use and enjoyment of adjoining properties. Planning Commission shall designate in writing any specific conditions which must be completed as part of the approval.
(3) The principal dwelling on the rear lot shall not be constructed closer than 50 feet from the front property line of the subject panhandle lot.
(4) The principal dwelling on the rear lot shall not be constructed closer than 40 feet from the rear and side property lines of the subject panhandle lot.
(5) Adequate screening shall be required for aesthetic or privacy purposes whenever the Planning Commission determines that the proposed dwelling, parking area, driveway or accessory structures would be detrimental to the use and enjoyment of adjoining residential property unless the screening was provided and maintained. Consideration shall be given to recommendations of the Architectural Review Officer in these matters.
(H) Prior to Voting. Prior to voting on whether to approve the creation of any proposed panhandle lot and/or dwelling, the Planning Commission shall consider each of the following conditions. If the Planning Commission determines, by a majority vote of the members attending the meeting, that one or more of the conditions set forth below exist, then such vote shall also constitute a decision of the Planning Commission to deny approval of the application for a panhandle lot:
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
47
7722743.2
(1) Considering the lots, structures, building, topography and uses of real estate in proximity to the proposed panhandle and the front lot, the application does not depict a future development that is significantly compatible with surrounding areas;
(2) The natural or existing surface water drainage will likely be altered (increased, retained or diverted) to such an extent that an adverse impact to other properties or to any public rights-of-way will probably occur under some circumstances;
(3) The height, elevation, orientation, location or architectural features of any proposed building or structure intended to be placed on either a panhandle or a front lot is unreasonably inconsistent with the orientation, location or architectural features of existing buildings or structures in the vicinity;
(4) The location of the access point, the length, the width or the grade of a proposed driveway presents features that are not consistent with safety, in any and all weather, or will cause the creation of an impervious driveway/parking surface that will cover such a large area of open ground or require removal of significant trees or other landscaping that existing green spaces will suffer excessive reduction;
(5) Proposed grading of site, proposed walls, fences, terraces, or the proposed location of other structures or buildings will unreasonably interfere with natural topographic patterns which contribute to the appearance of the existing site; and
(6) The proposed panhandle lot, if created, would unreasonably inhibit future uses, structures or buildings on adjacent lots which would be permitted by the existing zoning regulations. Such structures, buildings or uses need not actually exist at the time this condition is considered.
(I) Variances. No variance from any of the criteria set forth in any division of this section shall be approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals unless the conditions set forth in division (H) shall be determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals to be maintained. In addition, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall consider the seven criteria for a dimensional variance, which must be considered in order to determine whether practical difficulties exist.
(J) Final Approval. Final approval of any application for creation of a panhandle lot and/or dwelling shall be put in the form of a written resolution by Planning Commission with appropriate attachments. Any conditions, restrictions or limitations on said property which are imposed as a consideration of granting the application shall be set forth or referenced in the resolution. The resolution must be approved by a majority of vote of the members attending the meeting.
(K) Contingent-Approval Permitted. In circumstances where an applicant needs a variance from the requirements of this Code, the Planning Commission may provide contingent-approval of a Final Application. Such contingent-approval shall mean their approval of the Final Application is subject to the applicant obtaining any required variance(s) from the Board of Zoning Appeals. If the Planning Commission provides contingent-approval of a Final Application and the Board of Zoning Appeals subsequently denies the applicant’s requested variance(s), said denial shall constitute a rejection of the Final Application.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
48
7722743.2
(L) Appeals. Any applicant that seeks approval from Planning Commission of his or her application, pursuant to this section, and whose application is denied by the Planning Commission, may appeal such decision to the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(1) Timing of Appeal. The applicant appealing the decision must provide notice of his or her intent to appeal such decision to the Planning Commission and the Board of Zoning Appeals within thirty (30) days of the Planning Commission’s provision of written notification of its denial to the applicant.
(2) Hearing on Appeal. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hold a public hearing evaluating the appeal based upon the standards of review applied by the Planning Commission to the initial application, within sixty (60) days of receiving applicant’s notice of appeal.
(M) Effective Date. This section shall become effective on and after January 15, 2002. It shall be applicable to the creation of panhandle lots and/or dwellings and front lots considered by the Planning Commission on or after the aforesaid effective date. Those panhandle lots and/or dwellings and front lots previously approved and recorded prior to the effective date of this section shall continue to be regulated by the regulations in effect at the time of approval.
(1985 Code, § 150.25) (Ord. 1084, passed 1-17-1972; Ord. 88-45, passed 11-7-1988; Ord. 91-67, passed 10-31-1991; Ord. 01-36, passed 11-22-2001; Ord. 13-11 passed - -2013)
§ 150.31 CONTINUED VALIDITY
Should any provision of this Zoning Code be decided by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of this Zoning Code as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so decided to be unconstitutional or invalid.
(1985 Code, § 150.26) (Ord. 1084, passed 1-17-1972; Ord. 13-11 passed - -2013)
§ 150.32 VIOLATIONS
In the event that any structure is in the process of erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, moving, or maintenance, or any structure or land is, or in the process of use is, in violation of any provision of this Zoning Code, the City Law Director, in addition to the remedies provided for by the Revised Code of Ohio and by this Zoning Code, shall have authority and is hereby authorized to institute an appropriate action or proceeding in law or in equity, on behalf of the city, or any board or official thereof, to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use, or to restrain, correct or abate such violation.
(1985 Code, § 150.27) (Ord. 1084, passed 1-17-1972; Ord. 13-11 passed - -2013)
§ 150.33 DISH-TYPE SATELLITE AND RECEIVING STATIONS
(A) Dish-type satellite signal and receiving stations (hereafter “stations”), subject to the following regulations, may be located within the city.
(B) Stations shall not be linked to receivers which are not located on the same premises as the station.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
49
7722743.2
(C) Stations shall be located in the rear yard, as defined in this Zoning Code, and behind the principal dwelling or structure located on the lot, shall be located so that however turned or otherwise used, all parts of the station will be set back at least six feet from the projected house side lines, and shall be set back from the rear lot line no less than 15 feet.
(1) The height of the station, should the dish antenna be turned perpendicular to the ground, shall not extend more than 15 feet above normal ground level, and the maximum diameter of any dish antenna shall not exceed 12 feet.(D) No installation or erection of a station shall commence before a permit is obtained in accordance with this Zoning Code.
(1985 Code, § 150.28) (Ord. 1612, passed 12-6-1982)
§ 150.34 INTENTIONALLY DELETED
§ 150.35 INTENTIONALLY DELETED
§ 150.36 RESERVED
§ 150.37 CELLULAR OR WIRELESS COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
(A) Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to:
(1) Accommodate the need for cellular or wireless communications towers and facilities for the provision of personal wireless services while regulating their location and number in the city;
(2) Minimize adverse visual effects of communications towers and support structures through proper siting, design and screening;
(3) Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from communications towers and support structure failure; and
(4) Encourage the joint use of any new and existing communications towers and support structures to reduce the number of such structures needed in the future.
(B) Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
CELLULAR COMMUNICATION SERVICES
Personal communications accessed by means of cellular equipment and services.
CELLULAR OR WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA
Any structure or device used to receive or transmit electromagnetic waves between cellular phones, pagers, commercial mobile services, wireless services and ground-wired communications systems including both directional antennas, such as panels, microwave dishes and satellite dishes, and omni-directional antennas such as whips and other equipment utilized to serve personal communication services.
CELLULAR OR WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS SITE
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
50
7722743.2
A tract, lot or parcel of land that contains the cellular or wireless communications tower, antenna, support structures, parking and any other uses associated with and ancillary to cellular to cellular or wireless communications transmission.
CELLULAR OR WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS SUPPORT STRUCTURE
Any building or structure, including equipment shelter, guy wire anchors, accessory to but necessary for the proper functioning of the cellular or wireless communications antenna or tower.
CELLULAR OR WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS TOWER
Any freestanding structure used to support a cellular or wireless communications antenna.
CELLULAR OR WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS TOWER, HEIGHT OF
The height from the base of the structure, at grade, to its top; including any antenna located thereon. Grade shall be determined as the elevations of the natural or existing topography of the ground level prior to construction of the tower.
MICRO ANTENNAS
Any cellular or wireless communication antennas which consist solely of the antenna and which do not have any supporting structures other than brackets, including micro cells. MICRO ANTENNAS shall be equal to or less than five feet in height and with an area of not more than 580 square inches.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES
Commercial mobile services, unlicensed wireless services and common carrier wireless exchange access services, including cellular services.
TALL STRUCTURES
Any structure or building, including but not limited to smoke stacks, water towers, buildings over 35 feet in height, antenna support structures of other cellular or wireless communication companies and other communications towers.
(C) Application Procedure.
(1) (a) Any person or company intending to apply for the placement or operation of a cellular or wireless communications antenna, tower, or site within the city shall first schedule a pre-application conference with the City Manager or his or her assignee. At this conference, the prospective applicant must present in writing to the City Manager the number of towers needed by the prospective applicant in the city and identify the area in which each tower is intended to be located. The prospective applicant shall certify that this information is based on its engineering studies, and that to the best of the applicant’s knowledge, no additional towers or locations shall be needed within the city. The applicant shall provide to the City Manager a map identifying all sites within the city which would satisfy its needs and which would meet these zoning requirements without a variance. This information should identify the area within which each tower may be located, the minimum height of the proposed towers and identify any possible users that may co-locate at any of the sites.
(b) The purpose of the pre-application conference will be to, generally, evaluate the impact on adjacent areas and neighborhoods, discuss possibilities of co-location,
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
51
7722743.2
identify alternative suitable sites that may minimize the negative impact on residential areas.
(2) Upon completion of the pre-application conference, an application may be filed with the office of the City Manager. The application shall be in compliance with the requirements of this section and in such form as approved by the City Manager. If the application does not conform with the requirements of this section, the applicant shall be notified by the City Manager and no further consideration of the application shall occur until it is in compliance with the terms of this section.
(3) The application fee for a cellular or wireless communication system, tower, antenna or site shall be $500 for each proposed location and $200 for each new user proposing to co-locate. In addition, each applicant shall pay, prior to the issuance in obtaining independent expert consultation that the city determines is necessary to review the application and advise the city, and to conduct such post-construction test of signal emissions as is determined appropriate by the consultant, not to exceed $1,500.
(D) Use Regulations. The following use regulations shall apply to cellular or wireless communication antennas and towers:
(1) A cellular or wireless communications site may only be permitted in manufacturing zoning districts subject to the requirements set forth herein;
(2) Cellular or wireless communications sites in a manufacturing zoning district shall not be located any closer to any residential zoning district than as follows:
(a) Cellular or wireless communication towers less than 100 feet in height shall be located no closer than 100 feet to any residential zoning district; and
(b) For any cellular or wireless communication tower exceeding 100 feet in height, the tower may not be located closer to any residential zoning district than a distance equal to 100 feet plus one foot for each foot of height that the tower exceeds 100 feet.
(3) A cellular or wireless communications antenna may be mounted to an existing structure, such as a communications tower (whether the tower is for cellular or wireless purposes or not), smoke stack, water tower or other tall structures in any manufacturing zoning district. Cellular or wireless communication antennas may only be placed on the top of buildings that are no less than 35 feet in height;
(4) Micro antennas not exceeding five feet in height may be placed on any building in a business or manufacturing zoning district. A micro antenna may be attached to any existing building located in an area described in the preceding sentence, and shall not be subject to the setback requirements of other cellular or wireless communication towers provided it is placed on the roof of an existing building;
(5) All other uses accessory to the cellular or wireless communications antenna and towers, including but not limited to business offices, maintenance depots and materials and vehicle storage are prohibited from the site unless otherwise permitted in the zoning district in which the cellular or wireless communications antenna and/or tower is located; and
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
52
7722743.2
(6) Annually, each owner of a cellular or wireless communication tower or antenna shall file with the city, not later than June 1 of each year, a study or studies demonstrating that the operation of its antenna and all antennas located on its tower are within current standards for effective radiated power and standards for radiation exposure established by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). The FCC standards shall be the standards in effect on the first day of May immediately preceding the June 1 around deadline for filing.
(a) Each study shall provide a minimum of ten measurements, each taken on different dates, during peak operating conditions. All such measurements shall be taken within 120 days of the due date for filing the study. Such studies shall include documentation sufficient to demonstrate that the tests were conducted at peak operating conditions. However, if the city is advised by its engineering consultant that the determination that the antennas are operating within the above standards can be achieved with fewer measurements or less costly methods, the City Manager shall so advise the antenna owners and accept the alternative studies. This includes consideration by the engineering consultant as to whether the FCC reporting requirements may provide the necessary information to evaluate, with reasonable certainty, actual radiated power of the antennas.
(b) Such studies shall be accompanied by a single filing fee of $200. Two or more providers located on the same tower may submit joint studies along with a single application fee.
(c) If all antennas on a tower have been in operation less than six calendar months as of June 1, then the due date for such filing shall be the next annual filing date. If any antenna on a tower has been in operation six months or more as of June 1, then the owner of the tower and the owner of all antennas in operation six months or more shall file the required studies.
(E) Standards of Approval For Cellular or Wireless Communications Antennas and Towers. The following standards shall apply to all cellular or wireless communications antennas and towers.
(1) The cellular or wireless communications company shall demonstrate, using the latest technological evidence, that the antenna or tower must be placed in a proposed location in order to serve its necessary function in the company’s grid system. Part of this demonstration shall include a drawing showing the boundaries of the area around the proposed location which would probably also permit the antennas to function properly in the company’s grid system. This area shall be considered the allowable zone.
(a) The applicant shall provide to the city all engineering studies which the applicant has completed or intends to complete to establish the necessity of placing an antenna within the city in general and within allowable zone, in particular.
(b) The applicant shall provide a map of all current locations of wireless communication antenna sites and all future proposed wireless communication antenna sites which will provide service under a license issued by the FCC to users in the city. This map shall include:
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
53
7722743.2
(i) The location of all existing wireless communication antennas and towers that provide service to users located in the city;
(ii) The identification of each parcel of real estate within the manufacturing district that is also within the allowable zone of the applicant and is of sufficient size to comply with the setbacks and other requirements of this zoning regulation;
(iii) The geographic areas which are served by each tower location that provides service to users within the city; and
(iv) The geographic areas into which the provider must install an antenna or tower in order to provide service to users within the city.
(2) (a) If the communications company proposes to build a cellular or wireless communications tower (as opposed to mounting the antenna on an existing structure), it is required to demonstrate that it has contacted the owners of nearby tall structures within the allowable zone, asked for permission to install the cellular communications antenna on those structures and was denied for either non-economic reasons or that a clearly unreasonable economic demand was made by the owner, based on prevailing market values. Tall structures shall include but not be limited to smoke stacks, water towers and buildings over 35 feet in height, antenna support structures of other cellular or wireless communication companies or other communication towers.
(b) The city many deny the application to construct a new cellular or wireless communications tower if the applicant has not made a good faith effort to mount the antenna on existing structures.
(3) The applicant shall provide the city with its plan of operation of the antenna structure, including a description of the nature of the expected and intended usages including:
(a) The radio wave frequency range of the expected or intended usage;
(b) The effective radiated power under peak operation conditions of each antenna on the proposed tower; and
(c) The types of services that the applicant expects or intends to provide to customers of the applicant through the signals received and transmitted by the antenna.
(4) The applicant shall provide engineering calculations demonstrating anticipated levels of effective radiated power and shall provide a study which demonstrates the mapping of actual radiation levels actually produced by all antennas on a tower under maximum operating conditions at ground level within 800 feet of the tower. The readings shall be taken at 45-degree intervals around the tower of every 100 feet from the tower (plus or minus ten feet). Upon written request of any applicant, the City Manager, in his or her discretion, can waive the requirement for measurements at particular intervals or distances from the tower or he or she may require any person will be exposed at the locations specified in this provision or that the applicant has no authority to enter upon the land needed for the measurements, or that the city’s engineering consultant has advised that specific locations or other tests are not
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
54
7722743.2
necessary to determine to the consultant’s satisfaction the effective radiated power of the facility. The City Manager’s decision shall be stated in writing with written justification for the decision.
(F) Standards of Approval of All Cellular or Wireless Communications Antennas and Towers. For cellular or wireless communications antenna to be placed on an existing structure, with no new tower to be erected, the applicant needs to submit to the City Manager only such information as required to ensure compliance with the applicable provisions of this section. Such requirements for an application which is only for an antenna are identified by an asterisk (*) in this division (F). All other regulations set forth in this section shall be applicable unless clearly limited to towers only.
(1) Antenna/Tower Height.* The applicant shall demonstrate that the antenna/tower is no higher than necessary to function satisfactorily and to accommodate the co-location requirements as set out in division (F)(6) below. An antenna that is taller than the minimum necessary height may be approved if it would significantly increase the potential for co-location. Cellular or wireless communication towers shall be exempt from the maximum height requirements contained in § 150.29. Cellular towers shall be monopole construction unless it is demonstrated that another type of tower is required for safety purposes, or that the aesthetics of the tower would be significantly improved.
(2) Setbacks From the Base of the Tower. If a new cellular or wireless communications tower is to be constructed in a manufacturing zoning district, the minimum distance between the base of the tower or any guy wire anchors and any property line which abuts a zoning district other than a residential district shall be no closer than the greater of the following:
(a) Forty percent of the tower height; and
(b) Fifty feet.
(3) Cellular or Wireless Communications Tower Safety.*
(a) All cellular or wireless communications towers shall be fitted with anti-climbing devices as approved by the manufacturers. Furthermore, the applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed cellular or wireless communications tower and its antenna are safe and that the surrounding properties will not be negatively affected by tower failure, falling ice or other debris, electromagnetic fields or radio frequency interference. However, if a specific safety issue in question is determined to be regulated by either FCC regulations or applicable Building Code regulations, and the operation or construction is in compliance with such regulations, then this requirement for safety shall be deemed to have been met.
(b) Subsequent to the installation of a cellular or wireless communications tower site, if it is determined by the City Council, upon presentation of proper and sufficient documentation, and after a public hearing, that the operation of a cellular or wireless communications tower is inherently dangerous or is a demonstrable health hazard, the cellular or wireless tower shall be declared to be a nuisance and all operation shall cease. The tower or antenna shall also be removed as provided under division (H) below. However, no order of removal shall be made if it is inconsistent with existing FCC regulations.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
55
7722743.2
(4) Fencing.* A fence shall be required around the cellular or wireless communications tower and its support or accessory structures, unless the antenna is mounted on an existing structure. The fence shall be a minimum of eight feet in height and shall be erected in a manner to prevent access to non-authorized personnel.
(5) Landscaping.* Landscaping, in compliance with a plan approved by the ARO, shall be approved to screen as much of the support structure and ground level features as is possible but shall not unreasonably reduce visibility needed for security purposes. In addition, existing vegetation on and around the site shall be preserved to the greatest extent possible.
(6) Limiting the Number of Cellular or Wireless Communications Towers.
(a) In order to reduce the number of antenna support structures needed in the city in the future, the owner of an existing cellular or wireless communications tower shall not unreasonably deny a request to accommodate other uses, including other cellular or wireless communications companies, and the antenna of local police, fire and ambulance departments. The owner of the existing cellular or wireless communications tower may request reasonable compensation for the use of the tower.
(b) For the purposes of encouraging co-location of cellular or wireless antenna and other uses, cellular or wireless communication towers shall be designed, engineered and constructed as follows, unless waived for good cause to minimize impact on adjoining property by the City Manager:
(i) Towers less than 75 feet tall shall be designed, engineered and constructed to support antennas installed by one or more cellular or wireless communication service users;
(ii) Towers more than 75 feet in height but less than 150 feet shall be designed, engineered and constructed to support antennas installed by two or more wireless communication service users; and
(iii) Towers 150 feet in height or taller shall be designed, engineered and constructed to support antennas installed by three or more wireless communication service users.
(c) As used in divisions (F)(6)(b)1. through (F)(6)(b)3. above, the term USERS shall include the antennas of Police, Fire and Ambulance Departments. In addition, an applicant must demonstrate that the area acquired by lease or otherwise acquired for the use and construction of the cellular tower and accessory structures is sufficient in size to accommodate any additional structures that may be required if additional users are added to the tower.
(7) Licensing.* The communications company must demonstrate to the city that it is licensed by the FCC. The owner of the tower must also annually provide to the city on January 1 of each year, a list of all users of the tower and each user shall provide the city with a copy of each user’s license with the FCC. No approval will be granted to any applicant unless proof of current FCC license for the proposed use of the tower is provided.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
56
7722743.2
(8) Required Parking.* If the cellular or wireless communications site is fully automated, adequate parking shall be required for maintenance workers. If the site is not fully automated, adequate parking shall be required for the number of employees working on the largest shift. All parking specifications and requirements as established in the Zoning Code.
(9) Appearance.* Cellular or wireless communications towers under 200 feet in height shall have a galvanized finish. Cellular or wireless communications towers shall meet all Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) regulations. No cellular or wireless communications towers may be artificially lighted except when required by the FAA. Except for safety or warning signs approved by the ARO and City Manager, no cellular or wireless communication tower or antenna and accessory buildings and structures, including fences, shall contain any signage. All utility lines serving the towers shall be underground.
(10) Site Plan Required. A full site plan shall be required for all proposed cellular or wireless communications sites, except antenna to be placed on existing structures, at a reasonable scale, but not smaller than one inch to 100 feet, indicating, as a minimum, the following:
(a) The total area of the site;
(b) The existing zoning of the property in question and of all adjacent properties;
(c) All public and private right-of-way and easement lines located on or adjacent to the property which is proposed to be continued, created, relocated or abandoned;
(d) Existing topography with a maximum of five-foot contours intervals;
(e) The proposed finished grade of the development shown by contours not exceeding five- foot intervals;
(f) The location of all existing buildings and structures and the proposed location of the cellular or wireless communications tower and all cellular or wireless communications support structures including dimensions, heights and where applicable, the gross floor area of the buildings;*
(g) The locations and dimensions of all curb cuts, driving lanes, off-street parking and loading areas including the number of spaces, grades, surfacing materials, drainage plans and illumination of the facility;*
(h) All existing and proposed sidewalks and open areas on the site;*
(i) The location of all proposed fences, screening and walls;*
(j) The location of all existing and proposed streets;
(k) All existing and proposed utilities including types and grades;*
(l) The schedule of any phasing of the project;
(m) Documentation which shows all building and structures on adjacent lots and any additional lot which has a lot line within 500 feet of the lot on which the cellular
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
57
7722743.2
tower is proposed to be located. The approximate elevation of the highest point of each building or structure shall be noted. The applicant may identify any additional features in the area (such as existing screening, fences and topography) which might be helpful in considering the impact of the proposed tower on nearby property;
(n) The names and addresses of all property owners within 500 feet of the parcel of property on which the tower is to be placed; and
(o) Any other information as may be required to determine the conformance with this Zoning Code.*
(G) Maintenance. Any owner of property used as a cellular or wireless communications site and any owner of a cellular or wireless communications antenna or tower shall maintain such property and all structures in good condition and free from trash, outdoor storage, weeds and other debris. Any owner of a cellular or wireless communications tower shall be required to notify the City Manager of its intent in writing within 30 days of its cessation of business, its discontinuance of service or transfer of ownership.
(H) Removal.
(1) Any cellular or wireless communications tower or antenna that has discontinued its service for a period of six continuous months or more is hereby determined to be a nuisance. A tower declared to be a nuisance must be removed by the owner of the tower or antenna and by the owner of the property on which the tower or antenna is located, along with all accessory structures related thereto. DISCONTINUED shall mean that the structure has not been properly maintained, has been abandoned, become obsolete, is unused, is no longer used for its original purpose or is no longer transmitting the same type of radio wave signals that is was originally designed to transmit, or has ceased the daily activities or operations which had occurred.
(2) Whenever, upon inspection it shall appear that a cellular or wireless communications tower has been abandoned or its use discontinued, the City Manager or a designated representative shall notify, either by personal delivery or by certified mail, the owner of the property on which the tower is located that the tower must be taken down and removed. The City Manager or a designated representative, in addition to any other citations, notices, penalties or remedies provided by law or ordinance, is authorized to proceed in a manner consistent with and pursuant to R.C. §§ 715.26 and 715.261 to maintain the public health, safety and welfare and to recover costs as appropriate.
(I) Prohibitions.
(1) No cellular or wireless communications tower shall be permitted on any lot on which any nonconforming building or structure is located nor on which any nonconforming use or activity is occurring without first obtaining a variance from the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(2) No cellular or wireless communications tower shall be constructed, replaced or altered without first obtaining the applicable building permit.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
58
7722743.2
(3) A cellular or wireless communications antenna or communication site shall not be placed, operated, constructed, affixed or otherwise located within the city except as allowed and permitted by this chapter.
(J) Public Hearing.
(1) No permit shall be issued for the construction or placement of any telecommunications tower or antenna without the City Manager conducting a public hearing which shall be published as a legal advertisement. Notice shall be sent to all property owners within 500 feet of the parcel on which a tower or antenna is intended to be located. Such notice shall be sent by regular mail not less than ten days prior to public hearing.
(2) The City Manager shall conduct the public hearing and may continue it if he or she determines that it is in the best interest of obtaining additional relevant information.
(K) Appeals. Any decision of the City Manager to issue or deny issuance of a permit may be appealed by an interested party in writing to the Board of Zoning Appeals within 30 days of the decision. Any property owner or occupant of real estate, within 500 feet of the subject parcel shall be presumed to be an interested party. The date of the decision shall be the date the decision is mailed to the applicant and to all property owners within 500 feet of the subject parcel. Such mailing shall be by regular mail. Any decision to deny the application shall be set forth in writing and be supported by substantial evidence.
(1) Timing of Appeal. The interested party appealing the decision must provide notice of his or her intent to appeal such decision to the City Manager and the Board of Zoning Appeals within thirty (30) days of the City’s Manager’s provision of written notification of its decision to the applicant and all interested parties.
(2) Hearing on Appeal. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hold a public hearing, evaluating the appeal based upon the standards of review applied by the City Manager to permit application, within sixty (60) days of receiving the interested party’s notice of appeal.
(L) Severability. If any requirement for reporting or measuring radiated power from an antenna is determined to be illegal or invalid for any reason, then the standards for the reporting or measuring of radiated power which has been approved, authorized or directed by the FCC and is the most similar to the original requirement shall be used instead.
(1985 Code, § 150.32) (Ord. 97-33, passed 8-25-1997) Penalty, see § 150.99
§ 150.38 TRANSITIONAL OVERLAY DISTRICT
(A) Purpose.
(1) (a) It is the intent of the Special Public Interest Transitional District (hereinafter referred to as “T District”) to designate a sensitive transitional area of the city for certain types of controlled development, which development is consistent with the goals of the city as set forth herein. The request for approval of a Transitional District development plan within a T District may only be approved if it is initiated or authorized by the
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
59
7722743.2
property owner(s). The area of T District is set forth on Exhibit A, attached to Ordinance 98-43, passed February 8, 1999.
(b) Contrary to conventional development control strictly by type of use, the T District provides a more flexible instrument which governs development by the criteria of intensity and impacts of a use rather than its general nature. The meaning of USE is intended to encompass both the activity intended and permitted to take place on the property, as well as the improvements, including structures, landscaping, mounding, detention and drainage areas and parking, intended or planned for the site. As an alternative to the use of a property strictly in accordance with the underlying district designated for the parcel, this allows for different types of compatible land use within the zone designated as a T District.
(c) The creation of the T District is meant to identify an area (Exhibit A) within the city in which the Planning Commission may approve, approve with modifications or deny specific detailed plans proposed by the property owner (the Transitional District development plan) which meets the criteria established for the T District.
(2) The specific purposes of the T District are:
(a) To provide adequate buffering for the protection of residential districts from the adverse impacts of less restrictive uses which may be permitted in a T District;
(b) To protect and enhance the environmental, cultural, aesthetic and historic assets of the community through careful planning in the design and arrangement of buildings, activities, preservation of open or green space and the optimal utilization of natural site features;
(c) To permit the creation of a transitional zone within the city that will provide for the orderly transition from an existing Residence “A” District to the south to less restrictive districts located to the north of the Transitional District. This must be done in a manner that promotes harmony within the T District as well as providing transition between surrounding districts; and
(d) To reconcile the existing different uses that are in place at the inception of the T District so that the long term value of the property within the district is enhanced, without unreasonable harm occurring to the existing activities. Consideration shall be given to permitting reasonable residential use of the existing dwellings to continue.
(B) Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
T DISTRICT
The district designated by Council on the zoning map and attached to Ordinance 98-43, passed February 8, 1999 as Exhibit A and adopted in accordance with this code. The T DISTRICT is an overlay district which is superimposed upon the designated areas within the zoning district, and which shall be identified on the zoning map by a prefix of “T” to the underlying district. In the T DISTRICT all zoning regulations applicable to the Residential “B” District shall remain in effect until such time as approval may be given to a final transitional development plan for the lot or parcel.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
60
7722743.2
T DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT PLAN
As used in this section, a plan for the development and use of a specified parcel or tract of real estate, in a form recordable at the County Recorder’s Office, illustrated by a plat and containing:
(1) A legal description, and dimensions of the proposed development and acreage;
(2) Topography at two-foot contour intervals, which shall show the proposed development area, including property lines, easements and features, existing thereon, and including a certificate, by a registered engineer or surveyor, of the gross area of the development in acres and in square feet;
(3) All landscaping and screening of the development including the placement of trees, flowers, shrubs, mounding, grass and open spaces of the proposed development, including the planned buffer areas;
(4) The location, construction materials, illumination and dimension of all signs intended to be located on the property;
(5) The location and dimension of all parking facilities, vehicular and pedestrian ways, the location and directional flow of existing and proposed storm and sanitary sewers, areas for on-site water detention, and an estimate of the traffic volume to be generated;
(6) A notarized sworn statement explaining in detail the use to which the property shall be put and the anticipated effect which the proposed development shall have upon adjacent property;
(7) Detailed plans of all proposed buildings and structures to be located on the site. A depiction of the required 100-foot buffer yard and the location of trees, shrubs, mounding and other screening shall also be identified. Also shown on a separate document must be the improvements on said property existing at the time of the T District application. The removal or alteration of such improvements shall be identified as well as the relative time frame that this work shall occur;
(8) The declarations of covenants running with the land, if any;
(9) Any additional information as reasonably required by Planning Commission during its review process may be requested from time to time; and
(10) A schedule for construction and cost estimates for the completion of the development, including all public and private improvements in the development area.
The T District development plan, unless otherwise specified, shall be prepared by professional persons qualified in the planning of land development, traffic engineering and building and landscape design. The architectural and engineering services required for the preparation of the site development plan shall be rendered by licensed professional persons.
(C) Applicability. This T District is established as an overlay district by Council superimposed on specific areas of a Residential “B” District designated on Exhibit A, attached to Ordinance 98-43, passed February 8, 1999. This specific T District is designed to address zoning issues in this location and is not intended to be applicable to other areas unless the Zoning Code is amended in accordance with the procedures set forth in the Charter of the city.
(D) Permitted Buildings, Uses and Other Regulations.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
61
7722743.2
(1) As a matter of right, those buildings and uses permitted in the underlying Residential “B” District shall be permitted in accordance with all applicable regulations of that underlying district, until such time as buildings and uses authorized by a T District development plan are approved. Thereafter, only those buildings and uses approved for a T District development plan shall be valid on the property.
The transition from original use to T District use shall be in accordance with the time table approved as part of the T District application. Failure to complete the improvements and obtain a final certificate of occupancy within the approved time frame, including any authorized extensions, shall cause the approval of the T District development plan to lapse, and only buildings and uses permitted in the underlying district shall be permitted thereafter.
(2) The following buildings and uses shall only be permitted pursuant to a T District development plan, subject to review and approval in accordance with the provisions of this chapter:
(a) Offices for professional use (such as attorneys, doctors, architects, dentists and engineers) and office-type business uses (such as real estate, insurance and manufacturers’ representatives). Activities which are normal, necessary and subordinate to the office use listed herein shall be permitted. Examples of such activities include the preparation of dental supplies for patients, examination of and treatment of patients of a physician, meeting with clients and provision of services by attorneys and insurance representatives, and closings held at a real estate office. There shall be no permitted use of such offices that is not clearly within the types of activities described herein;
(b) Nursing homes and assisted care facilities, but no services shall be provided to persons who are not residents thereof;
(c) Single-family residential uses, which may be combined with the permitted office uses set forth in division (D)(2)(a) above, as long as a resident of the residential unit is a primary participant in the business of the office. No more than one residential dwelling shall be permitted in any T District development plan when it is combined with the permitted office uses set forth in division (D)(2)(a) above; and
(d) Medical clinics, and treatment rooms, but no urgent care facilities or other medical facilities that normally require emergency services transportation and no hospital or emergency facilities shall be permitted.
(3) Accessory Buildings and Uses. Accessory buildings and uses may be permitted if approved by the Planning Commission as being consistent with the purposes and provisions of this chapter.
(4) All plans for the uses permitted in the T District shall be prepared to maximize buffering of adjacent districts to the south, east and west. Additional trees and plantings shall be part of the landscaping plans based on consideration of the view from those adjoining districts. The overall intent and focus of the final plan is to encourage the uses listed above but to minimize the visual impact to adjacent residential districts. In that regard, parking for such businesses should, where feasible, be designed for the front side of such buildings, on the Camargo Road
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
62
7722743.2
side of the T District development. Architectural features which resemble or emphasize a residential look of buildings shall be required as approved by the ARO and shall satisfy the specific requirements set forth in division (E) below. Common drives and access points to Camargo Road should be considered.
(E) Standards for T District Development Plan Review and Approval.
(1) The active use of property and the design of the buildings in the T District shall only be approved if it meets the following general conditions as determined by Planning Commission:
(a) The active use and design do not significantly create an adverse influence on any abutting or surrounding properties;
(b) The plan provides for an orderly transition from more restrictive (residential) to less restrictive districts;
(c) The plan is designed to maximize the public interest and private benefit in a balanced manner; and
(d) The plan permits and encourages improved development within the remaining sites in the T District.
(2) Specific requirements and standards that must be clearly set forth in a T District development plan before it may be approved are as follows.
(a) Architectural features shall incorporate such characteristics as are normally associated with single-family residential homes, including the following: exterior construction shall be similar to typical residential construction in such combination as approved by the ARO as being consistent in character with surrounding residential areas. The side of a building facing Camargo Road may differ in appearance (for example it may be predominately glass); gabled or hipped roofs shall be required (no flat roofs); the height of new buildings shall be limited to 35 feet, consistent with other residential structures in the city; air conditioning units and waste disposal dumpsters must be specifically shielded by suitable fencing/landscaping as determined to be reasonable by the ARO for purposes of shielding these items from adjacent residential areas. These requirements shall not apply to an existing residential building which is converted to an office use, provided the exterior features of the residential structure, including air conditioning and other exterior equipment, are maintained.
(b) A rear yard setback of 100 feet shall be maintained from the residential district located adjacent to the T District as depicted on Exhibit A, attached to Ordinance 98-43, passed February 8, 1999. No structures, including parking areas or driveways, shall be placed within this 100-foot setback area.
(c) New parking areas shall be placed, where practical and feasible, between the building and Camargo Road. Parking areas which must be placed to the side or rear of the buildings shall be softened by the placement of landscaping islands in order to reduce the visual mass of impervious surface and parked motor vehicles. The number of
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
63
7722743.2
parking spaces required shall be four spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor area of the building, excluding areas devoted exclusively to mechanical (physical plant) equipment, storage or common hallways. However, shared parking areas may be permitted if it is determined by the Planning Commission that the overall coverage of impervious areas could be reduced, it would enhance the green areas available on the development plan and would permit the new building to be erected closer to Camargo Road. (The city is attempting to minimize required parking surfaces while ensuring that there is adequate parking.)
(d) Impervious surfaces shall not cover more than 70% of an area within the entirety of a T District development plan. The required 100-foot setback area of each lot is included in the T District development plan. Therefore, in calculating the percentage of the area in the development plan that impervious surface will cover, the green area within the 100-foot setback shall be included as part of the total area of the plan. Impervious surface shall include all areas of ground within the development plan designated as a parking area, (but not including landscape islands) buildings, structures, driveways and walkways.
(e) Evergreen landscaping within the 100-foot buffer area that is of sufficient height to block the line of sight view of any parking areas located in the rear or side of any building to be used in a T District development plan. Mounding may be included as part of the line of sight screening. The line of sight shall be from a ten-foot height located in all points along the residential property line which abuts the T District development.
(f) No development plan shall be approved which incorporates a proposed property line(s) the primary purpose of which appears to be avoiding the requirements imposed by this chapter.
(g) Exterior lighting shall be kept low and shall be reasonably shielded from adjacent residential districts.
(h) Development plan shall provide a written acknowledgment that all landscaping, screening, mounding, buffering, structures drives and parking areas and buildings shall be maintained in first class condition and that failure to so maintain these items shall be a violation of this Zoning Code, enforceable in all ways available in law and equity as any other violation of the City Zoning Code.
(3) No uses in addition to those permitted in the underlying zoning shall be permitted unless the developer demonstrates compliance with each of the above standards to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission.
(4) To secure the application of all relevant standards to a development in a T District, the Planning Commission shall require that the following are specifically set forth in any T District development plan:
(a) Front, side and rear yard requirements, density requirements, height and bulk of building requirements and intensity of use; no minimum setbacks are required to be included in the development plan except there shall be sufficient setback for necessary
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
64
7722743.2
screening and that the 100-foot setback depicted on Exhibit A, attached to Ordinance 98-43, passed February 8, 1999, shall be maintained;
(b) The use of materials or designs in the erection of structures which shall minimize the adverse impact of the uses proposed by the development plan on neighboring properties;
(c) Permits for business signs, outdoor storage, parking spaces and driveways;
(d) Screening or other areas of land to serve as a buffer of the proposed use in the T District from adjacent properties by walls, fences, landscaping or open spaces; and
(e) Such additional conditions and limitations on the use, building dimensions, open spaces and the like as may be deemed necessary to carry out the intent of this chapter and this Zoning Code.
(F) Submission and Review of Site Development Plan.
(1) Application Procedure.
(a) Any person or company intending to apply for approval of a T District development plan shall first schedule a pre-application conference with the City Manager or his or her assignee. At this conference, the prospective applicant must present in writing to the City Manager a preliminary proposal for a T District development plan.
(b) The purpose of the pre-application conference will be to, generally, evaluate the impact on adjacent areas and neighborhoods and identify the benefits achieved, such as better use of property, stabilizing future changes and providing a transition area. This information should also identify the adjoining property owners and any existing nonconforming uses.
(c) Upon completion of the pre-application conference an application may be filed with the office of the City Manager. The application shall be in compliance with the requirements of this chapter and in such form as approved by the City Manager. If the application does not conform with the requirements of this chapter, the applicant shall be notified by the City Manager and no further consideration of the application shall occur until it is in compliance with the terms of this chapter.
(2) Public Hearing and Decision.
(a) Upon receipt of an application in the format prescribed by this chapter, the City Manager shall forward the application to the Planning Commission for consideration. The Planning Commission shall review said T District development plan and shall hold a public hearing on such application. Notice of such hearing shall be sent to all property owners within 200 feet of the proposed T District Development not less than ten days prior to the scheduled hearing.
(b) Subsequent to the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall either approve the T District development plan as submitted, approve a modified plan with conditions or
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
65
7722743.2
deny approval of the plan. Five members of Planning Commission must vote in the affirmative to approve any such application either as submitted or modified. Approval of this plan shall be considered approval of a preliminary T District development plan. Approval of the preliminary development plan shall not constitute any authority to proceed with construction or development. Such approval shall only authorize the applicant to submit a proposed final development plan.
(c) A proposed Final T District development plan shall be submitted within six months of the date of the Planning Commission meeting at which the preliminary plan was approved. The Planning Commission may extend this period for a reasonable period upon a showing of good cause by the applicant. The final plan must be substantially consistent with the preliminary plan in all respects. If the Planning Commission finds that a proposed final plan of a development area is in substantial accordance with and represents a detailed expansion of the preliminary plan, as previously approved, that the final plan complies with all of the conditions and adjustments which may have been imposed in the approval of the preliminary plan, that it is in accordance with the criteria and provisions and purpose of this chapter and this code, that all agreements, contracts, deed restrictions, dedications, declarations of ownership and other required documents are in acceptable form and have been executed, that all fee payments have been made, then the Planning Commission shall approve such final plan and certify its approval to the City Manager and City Council. Certification of the approval shall be for informational purposes only.
(d) Following the approval of a final plan, the City Manager shall issue such permits as are necessary and under his or her jurisdiction upon payment of the required fees.
(e) Amendment of Plan.
(i) A major amendment of an existing plan shall require a review and approval of the Planning Commission in the same manner and with the same requirements imposed by this chapter for approval of an original T District development plan. A major amendment shall include any change of use from one category to another as listed in division (D)(2) hereof, any increase in the impervious area coverage in excess of 5% over the amount approved in the original plan, the enlargement of any building from that originally approved, or the consolidation of use of adjoining T District development plans.
(ii) Minor amendments to a T District development plan must be approved by the City Manager and the ARO. Either official may refer the request for approval of a minor amendment to the Planning Commission if the official determines that the request should be considered a major amendment. Minor amendments shall include internal changes to buildings and structures, changes to the front of a building, changes to signs which are not being enlarged and are consistent with what was previously approved by the Planning Commission, amendments to drainage pattern or replacement of existing lighting provided it remains effectively shielded. A minor amendment shall also include any change of use that does not change the category of use as those categories are set forth in division (D)(2) hereof. For example, a change in use of an office from real
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
66
7722743.2
estate to insurance shall be considered a minor amendment. However, a change of use from any office use to a medical clinic shall be considered a major amendment.
(3) Contingent-Approval Permitted. In circumstances where an applicant needs a variance from the requirements of this Code, the Planning Commission may provide contingent-approval of a Final Application for a development plan. Such contingent-approval shall mean their approval of the Final Application is subject to the applicant obtaining any required variance(s) from the Board of Zoning Appeals. If the Planning Commission provides contingent-approval of a Final Application and the Board of Zoning Appeals subsequently denies the applicant’s requested variance(s), said denial shall constitute a rejection of the Final Application.
(4) Appeals. Pursuant to this section, if the Planning Commission, City Manager, or ARO deny an applicant’s request for approval of a development plan or an amendment to a previously-approved development plan, such applicant may appeal the decision denying their request to the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(a) Timing of Appeal. The applicant appealing the decision must provide notice of his or her intent to appeal such decision to the Planning Commission and the Board of Zoning Appeals within thirty (30) days of the Planning Commission’s provision of written notification of its denial to the applicant.
(b) Hearing on Appeal. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hold a public hearing evaluating the appeal based upon the standards of review applied by the Planning Commission to the initial conditional use application, within sixty (60) days of receiving applicant’s notice of appeal.
(1985 Code, § 150.33) (Ord. 98-43, passed 2-8-1999)
§ 150.39 TRANSITIONAL OVERLAY DISTRICT #2
(A) Purpose.
(1) (a) It is the intent of the Special Public Interest Transitional District (hereinafter referred to as “T District #2”) to designate a sensitive transitional area of the city for certain types of controlled development, which development is consistent with the goals of the city as set forth herein. The request for approval of a Transitional District development plan within a T District may only be approved if it is initiated or authorized by the property owner(s). The area of a T District is set forth on Exhibit B attached to Ordinance 05-05.
(b) Contrary to conventional development control strictly by type of use, the T District provides a more flexible instrument which governs development by the criteria of intensity and impacts of a use rather than its general nature. The meaning of USE is intended to encompass both the activity intended and permitted to take place on the property, as well as the improvements, including structures, landscaping, mounding, detention and drainage areas and parking, intended or planned for the site. As an alternative to the use of a property strictly in accordance with the underlying district
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
67
7722743.2
designated for the parcel, this allows for different types of compatible land use within the zone designated as a T District #2.
(c) The creation of the T District #2 is meant to identify an area within the city in which the Planning Commission may approve, approve with modifications or deny specific detailed plans proposed by the property owner (the Transitional District development plan) which meets the criteria established for the T District #2.
(2) The Specific Purposes of the T District #2 Are:
(a) To provide adequate buffering for the protection of residential districts from the adverse impacts of less restrictive uses which may be permitted in a T District;
(b) To protect and enhance the environmental, cultural, aesthetic and historic assets of the community through careful planning in the design and arrangement of buildings, activities, preservation of open or green space and the optimal utilization of natural site features;
(c) To permit the creation of a transitional zone within the city that will provide for the orderly transition from an existing Residential “B” District to the south to less restrictive districts located to the north of the Transitional District. This must be done in a manner that promotes harmony within the T District as well as providing transition between surrounding districts; and
(d) To reconcile the existing different uses that are in place at the inception of the T District so that the long-term value of the property within the district is enhanced, without unreasonable harm occurring to the existing activities. Consideration shall be given to permitting reasonable residential use of the existing dwellings to continue.
(B) Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
T DISTRICT #2.
The district designated by Council on the zoning map and attached to Ordinance 05-05 as Exhibit B and adopted in accordance with this code. The T District #2 is an overlay district which is superimposed upon the designated areas within the zoning district, and which shall be identified on the zoning map by a prefix of “T” to the underlying district. In the T DISTRICT #2, all zoning regulations applicable to the Residential “B” District shall remain in effect until such time as approval may be given to a final transitional development plan for the lot or parcel.
T DISTRICT #2 DEVELOPMENT PLAN
As used in this section, a plan for the development and use of a specified parcel or tract of real estate, in a form recordable at the County Recorder’s office, illustrated by a plat, and containing:
(1) A legal description, and dimensions of the proposed development and acreage;
(2) Topography at two-foot contour intervals, which shall show the proposed development area, including property lines, easements and features, existing thereon, and including a certificate, by a registered engineer or surveyor, of the gross area of the development in acres and in square feet;
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
68
7722743.2
(3) All landscaping and screening of the development including the placement of trees, flowers, shrubs, mounding, grass and open spaces of the proposed development, including the planned buffer areas;
(4) The location, construction materials, illumination and dimension of all signs intended to be located on the property;
(5) The location and dimension of all parking facilities, curb cuts, vehicular and pedestrian ways, the location and direction flow of existing and proposed storm and sanitary sewers, areas for on-site water detention and an estimate of the traffic volume to be generated;
(6) A notarized sworn statement explaining in detail the use to which the property shall be put and the anticipated effect which the proposed development shall have upon adjacent property;
(7) Detailed plans of all proposed buildings and structures to be located on the site. A depiction of the required 30-foot buffer yard and the location of trees, shrubs, mounding and other screening shall also be identified. Also shown on a separate document must be the improvements on said property existing at the time of the T District application. The removal or alteration of such improvements shall be identified as well as the relative time frame that this work shall occur;
(8) The declarations of covenant running with the land, if any;
(9) Any additional information as reasonably required by the Planning Commission during its review process may be requested from time to time; and
(10) A schedule for construction and cost estimates for the completion of the development, including all public and private improvements in the development area.
The T District development plan, unless otherwise specified, shall be prepared by professional persons qualified in the planning of land development, traffic engineering and building and landscaping design. The architectural and engineering services required for the preparation of the site development plan shall be rendered by licensed professional persons.
(C) Applicability. This T District is established as an overlay district by Council superimposed on specific areas of a Residential “B” District designated on Exhibit B, attached to Ordinance 05-05. This specific T District #2 is designed to address zoning issues in this location and is not intended to be applicable to other areas unless the Zoning Code is amended in accordance with the procedures set forth in the Charter of the city.
(D) Permitted Buildings, Uses and Other Regulations.
(1) As a matter of right, those buildings and uses permitted in the underlying Residential “B” District shall be permitted in accordance with all applicable regulations of that underlying district, until such time as buildings and uses authorized by a T District #2 development plan are approved. Thereafter, only those buildings and uses approved for a T District #2 development plan shall be valid on the property. The transition from original use to T District #2 use shall be in accordance with the time table approved as part of the T District #2 application. Failure to complete the improvements and obtain a final certificate of occupancy within the approved time frame, including any authorized extensions, shall cause the approval
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
69
7722743.2
of the T District #2 development plan to lapse, and only buildings and uses permitted in the underlying district shall be permitted thereafter.
(2) The following buildings and uses shall only be permitted pursuant to a T District #2 development plan, subject to review and approval in accordance with the provisions of this section:
(a) Offices for professional use (such as attorneys, doctors, architects, dentists and engineers) and office-type business uses (such as real estate, insurance and manufacturers’ representatives). Activities which are normal, necessary and subordinate to the office use listed herein shall be permitted. Examples of such activities include the preparation of dental supplies for patients, examination of and treatment of patients of a physician, meeting with clients and provision of services by attorneys and insurance representatives, and closings held at a real estate office. There shall be no permitted use of such offices that is not clearly within the types of activities described herein;
(b) Low Density Retail Use. A LOW DENSITY RETAIL USE shall de defined as follows:
(i) The hours of operation (hours held open to the public) are limited to 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday and 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on Sunday; and
(ii) The retail use shall not occupy more than 2,000 square feet of usable floor area of any existing or new structure. These uses shall include:
a. Specialty shop;
b. Clothing store;
c. Bank;
d. Bookstore;
e. Barbershop/salon;
f. Pet grooming;
g. Gift shop;
h. Florist;
i. Arts and crafts; and
j. Other similar uses that are consistent with these guidelines established herein, as demonstrated by the applicant, and have been approved by the Planning Commission.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
70
7722743.2
(c) Single-family residential uses, which may be combined with the permitted uses set forth in divisions (D)(2)(a) and (D)(2)(b) above, as long as a resident of the residential unit is a primary participant in the business. No more than one residential dwelling shall be permitted in any T District #2 development plan when it is combined with the permitted uses set forth in division (D)(2)(a) above; and
(d) Medical clinics and treatment rooms, but no urgent care facilities or other medical facilities that normally require emergency services transportation and no hospital or emergency facilities shall be permitted.
(3) Accessory Buildings and Uses. Accessory buildings and uses may be permitted if approved by the Planning Commission as being consistent with the purposes and provisions of this section.
(4) All plans for the uses permitted in the T District #2 shall be prepared to maximize buffering of adjacent districts to the south. Additional trees and plantings shall be part of the landscaping plans based on consideration of the view from those adjoining districts. The overall intent and focus of the final plan is to encourage the uses listed above but to minimize the visual impact to adjacent residential districts. In that regard, parking for such businesses should, where feasible, be designed for the front side of such buildings, on the Camargo Road side of the T District #2 development. Architectural features which resemble or emphasize a residential look of buildings shall be required as approved by the ARO and shall satisfy the specific requirements set forth in division (E) below. Common drives and access points to Camargo Road should be considered.
(E) Standards For T District #2 Development Plan Review and Approval.
(1) The active use of property and the design of the buildings in the T District #2 shall only be approved if it meets the following general conditions as determined by the Planning Commission:
(a) The active use and design do not significantly create an adverse influence on any abutting or surrounding properties;
(b) The plan provides for an orderly transition from more restrictive (residential) to less restrictive districts;
(c) The plan is designed to maximize the public interest and private benefit in a balanced manner; and
(d) The plan permits and encourages improved development within the remaining sites in the T District #2.
(2) Specific requirements and standards that must be clearly set forth in a T District #2 development plan before it may be approved are as follows.
(a) Architectural features shall incorporate such characteristics as are normally associated with single-family residential homes, including the following: exterior construction shall be similar to typical residential construction in such combination as approved by
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
71
7722743.2
the ARO as being consistent in character with surrounding residential areas. The side of a building facing Camargo Road may differ in appearance (for example it may be predominantly glass); gabled or hipped roofs shall be required (no flat roofs); the height of new buildings shall be limited to 28 feet, consistent with other residential structures in the city; air conditioning units and waste disposal dumpsters must be specifically shielded by suitable fencing/landscaping as determined to be reasonable by the ARO for purposes of shielding these items from adjacent residential areas. These requirements shall not apply to an existing residential building which is converted to an office use, provided the exterior features of the residential structure, including air conditioning and other exterior equipment, are maintained.
(b) A rear yard setback of 30 feet shall be maintained from the residential district located adjacent to the T District #2 as depicted on Exhibit B, attached to Ordinance 05-05. No structures, including parking areas or driveways, shall be placed within this 30-foot setback area.
(c) New parking areas shall be placed, where practical and feasible, between the building and Camargo Road. Parking areas which must be placed to the side or rear of the buildings shall be softened by the placement of landscaping islands in order to reduce the visual mass of impervious surface and parked motor vehicles. The number of parking spaces required shall be five spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor area of the building, excluding areas devoted exclusively to mechanical (physical plant) equipment, storage or common hallways. However, shared parking areas may be permitted if it is determined by the Planning Commission that the overall coverage of impervious areas could be reduced, it would enhance the green areas available on the development plan and would permit the new building to be erected closer to Camargo Road. (Note: The city is attempting to minimize required parking surfaces while ensuring that there is adequate parking.)
(d) Impervious surfaces shall not cover more than 70% of an area within the entirety of a T District development plan. The required 30-foot setback area of each lot is included in the T District development plan. Therefore, in calculating the percentage of the area in the development plan that impervious surface will cover, the green area within the 30-foot setback shall be included as part of the total area of the plan. Impervious surface shall include all areas of ground within the development plan designated as a parking area (but not including landscape islands), buildings, structures, driveways and walkways.
(e) A landscape plan shall be required and will include evergreen landscaping within the 30-foot setback area that is of sufficient height to block the line of sight view of any parking areas located in the rear or side of any building to be used in a T District #2 development plan. Mounding may be included as part of the line of sight screening. The line of sight shall be from a ten-foot height located in all points along the residential property line which abuts the T District #2 development.
(f) No development plan shall be approved which incorporates a proposed property line(s) the primary purpose of which appears to be avoiding the requirements imposed by this chapter.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
72
7722743.2
(g) Exterior lighting shall be kept low and shall be reasonably shielded from adjacent residential districts.
(h) The development plan shall provide a written acknowledgment that all landscaping, screening, mounding, buffering, structure drives and parking areas and buildings shall be maintained in first class condition and that failure to so maintain these items shall be a violation of this Zoning Code, enforceable in all ways available in law and equity as any other violation of the City Zoning Code.
(i) Redevelopment of the property shall require improvements to the property including the installation of appropriate curbs, sidewalks, lighting and other streetscape treatment as designated by the ARO. If a variance is requested by the owner and granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall require the owner to post a bond for the full amount of the improvements to be installed at a later date.
(j) Access to these properties shall be limited to Camargo Road only.
(k) Developments are encouraged to limit the number of curb cuts per site. The Planning Commission will approve the number and location of curb cuts for each site. If there is ever a conflict between the requirements in the T District and the parking regulations, the T District requirements will supersede the underlying requirements.
(3) No uses in addition to those permitted in the underlying zoning shall be permitted unless the developer demonstrates compliance with each of the above standards to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission.
(4) To secure the application of all relevant standards to a development in the T District #2, the Planning Commission shall require that the following are specifically set forth in any T District #2 development plan:
(a) Front, side and rear yard requirements, density requirements, height and bulk of building requirements and intensity of use; no minimum setbacks are required to be included in the development plan except there shall be sufficient setback for necessary screening and that the 30-foot setback depicted on Exhibit B, attached to Ordinance 05-05, shall be maintained;
(b) The use of materials or designs in the erection of structures which shall minimize the adverse impact of the uses proposed by the development plan on neighboring properties;
(c) Permits for business signs, outdoor storage, parking spaces and driveways;
(d) Screening or other areas of land to serve as a buffer of the proposed use in the T District #2 from adjacent properties by walls, fences, landscaping or open spaces; and
(e) Such additional conditions and limitations on the use, building dimensions, open spaces and the like as may be deemed necessary to carry out the intent of this chapter and this Zoning Code.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
73
7722743.2
(F) Submission and Review of Site Development Plan.
(1) Application Procedure.
(a) Any person or company intending to apply for approval of a T District #2 development plan shall first schedule a pre-application conference with the City Manager or his or her assignee. At this conference, the prospective applicant must present in writing to the City Manager a preliminary proposal for a T District #2 development plan.
(b) The purpose of the pre-application conference will be to, generally, evaluate the impact on adjacent areas and neighborhoods and identify the benefits achieved, such as better use of property, stabilizing future changes and providing a transition area. This information should also identify the adjoining property owners and any existing nonconforming uses.
(c) Upon completion of the pre-application conference an application may be filed with the office of the City Manager. The application shall be in compliance with the requirements of this chapter and in such form as approved by the City Manager. If the application does not conform with the requirements of this chapter, the applicant shall be notified by the City Manager and no further consideration of the application shall occur until it is in compliance with the terms of this chapter.
(2) Public Hearing and Decision.
(a) Upon receipt of an application in the format prescribed by this chapter, the City Manager shall forward the application to the Planning Commission for consideration. The Planning Commission shall review said T District # 2 development plan and shall hold a public hearing on such application. Notice of such hearing shall be sent to all property owners within 200 feet of the proposed T District #2 development not less than ten days prior to the scheduled hearing.
(b) Subsequent to the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall either approve the T District #2 development plan as submitted, approve a modified plan with conditions or deny approval of the plan. Five members of the Planning Commission must vote in the affirmative to approve any such application either as submitted or modified. Approval of this plan shall be considered approval of a preliminary T District development plan. Approval of the preliminary development plan shall not constitute any authority to proceed with construction or development. Such approval shall only authorize the applicant to submit a proposed final development plan.
(c) A proposed final T District #2 development plan shall be submitted within six months of the date of the Planning Commission meeting at which the preliminary plan was approved. The Planning Commission may extend this period for a reasonable period upon a showing of good cause by the applicant. The final plan must be substantially consistent with the preliminary plan in all respects. If the Planning Commission finds that a proposed final plan of a development area is in substantial accordance with and represents a detailed expansion of the preliminary plan, as previously approved, that the final plan complies with all of the conditions and adjustments which may have
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
74
7722743.2
been imposed in the approval of the preliminary plan, that it is in accordance with the criteria and provisions and purpose of this chapter and this code, that all agreements, contracts, deed restrictions, dedications, declaration of ownership and other required documents are in acceptable form and have been executed, that all fee payments have been made, then the Planning Commission shall approve such final plan and certify its approval to the City Manager and City Council. Certification of the approval shall be for informational purposes only.
(d) Following the approval of a final plan, the City Manager shall issue such permits as are necessary and under his or her jurisdiction upon payment of the required fees.
(e) Amendment of Plan.
(i) A major amendment of an existing plan shall require a review and approval of the Planning Commission in the same manner and with the same requirements imposed by this chapter for approval of an original T District development plan. A major amendment shall include any change of use from one category to another as listed in division (D)(2) hereof, any increase in the impervious area of coverage in excess of 5% over the amount approved in the original plan, the enlargement of any building from that originally approved, or the consolidation of use of adjoining T District development plans.
(ii) Minor amendments to a T District #2 development plan must be approved by the City Manager and the ARO. Either official may refer the request for approval of a minor amendment to the Planning Commission if the official determines that the request should be considered a major amendment. Minor amendments shall include internal changes to buildings and structures, changes to the front of a building, changes to signs which are not being enlarged and are consistent with what was previously approved by the Planning Commission, amendments to drainage pattern or replacement of existing lighting provided it remains effectively shielded. A minor amendment shall also include any change of use that does not change the category of use as those categories are set forth in division (D)(2) hereof. For example, a change in use of an office from real estate to insurance shall be considered a minor amendment. However, a change of use from any office use to a medical clinic shall be considered a major amendment.
(3) Contingent-Approval Permitted. In circumstances where an applicant needs a variance from the requirements of this Code, the Planning Commission may provide contingent-approval of a Final Application for a development plan. Such contingent-approval shall mean their approval of the Final Application is subject to the applicant obtaining any required variance(s) from the Board of Zoning Appeals. If the Planning Commission provides contingent-approval of a Final Application and the Board of Zoning Appeals subsequently denies the applicant’s requested variance(s), said denial shall constitute a rejection of the Final Application.
(4) Appeals. Pursuant to this section, if the Planning Commission, City Manager, or ARO deny an applicant’s request for approval of a development plan or an amendment to a previously-
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
75
7722743.2
approved development plan, such applicant may appeal the decision denying their request to the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(a) Timing of Appeal. The applicant appealing the decision must provide notice of his or her intent to appeal such decision to the Planning Commission’s provision of written notification of its denial to the applicant.
(b) Hearing on Appeal. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hold a public hearing, evaluating the appeal based upon the standards of review applied by the Planning Commission to the initial conditional use application, within sixty (60) days of receiving applicant’s notice of appeal.
(1985 Code, § 150.34) (Ord. 05-05, passed 8-22-2005)
§ 150.40 TRANSITIONAL OVERLAY DISTRICT #3
(A) Intent. It is the intent of the Transitional Overlay District #3 (hereinafter referred to as “T District #3”) to designate a sensitive transitional area of the city for certain types of controlled development consistent with the purposes of the city as set forth herein. The request for approval of a T District #3 development plan within a T District #3 may only be approved if it is initiated or authorized by the property owner(s). The area of a T District #3 is set forth on Exhibit B attached to Ordinance 10-22, passed on February 14, 2011.
(B) Purposes. The specific purposes of the T District #3 are:
(1) To encourage development of appropriate land uses in the district given the existing surrounding development;
(2) To provide adequate buffering for the protection of existing adjacent residential uses and districts from the adverse impacts of more intense uses that may be developed in the T District #3; and
(3) To provide for the orderly transition from an existing Residence “A” District to the south and east of the T District #3 to the higher intensity uses of the Business “A” District to the north and west. This must be done in a manner that promotes harmony within the T District #3 as well as providing a transition between surrounding districts.
(C) Applicability. This T District #3 is established as an overlay district by Council superimposed on specific areas of a Residence “A” District designated on Exhibit B, attached to Ordinance 10-22 passed on February 14, 2011. It shall be identified on the zoning map by a “T District #3.” This specific T District #3 is designed to address zoning issues in this location and is not intended to be applicable to other areas unless the Zoning Code is amended in accordance with the procedures set forth in the Charter of the city. In the T District #3, all zoning regulations applicable to the Residence “A” District shall remain in effect until such time as approval may be given to a final T District #3 development plan for the lot or parcel.
(D) Development Plan Required. Redevelopment of the property shall require a development plan which includes necessary public improvements. The development plan requirements are listed in division (G) below.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
76
7722743.2
(E) Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
BUFFERYARD
An area of healthy and viable vegetation, natural or planted, installed and maintained for the purposes of separating and screening the effects of a higher intensity land use upon a lower intensity land use. The BUFFERYARD is to be placed within the setbacks, as described herein, and is to contain only vegetation; and no part of the BUFFERYARD is to be used for parking or driveways.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACES
Surfaces (e.g., parking lots and rooftops) covered by impenetrable materials such as asphalt, concrete, brick and stone.
INDEPENDENT LIVING BUILDING
A building which contains complete housing units for individual use, each including kitchen, bathroom, living room and at least one bedroom. Transportation services and facilities such as congregate dining, social gathering areas, library, prayer chapel and exercise room may also be included. No nursing type facilities are included.
(F) Permitted Uses.
(1) As a matter of right, those buildings and uses permitted in the underlying Residence “A” District shall be permitted in accordance with all applicable regulations of that underlying district, until such time as buildings and uses authorized by a T District #3 development plan are approved. Thereafter, only those buildings and uses approved for a T District #3 development plan shall be valid on the property. The transition from original uses to T District #3 uses shall be in accordance with the schedule for construction approved as part of the T District #3 application. Failure to complete the improvements and obtain a final certificate of occupancy within the approved time frame, including any authorized extensions, shall cause the approval of the T District #3 development plan to lapse, and the site shall revert to only buildings and uses permitted in the underlying district.
(2) Multi-family residential uses, including attached townhouses, pursuant to a T District #3 development plan, subject to review and approval in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, that meet the following standards:
(a) Two and twenty-four one hundredths acres minimum site size;
(b) No more than 15 dwelling units per acre calculated on the entire gross acreage of the development site;
(c) One hundred-foot minimum setback from the side property line to the south;
(d) Ten-foot minimum setback from the side property line to the north;
(e) Ten-foot minimum rear yard setback from the east property line abutting a nonresidential use;
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
77
7722743.2
(f) Fifty-foot minimum rear yard setback from the east property line abutting a residential use;
(g) Thirty-foot minimum attractively landscaped setback from Hosbrook Road which includes a combination of grass, groundcover and trees, and does not interfere with visibility for drivers entering and exiting the property;
(h) Twenty-five-foot minimum landscaped bufferyard within the 100-foot and 50-foot setbacks, pursuant to division (I)(8) herein;
(i) Minimum unit size of 750 square feet;
(j) Minimum of two enclosed parking spaces per unit; and
(k) Minimum of one visitor parking space per unit that can either be enclosed or a surface parking lot.
(3) Independent living for adults age 55 and older, defined as in division (E) above, pursuant to a T District #3 development plan, subject to review and approval in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, that meet the following standards:
(a) Two and twenty-four one hundredths acres minimum site size;
(b) No more than 15 dwelling units per acre calculated on the entire gross acreage of the development site;
(c) One hundred-foot minimum setback from the side property line to the south;
(d) Ten-foot minimum setback from the side property line to the north;
(e) Ten-foot minimum rear yard setback from the east property line abutting a nonresidential use;
(f) Fifty-foot minimum rear yard setback from the east property line abutting a residential use;
(g) Thirty-foot minimum attractively landscaped setback from Hosbrook Road which includes a combination of grass, groundcover, and trees, and does not interfere with visibility for drivers entering and exiting the property;
(h) Twenty-five-foot minimum landscaped bufferyard within the 100-foot and 50-foot setbacks, pursuant to division (I)(8) herein ;
(i) Minimum unit size of 750 square feet;
(j) Minimum of one enclosed parking space per unit; and
(k) Minimum of seven employee parking spaces and one visitor parking space per unit that can either be enclosed or a surface parking lot.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
78
7722743.2
(4) Offices for professional use (such as attorneys, doctors, architects, dentists, and engineers) and office-type business uses (such as real estate, insurance and manufacturers’ representatives). Activities which are normal, necessary and subordinate to the office use listed herein shall be permitted. Examples of such activities include the preparation of dental supplies for patients, examination of and treatment of patients of a physician, meeting with clients and provision of services by attorneys and insurance representatives, and closings held at a real estate office. There shall be no permitted use of such offices that is not clearly within the types of activities described herein.
(a) Offices converted from residential structures existing at the time of adoption of these T District #3 regulations for which no expansion or other exterior changes are proposed must meet the following standards:
(i) One parking space for each 500 square feet of gross office space;
(ii) Compliance with all other parking requirements of § 150.24 of the City Zoning
(iii) Code;
(iv) New parking areas abutting a residence use must not be placed within 25 feet of the property; and
(v) Some submission requirements may be waived by the City Manager.
(b) Offices which are new construction must meet the following standards:
(i) Two and twenty-four one hundredths acres minimum site size;
(ii) One hundred-foot minimum setback from the side property line to the south;
(iii) Ten-foot minimum side yard setback from the side property line to the north;
(iv) Ten-foot minimum rear yard setback from the east property line abutting a nonresidential use;
(v) Fifty-foot minimum rear yard setback from the east property line abutting a residential use;
(vi) Thirty-foot minimum attractively landscaped setback from Hosbrook Road which includes a combination of grass, groundcover, and trees, and does not interfere with visibility for drivers entering and exiting the property;
(vii) Twenty-five-foot minimum landscaped bufferyard within the 100-foot and 50-foot setbacks pursuant to division (I)(8) herein ; and
(viii) Must comply with all requirements of § 150.24 regarding parking.
(5) Accessory buildings and uses may be permitted if approved by the Planning Commission as being consistent with the purposes and provisions of this chapter.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
79
7722743.2
(G) Development Plan Requirements.
(1) Full size plat of development, drawn to a scale of one inch equals 50 feet, with north arrow, and identification of site in relation to adjacent main roads;
(2) Existing and proposed property lines, and dimensions and acreage of the proposed development, certified by a licensed engineer or registered surveyor;
(3) Existing and proposed topography at two-foot contour intervals prepared and certified by a registered surveyor;
(4) Footprints of existing structures on lots to be developed and all adjacent lots, with notations for proposed demolition of any structures;
(5) Footprints of all proposed structures;
(6) All proposed setbacks, indicating dimension and distance from property lines to proposed structures, including decks, porches and patios;
(7) Location and dimension of all parking areas and facilities, park or playground areas, vehicular and pedestrian ways, other common areas, and all other impermeable public or private paved surfaces;
(8) Location and dimension of all entrances into and exits from the development;
(9) Information on all signage to be located on the property pursuant to the City Sign Code and application;
(10) Location, construction material, illumination in footcandles of all proposed lighting, and photometric study;
(11) Location of dumpsters, with required sufficient screening, and location of mailboxes;
(12) Location of all utilities, and location and directional flow of existing and proposed water and sanitary sewers and areas for on-site water retention and detention;
(13) Elevations of proposed structures, including notation for proposed building height;
(14) A landscape plan including the following:
(a) The location of all existing vegetation, noting whether it will remain or not;
(b) The location of proposed bufferyards, landscaping and screening, including trees, flower beds, shrubs, mounding, grass and open space, and all irrigation devices for the landscaping; and
(c) A table listing the common and botanical names of all proposed plants to be planted or retained on the site pursuant to division (I)(9) herein.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
80
7722743.2
(15) Traffic circulation and access including adequacy of adjacent streets, entrances and exits, traffic flow, sight distance, curb cuts, turning lanes and existing or recommended traffic signalization, and emergency vehicle access.
(H) Additional Submission Requirements.
(1) A traffic management plan, provided by a licensed engineer, that includes but is not limited to a traffic count along Hosbrook Road, prior to development, and a projection of the traffic impact after development, illustrating line of sight issues, alignment with driveways or streets on Hosbrook Road, identification of sight-distance issues related to access to the proposed development, and distance to adjacent driveways on Hosbrook Road;
(2) A statement explaining in detail the use to which the property shall be put and the anticipated effect which the proposed development shall have upon adjacent property;
(3) A letter from MSD indicating the availability of sewer service;
(4) A legal description of the lots;
(5) A description of all exterior building materials and colors;
(6) A schedule for construction, and cost estimates for the completion of the development including all public and private improvements;
(7) Plans, if any, to dedicate any streets or other property to the city;
(8) A performance bond or other acceptable security and other legal data to ensure completion of streets, bufferyard and amenities in accordance with the accepted plans may be required for the final development plan; and
(9) The development plan shall provide a written acknowledgment that all landscaping, screening, mounding, buffering, structure drives, and parking areas and buildings shall be maintained in first class condition, to the satisfaction of the City Manager and his or her designee, and that failure to so maintain these items shall be a violation of this Zoning Code, enforceable in all ways available in law and equity as any other violation of the City Zoning Code.
(I) General Standards For T District #3 Development Plan Approval. The active use of property and the design of the buildings in the T District #3 shall only be approved if the Planning Commission determines that they do not significantly create an adverse influence on any abutting or surrounding properties; provide for an orderly transition from more restrictive (residential) to less restrictive districts; and if the plan is designed to maximize the public interest and private benefit in a balanced manner. The following standards apply to all uses:
(1) Waste disposal dumpsters and any other ground level mechanical units must be shielded by suitable fencing/landscaping as approved by the ARO;
(2) Any rooftop mechanical units including satellite dishes must be shielded from residential areas and approved by the ARO;
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
81
7722743.2
(3) The site must maintain an impervious surface ratio of 60% (ISR = total area of buildings and impervious surface areas divided by the total area of the lot) or 40% open space;
(4) Maximum height permitted is 827 feet above mean sea level (includes rooftop mechanicals which must be screened as stated above in division (I)(2) above);
(5) Loading areas must be to the rear of the site;
(6) Exterior lighting shall be kept low (-0- footcandles net increase at property line abutting residential district or use) and shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts or use with house side shields;
(7) New parking areas shall be placed, where practical and feasible, behind the building, with parking in the front of the building limited to short term pick-up and drop off and valet parking. Parking areas which must be placed to the side or rear of the buildings shall be softened by the placement of landscaping islands in order to reduce the visual mass of impervious surface and parked motor vehicles;
(8) Landscaping shall be installed in the bufferyard which creates a physical and visual buffer from adjoining properties, and for this purpose, a combination of live plantings shall be planted within the side and rear yard setbacks and described herein, according to acceptable nursery industry standards and shall comply with the following criteria:
(a) All landscaping materials shall consist of only live plantings, and shall be installed and maintained according to accepted nursery industry procedures;
(b) Landscaping materials shall be of sufficient height to block the line of sight of any residential areas adjacent to the T District #3 site. Mounding may be included as part of the line of sight screening. The line of sight shall be from a ten-foot height located in all points along the residential property line which abuts the T District #3 development;
(c) Landscaping planted within the bufferyard shall create a dense vegetative screen, which shall be equally effective in winter and summer;
(d) Shrubs planted in the bufferyard shall be a minimum height of three and one-half feet when planted, and shall achieve a height of six feet, no later than 24 months after the initial installation;
(e) When required landscaping is located along the area extending from the building to the street, the height shall be consistent with sight distance from the street for safety purposes;
(f) Each shrub shall be planted sufficiently close to the next shrub, according to nursery industry standards, to provide an effective, dense screen;
(g) Deciduous trees shall be a minimum caliper of three inches at the time of planting (if deciduous trees are used for screening purposes, additional materials must be used to create a dense buffer);
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
82
7722743.2
(h) Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of eight feet in height at the time of planting; and
(i) No driveways or parking areas shall be placed within the bufferyard;
(9) Access to these properties shall be limited to Hosbrook Road only;
(10) Developments are encouraged to limit the number of curb cuts per site;
(11) If there is a conflict between the requirements in the T District #3 and the parking regulations, the T District #3 requirements will supersede the underlying requirements; and
(12) Violation of these provisions shall be grounds for the city to refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy.
(J) Submission and Review of Site Development Plan.
(1) Application Procedure.
(a) Any person or company intending to develop a use other than a single-family residential use must apply for approval of a T District #3 development plan, and shall first schedule a pre-application conference with the City Manager or his or her assignee. At this conference, the prospective applicant must present in writing to the City Manager a preliminary proposal for the development plan.
(b) The purpose of the pre-application conference will be to, generally, evaluate the impact on adjacent areas and neighborhoods and identify the benefits achieved, such as better use of property, stabilizing future changes and providing a transition area. This information should also identify the adjoining property owners and any existing nonconforming uses.
(c) Upon completion of the pre-application conference an application may be filed with the office of the City Manager. The application shall be in compliance with the requirements of this chapter and in such form as approved by the City Manager. If the application does not conform with the requirements of this chapter, the applicant shall be notified by the City Manager and no further consideration of the application shall occur until it is in compliance with the terms of this chapter.
(2) Public Hearing and Decision.
(a) Upon receipt of an application in the format prescribed by this chapter, the City Manager shall forward the application to the Planning Commission for consideration. The Planning Commission shall review said T District #3 development plan and shall hold a public hearing on such application. Notice of such hearing shall be sent to all property owners within 200 feet of the proposed T District #3 development not less than ten days prior to the scheduled hearing.
(b) Subsequent to the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall either approve the T District #3 development plan as submitted, approve a modified plan with conditions, or deny approval of the plan. Five members of the Planning Commission must vote in
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
83
7722743.2
the affirmative to approve any such application either as submitted or modified. Approval of this plan shall be considered approval of a preliminary T District #3 development plan. Approval of the preliminary development plan shall not constitute any authority to proceed with construction or development. Such approval shall only authorize the applicant to submit a proposed final development plan.
(c) A proposed final T District #3 development plan shall be submitted within six months of the date of the Planning Commission meeting at which the preliminary plan was approved. The Planning Commission may extend this period for a reasonable period upon a showing of good cause by the applicant. The final plan must be substantially consistent with the preliminary development plan in all respects. If the Planning Commission finds that a proposed final plan of a development area is in substantial accordance with and represents a detailed expansion of the preliminary plan, as previously approved, that the final plan complies with all of the conditions and adjustments which may have been imposed in the approval of the preliminary plan, that it is in accordance with the criteria and provisions and purpose of this chapter and this code, that all agreements, contracts, deed restrictions, dedications, declaration of ownership and other required documents are in acceptable form and have been executed, that all fee payments have been made, then the Planning Commission shall approve such final plan and certify its approval to the City Manager and City Council. Certification of the approval shall be for informational purposes only.
(d) Following the approval of a final plan, the City Manager shall issue such permits as are necessary and under his or her jurisdiction upon payment of the required fees.
(3) Amendment of Plan.
(a) A major amendment of an existing plan shall require review and approval of the Planning Commission in the same manner and with the same requirements imposed by this chapter for approval of an original T District #3 development plan. A major amendment shall include any change of use from one category to another as listed in division (F) hereof; any increase in the impervious area of coverage in excess of 5% over the amount approved in the original plan; the enlargement of any building from that originally approved; or the consolidation of use of adjoining T District #3 development plans.
(b) Minor amendments to a T District #3 development plan must be approved by the City Manager and the ARO. Either official may refer the request for approval of a minor amendment to the Planning Commission if the official determines that the request should be considered a major amendment. Minor amendments shall include internal changes to buildings and structures; changes to the front of a building; changes to signs which are not being enlarged and are consistent with what was previously approved by the Planning Commission; amendments to the drainage pattern; or replacement of existing lighting provided it remains effectively shielded. A minor amendment shall also include any change of use that does not change the category of use as those categories are set forth in division (F) hereof.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
84
7722743.2
(4) Contingent-Approval Permitted. In circumstances where an applicant needs a variance from the requirements of this Code, the Planning Commission may provide contingent-approval of a Final Application for a development plan. Such contingent-approval shall mean their approval of the Final Application is subject to the applicant obtaining any required variance(s) from the Board of Zoning Appeals. If the Planning Commission provides contingent-approval of a Final Application and the Board of Zoning Appeals subsequently denies the applicant’s requested variance(s), said denial shall constitute a rejection of the Final Application.
(5) Appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals. Pursuant to this section, if the Planning Commission, City Manager or ARO deny an applicant’s request for approval of a development plan or an amendment to a previously-approved development plan, such applicant may appeal the decision denying their request to the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(a) Timing of Appeal. The applicant appealing the decision must provide notice of his or her intent to appeal such decision to the Planning Commission and the Board of Zoning Appeals within thirty (30) days of the Planning Commission’s provision of written notification of its denial to the applicant.
(b) Hearing on Appeal. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hold a public hearing, evaluating the appeal based upon the standards of review applied by the Planning Commission to the initial conditional use application, within sixty (60) days of receiving applicant’s notice of appeal.
(Ord. 10-22, passed 2-14-2011)
§ 150.41 BALCONIES, DECKS, LANDINGS/STOOPS, PORCHES, AND RAMPS.
(A) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish standards for the construction or reconstruction of porches, decks and other structures that may be attached to the principal dwelling units within the city. Building materials as well as the style of construction of such structures determine whether the structure adds to the value of the residence and the surrounding properties or detracts such value. It is also the purpose of this section to identify certain modest structures that serve a useful purpose and provide minimal visual impact from surrounding properties. Such minimal structures are intended to be exempt from the zoning setback requirements, provided they meet the standards set forth in this section. The structures identified in this regulation are intended to be regulated in such a manner as to protect or increase the value of residential properties within the city, while permitting reasonable use of properties in a manner that enhances the residential lifestyle. This section shall also provide guidance to the Planning Commission and the administration in determining if a proposed structure conforms to the Zoning Code or whether a variance needs to be requested.
(B) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
BALCONY
An exterior floor system projecting from an adjoining structure that is attached to or supported by the adjoining structure, with no additional independent supports. A balcony may be covered or uncovered.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
85
7722743.2
DECK
An exterior floor system constructed of wood, metal, composite or other like material, which is either attached to or detached from the principal building or dwelling and is supported by an adjoining structure and/or posts, piers or other independent supports. A deck attached to or detached from the principal building or dwelling shall be included in calculations for maximum lot coverage set out in Table C.1 of § 150.29.
LANDING OR STOOP
An elevated, open structure that is located at the head or foot of a staircase or ramp, or a platform in a flight of stairs or ramp. Landings and stoops are exempt from rear and side yard setback requirements set out in Table C.1 of § 150.29. Landings and stoops located in a front yard setback must be constructed of concrete or masonry.
PORCH
An open structure entirely covered with a roof and attached to the principal building or dwelling.
RAMP
A sloping walkway or passage used to join and provide a smooth transition between two levels of different elevations.
(C) Requirements and Permitted Location of Structures. The following requirements shall apply to the above-mentioned structures.
(1) Decks or Ramps.
(a) A deck or ramp may be erected in the side or rear yard only, unless such ramp or deck is for resident’s medical necessity, and constructed in compliance with The Americans with Disability Act, 42 U.S.C. § 12101, et seq.
(b) A deck or ramp shall meet all the setback requirements for the rear and side yard, unless such ramp or deck is for resident’s medical necessity, and constructed in compliance with The Americans with Disability Act, 42 U.S.C. § 12101, et seq.
(c) If the deck or ramp encroaches within the minimum rear or side yard setback and thus requires a variance, it shall meet the following standards.
(i) The deck or ramp materials must be finished with paint or an opaque stain and shall not include raw decking material.
(ii) The deck or ramp must have skirting or an apron at the bottom.
(2) Landings or Stoops.
(a) The landing or stoop may be located in the front, side or rear yards.
(b) A landing or stoop is exempt from the setback requirements and cannot be built more than four feet from the principal building or dwelling or accessory building or structure to which it abuts and shall not be any larger than 36 square feet.
(3) Porches.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
86
7722743.2
(a) A porch may be erected in the front, side or rear yards.
(b) A porch shall meet all the setback requirements as stipulated in these regulations.
(c) A porch shall be a one-story structure.
(d) If the porch encroaches within the front, side or rear yard setback and thus requires a variance, it shall meet the following standards.
(i) If constructed of wood or similar material, the porch must be finished with paint or an opaque stain and shall not include raw decking material.
(ii) The porch must have skirting or an apron at the bottom.
(iii) The porch must contain appropriate roofing materials that are compatible with the design of the porch or principal building or dwelling.
(iv) The porch flooring materials must be constructed from concrete, masonry or finished tongue-and-groove type wood or composite flooring.
(4) Balconies.
(a) A balcony may be erected in the front, side or rear yards.
(b) A balcony shall meet all the setback requirements as stipulated in these regulations.
(c) If a balcony encroaches within the front, side or rear yard setback and thus requires a variance, it shall meet the following standards.
(i) If constructed of wood or similar material, the balcony must be finished with paint or an opaque stain and shall not include raw decking material.
(ii) The balcony flooring materials must be constructed from concrete, masonry or finished tongue-and-groove type wood or composite flooring.
(1985 Code, § 150.35) (Ord. 05-22, passed 12-12-2005)
§ 150.42 TRANSITIONAL RESIDENTIAL OVERLAY DISTRICT
(A) Intent and Purpose
(1) It is the intent of the Transitional Residential Overlay District (hereinafter referred to as the “TRO District”) to designate an area of the city for increased density of residential development, to provide more housing options while maintaining the value and quality of the city’s housing stock.
(2) The existing Residence B single-family zoning within the District shall remain intact but the designated areas shall be eligible for increased density of residential development provided the criteria, conditions and requirements set forth in this section are met as determined by and
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
87
7722743.2
as established by the city Planning Commission, following approval of an application for a Transitional Residential Overlay Development Plan within the TRO District.
(3) A TRO District Development Plan must be submitted to the Planning Commission, and must be initiated or authorized in writing by the property owner(s); the Planning Commission may approve, approve with modifications, or deny the detailed specific TRO Plan submitted with the application.
(4) The creation of the TRO District on the south side of Euclid Avenue between Miami Avenue and Laurel Avenue, recognizes the following unique factors which are compatible with alternative, higher density single family housing development:
(a) Commercial uses on Laurel Avenue, abutting the TRO District to the south;
(b) The high level of traffic in the intersection of Miami and Euclid, occupied by an office, the municipal building, a fire station, and a library;
(c) A power station, and additional business uses to the east; and
(d) The high level of traffic on the two lane primary street (Euclid Avenue) to the north.
(B) Applicability. This TRO District is established as an overlay district superimposed on specific areas, including the existing Residence “B” district, designated on Exhibit “A” attached to Ordinance No. 08-05, passed on February 28, 2008 and is not intended to be applicable to other areas unless the zoning code is amended in accordance with the procedures set forth in the Charter of the City of Madeira.
(C) Permitted Uses.
(1) Permitted uses in the TRO District shall be those uses permitted in the underlying Residence “B” District, which allows single-family detached residences.
(2) In addition, permitted uses in the TRO District shall include “attached townhouse” style residences, with a minimum of 1,000 square feet of floor area. For the purposes of this section, FLOOR AREA shall only include first floor and above living areas. Floor areas of garages, cellars and basements shall not be included in the calculation of total floor area.
(a) An ATTACHED TOWNHOUSE STYLE RESIDENCE is defined as a residential structure in which each dwelling unit has its own entrance and exit, and each unit occupies the ground level on at least one floor.
(b) No structure is permitted to consist of more than four attached townhouses, except for buildings referenced under division (G)(9) herein.
(D) Conditional and Home Office Uses. Conditional uses in the TRO District shall be the same as those for other residential districts pursuant to § 150.13 and home offices, pursuant to § 150.12.
(E) Accessory Structures Not Allowed. Except for fences identified and approved as part of the development plan, detached accessory structures, including detached parking structures shall not be
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
88
7722743.2
allowed on the subject property anywhere within the TRO District, unless the property is used in accordance with Residence B zoning.
(F) TRO Development Plan Submission Requirements. The TRO development plan shall be prepared, and stamped if appropriate by licensed professional persons qualified in the planning of land development, traffic engineering and building and landscape design. No plan shall be approved by Planning Commission unless all of the criteria set forth below are met. A TRO development plan may only be adopted upon determination that all the information set forth below has been provided in the application (which shall include the proposed site plan) and is in compliance (as determined by the Planning Commission) with the criteria set forth below.
(1) Site Plan Requirements.
(a) Full size plat of development, drawn to a scale of one inch equals 50 feet, north arrow, and identification of site in relation to adjacent main roads;
(b) Existing and proposed property lines, and dimensions and acreage of the proposed development, certified by a registered engineer or surveyor;
(c) Existing and proposed topography at two-foot contour intervals prepared and stamped by a licensed surveyor;
(d) Footprints of existing structures on lots to be developed and all adjacent lots, with notations for proposed demolition of any structures;
(e) Footprints of all proposed structures;
(f) All proposed setbacks, indicating dimension and distance from property lines to proposed structures, including decks, porches and patios;
(g) Location and dimension of all parking facilities, park or playground areas, vehicular and pedestrian ways, other common areas, and all other impermeable public or private paved surfaces;
(h) Location and dimension of all entrances into and exits from the development;
(i) Location, construction materials, illumination and dimension of all proposed signage and lighting;
(j) Location of dumpsters, with required sufficient screening, and location of mailboxes;
(k) Location of all utilities, and location and directional flow of existing and proposed water lines, storm and sanitary sewers, and areas for on-site water retention and detention (see list below, approval contingent upon approval of the Metropolitan Sewer District);
(l) Elevations of proposed structures, including notation for proposed building height;
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
89
7722743.2
(m) Location of all existing vegetation, noting whether it will remain or not, and proposed landscaping and screening, including trees, flower beds, shrubs, mounding, grass and open space, as well as location of all irrigation devices for the landscaping;
(n) Elevations of all proposed vegetation, and a table listing the common and botanical names of all proposed plants to be planted or retained on the site;
(o) Traffic circulation and access including adequacy of adjacent streets, entrances and exits, traffic flow, sight distance, curb cuts, turning lanes and existing or recommended traffic signalization, and emergency vehicle access; and
(p) Public sidewalks which shall be maintained and/or extended wherever proposed development is adjacent to Euclid Avenue.
(2) Additional Submission Requirements.
(a) A traffic management plan, provided by a licensed engineer, that includes but is not limited to a traffic count along Euclid Avenue, prior to development, and a projection of the traffic impact after development, illustrating line of sight issues, alignment with driveways or streets on the north side of Euclid Avenue, identification of sight-distance issues related to access to the proposed development, and distance to adjacent driveways on the south side of Euclid Avenue;
(b) A notarized statement explaining in detail the use to which the property shall be put and the anticipated effect which the proposed development shall have upon adjacent property;
(c) A letter from MSD indicating the availability of sewer service;
(d) A legal description of the lots;
(e) A description of all exterior building materials and colors;
(f) A plant list (an accepted plant list from the city may be used) indicating the common name and botanical name of plants shown on the development site plan;
(g) A schedule for construction, and cost estimates for the completion of the development including all public and private improvements, and landscaping;
(h) Plans, if any, to dedicate any streets or other property to the city;
(i) A performance bond or other acceptable security and other legal data to ensure completion of streets, buffer and amenities in accordance with the accepted plans; and
(j) The ratio of pervious to impervious surface areas.
(G) TRO Development Plan Criteria. The Planning Commission may not approve any TRO Development unless it has been reviewed by the Architectural Review Officer (ARO), and meets all of the criteria set forth below:
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
90
7722743.2
(1) Density of the TRO development shall be limited to no more than ten dwelling units per acre, calculated on the entire (gross acreage of the) development site;
(2) The plan shall depict a ten-foot minimum side and rear yard landscaped setback from property lines which abut a commercial use or commercial zone;
(3) The plan shall depict a 15-foot minimum side and rear yard landscaped setback from property lines where the subject property abuts a residential use or zoning district;
(4) The plan shall depict a 2-foot minimum front yard landscaped setback from the right-of-way (Euclid Avenue);
(5) The plan shall depict a minimum of ten feet between structures;
(6) Structures fronting on Euclid Avenue shall be no more than 35 feet in height, measured from the existing pre-development grade on Euclid Avenue to the peak of the roof, at the front of each dwelling unit; structures not adjacent to Euclid Avenue shall be no more than 35 feet in height, measured from the grade established alter the installation of the street and utilities;
(7) Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum of two enclosed parking spaces, and, in addition, a minimum of two unenclosed parking spaces per unit available on site. Garage doors shall not face directly onto Euclid Avenue;
(8) The architect/artist rendering of buildings and the landscaping must provide evidence to the Planning Commission that such buildings and landscaping shall be designed and built in such a manner as to be compatible with the look and feel of single-family dwelling units, and Planning Commission will take into consideration the orientation and finishes of all buildings relative to the surrounding properties; flat roofs are not deemed to be compatible with the look and feel of single-family dwelling units; therefore pitched roofs shall be required on all buildings constructed in accordance with the TRO District;
(9) The massing of buildings adjacent to the frontage of Euclid Avenue shall be controlled such that no more than three units shall be constructed as one single building, and all buildings adjacent to Euclid Avenue shall have their architectural front facing toward Euclid Avenue;
(10) Architectural features shall incorporate such characteristics and materials as are normally associated with single-family residential homes, and must be approved by the ARO as being in character with the surrounding residential areas; neither exterior insulation finishing system (“EIFS”), nor aluminum, nor vinyl siding materials shall be permitted;
(11) Landscaping shall be installed which creates a physical and visual buffer from adjoining properties, and for this purpose, a combination of live plantings shall be planted within the front, side and rear yard setbacks, and common areas, shall be planted according to acceptable nursery industry standards; and shall comply with the following criteria:
(a) All landscaping materials shall consist of only live plantings, and shall be installed and maintained according to accepted nursery industry procedures;
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
91
7722743.2
(b) Landscaping planted within the side and rear setbacks of the TRO development site shall create a dense vegetative screen, which shall be equally effective in winter and summer;
(c) Shrubs planted in the side and rear setback areas of the TRO development site shall be a minimum height of three and one-half feet when planted, and shall achieve a height of six feet, no later than 24 months after the initial installation;
(d) When the required screening is located along the area extending from the building to the street, the height shall be consistent with sight distance from the street for safety purposes;
(e) Each shrub shall be planted sufficiently close to the next shrub, according to nursery industry standards, to provide an effective, dense screen;
(f) Deciduous trees shall be a minimum caliper of three inches at the time of planting (if deciduous trees are used for screening purposes, additional materials must be used to create a dense buffer);
(g) Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of eight feet in height at the time of planting; and
(h) Violation of these provisions shall be grounds for the city to refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy.
(12) Air conditioning units and dumpsters must be shielded from view by suitable fencing and or landscaping as determined reasonable by the ARO;
(13) Exterior lighting shall be minimal and limited to that necessary for safety, and shielding; height and overflow of lighting shall be analyzed and only approved if it minimizes impact onto adjacent property, and as determined reasonable by the ARO;
(14) Storm water drainage must be based upon a minimum of 25-year storm frequency, utilizing on-site absorption and/or temporary detention;
(15) The plan shall depict a public sidewalk which shall be maintained and/or installed parallel with Euclid Avenue wherever the applicant’s property is adjacent to Euclid Avenue;
(16) (a) Dwelling units within the subject property need not be located on separate lots or separate units divided by lot lines; and dwelling units, including garages, may share common walls. Subject property that is within a Transitional Residential Overlay District may be developed as a condominium provided the development adheres to the applicable requirements of the Ohio Revised Code and the requirements of this section. If the developer intends to subdivide the property, it may request approval for subdivision either as part of the final development plan approval process or subsequent to the Planning Commission’s approval of the final development plan. However, the subdivision of the property shall only be authorized as incidental and accessory to the requirements for buildings, infrastructure, easements and other physical features that conform to the requirements and criteria set forth elsewhere in these Transitional Residential Overlay District regulations. Therefore, no subdivision
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
92
7722743.2
of property intended for development pursuant to the regulations of this section shall be permitted prior to approval of a final development plan that meets the requirements of this Transitional Residential Overlay District. The purpose of this requirement is to prohibit the establishment of any new lot that does not meet the dimensional and other requirements of the underlying zoning district (including but not limited to minimum area, depth and width), unless the lot is part of a final development plan approved in accordance with this section.
(b) Thus, approval of any lots that are intended to be part of a Transitional Residential Overlay District is specifically conditioned upon the lot being developed in accordance with final development plans approved in accordance with the Transitional Residential Overlay District regulations. There shall be no zoning certificate, building permit nor any certificate of occupancy issued for any lot that has been created as part of a Transitional Residential Overly District unless the improvements are substantially consistent with the final development plan. Furthermore, all plats depicting a subdivision of land, in whole or in part, of a final development plan shall contain thereon an appropriate executed declaration limiting development of lots to only buildings and improvements depicted on an approved final development plan.
(c) This amendment to this section specifically finds that the lots depicted on Exhibit A (attached hereto and incorporated as part of the amendment to this section) do, in fact, comply with the requirements of this section and may, therefore, be approved for recording as long as the lots submitted substantially comply with those depicted on Exhibit A.
(d) Any and all lots proposed to be created as part of a final development plan in a Transitional Residential Overlay shall comply with the following criteria:
(i) The creation of the lots shall not alter any of the building layouts or other improvements, including but not limited to roadways, sidewalks, easements and fences depicted on the applicable final development plan approved for the Transitional Residential Overlay District by the Planning Commission;
(ii) The establishment of any and all lots shall not alter or lessen the responsibility of the homeowners’ association to maintain or construct the infrastructure and other improvements and grounds that exist within the common areas of the Transitional Residential Overlay District; and
(iii) No property line proposed or approved on a final development plan shall intersect with dwelling units except to track a common wall.
(17) It is recognized that the unique lots created within the Transitional Residential Overlay District, in furtherance of the final development plan, do not meet numerous requirements for lots that may be created in other residential districts. The lots do not meet minimum requirements of other lots within the city in residential districts. For example, these lots within the Transitional Residential District do not meet frontage requirements, minimum area requirement, minimum setback requirement, shape requirements and other requirements not
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
93
7722743.2
specifically named herein which are required in other residential districts. The approval of lots within the Transitional Overlay District shall not be construed as permitting or authorizing any other lots to be approved by variance or by other application for subdivision of other property not located within this Transitional Residential Overlay District.
(18) While this amendment authorizes the subdivision of property within the area of a final development plan formed within a Transitional Residential Overlay District, it is recognized and assumed that the developer may apply for record plat approval of lots in phases as small as two lots at a time. The City Manager shall issue any necessary documentation to allow these lots to be recorded at the County Auditor and Recorders’ offices, provided the record plat submitted for review is substantially consistent with the lots depicted on Exhibit A or on any other lots approved in conjunction with any other final development plan approved within this Transitional Residential Overlay District.
(19) This division (G) establishes certain setback and landscaping criteria that must be satisfied by a final development plan. The establishment of additional interior lot lines do not alter the minimum setbacks and landscaping requirements set forth in this division (G). The requirements of division (G) should not be construed to be applied to any interior lots proposed or created.
(H) Application and Review. The applicant submitting a TRO development plan shall, in the application, address all the criteria set forth above. The applicant may identify certain portions of any criteria if it intends to supplement the information at a later time. The application shall contain an acknowledgment by the applicant that Planning Commission shall not be bound nor shall it be permitted to make a final decision until such time as the information necessary to satisfy the requirements of each criteria is presented in sufficient detail. The application shall also provide an acknowledgment by the applicant that if Planning Commission modifies or composes conditions for the approval of an application, no final approval shall be granted until documents or other evidence indicating compliance with the modifications or conditions has been incorporated into the application, submitted and reviewed by Planning Commission, before final approval by Planning Commission is determined.
(1) Application Procedure.
(a) Any person or company intending to apply for approval of a TRO District Development Plan shall first schedule a pre-application conference with the City Manager or his or her designee. At this conference, the prospective applicant must present in writing to the City Manager a preliminary proposal for a TRO District development plan.
(b) The purpose of the pre-application conference will be to, generally, evaluate the impact on adjacent areas and neighborhoods and identify the benefits achieved, such as better use of property, stabilizing future changes and providing a transition area. This information should also identify the adjoining property owners and any existing non-conforming uses.
(c) Upon completion of the pre-application conference an application may be filed with the office of the City Manager. The application shall be in compliance with the
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
94
7722743.2
requirements of this chapter and in such form as approved by the City Manager. If the application does not conform to the requirements of this chapter, the applicant shall be notified by the City Manager and no further consideration of the application shall occur until it is in compliance with the terms of this chapter.
(2) Public Hearing and Decision.
(a) Upon receipt of an application in the format prescribed by this chapter; the City Manager shall forward the application to the Planning Commission for consideration. The Planning Commission shall review said TRO District development plan and shall hold a public hearing on such application. Notice of such hearing shall be sent to all property owners within 200 feet of the proposed TRO District Development not less than ten days prior to the scheduled hearing.
(b) Subsequent to the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall either approve the TRO District development plan as submitted, approve a modified plan with conditions, or deny approval of the plan. Five members of Planning Commission must vote in the affirmative to approve any such application either as submitted or modified. Approval of this plan shall be considered approval of a preliminary TRO District development plan. Approval of the preliminary development plan shall not constitute any authority to proceed with construction or development. Such approval shall only authorize the applicant to submit a proposed final development plan.
(c) A proposed final TRO District development plan shall be submitted within six months of the date of the Planning Commission meeting at which the preliminary plan was approved. The Planning Commission may extend this period for a reasonable period upon a showing of good cause by the applicant. The final plan must be substantially consistent with the preliminary plan in all respects. If the Planning Commission finds that a proposed final plan of a development area is in substantial accordance with and represents a detailed version of the preliminary plan, as previously approved, that the final plan complies with all of the conditions and adjustments which may have been imposed in the approval of the preliminary plan, that it is in accordance with the criteria and provisions and purpose of this chapter and this code, that all agreements, contracts, deed restrictions, dedications, declarations of ownership and other required documents are in acceptable form and have been executed, that all fee payments have been made, then the Planning Commission shall approve such final plan and certify its approval to the City Manager and City Council. Certification of the approval shall be for informational purposes only.
(d) Following the approval of a final plan, the City Manager shall issue such permits as are necessary and under his or her jurisdiction, upon payment of the required fees, and conditioned upon the receipt and approval by the City Law Director of the homeowner’s association by-laws and the declarations of covenants and restrictions which shall require the continued property maintenance of all landscaping material and shall keep them in a proper neat and orderly appearance free from refuse and debris at all times and all unhealthy or dead plant material shall be replaced within a one year or by the next planting period, and shall provide for the maintenance of all landscaping, screening, mounding, buffering, structures, drives and parking areas, and
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
95
7722743.2
buildings; and that failure to do so shall be a violation of this Zoning Code enforceable in all ways in law or in equity as any other violation of the Zoning Code.
(3) Major Amendments of the Plan. A major amendment of an existing plan shall require a review and approval of the Planning Commission in the same manner and with the same requirements imposed by this chapter for approval of an original TRO District development plan. A major amendment shall include:
(a) Any increase in the impervious area coverage in excess of 5% of the amount approved in the original plan;
(b) The enlargement of any building from the size originally approved, or the consolidation of use of adjoining TRO District development plans;
(c) A change in the arrangement or massing of buildings or any changes in the use of building spaces designated on the original development plan;
(d) An increase in the number of residential units;
(e) A change in the vehicular circulation or the placement or arrangement of parking spaces;
(f) Any significant reduction in the effectiveness of open spaces, landscape buffers and edges; and
(g) Any significant change in the design elevations, roof pitch, materials or massing of the buildings.
(4) Minor Amendments of the Plan. A TRO District development plan must be approved by the City Manager and the ARO. In any event, all applications for minor amendments shall be in writing and all actions of the City Manager and ARO shall be documented. Either official may refer the request for approval of a minor amendment to the Planning Commission if the official determines that the request should be considered a major amendment. Minor amendments shall include:
(a) Internal changes to buildings and structures;
(b) Changes to the front of a building;
(c) Changes to signs which are not being enlarged and are consistent with what was previously approved by the Planning Commission;
(d) Amendments to the drainage pattern; and
(e) Replacement of existing lighting provided it remains effectively shielded.
(5) Contingent-Approval Permitted. In circumstances where an applicant needs a variance from the requirements of this Code, the Planning Commission may provide contingent-approval of a Final Application for a development plan. Such contingent-approval shall mean their approval of the Final Application is subject to the applicant obtaining any required
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150:
Zoning Code
96
7722743.2
variance(s) from the Board of Zoning Appeals. If the Planning Commission provides contingent-approval of a Final Application and the Board of Zoning Appeals subsequently denies the applicant’s requested variance(s), said denial shall constitute a rejection of the Final Application.
(6) Appeals. Pursuant to this section, if the Planning Commission, City Manager, or ARO deny an applicant’s request for approval of a development plan or an amendment to a previously-approved development plan, such applicant may appeal the decision denying their request to the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(a) Timing of Appeal. The applicant appealing the decision must provide notice of his or her intent to appeal such decision to the Planning Commission and the Board of Zoning Appeals within thirty (30) days of the Planning Commission’s provision of written notification of its denial to the applicant.
(b) Hearing on Appeal. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hold a public hearing, evaluating the appeal based upon the standards of review applied by the Planning Commission to the initial conditional use application, within sixty (60) days of receiving applicant’s notice of appeal.
(1985 Code, § 150.36) (Ord. 08-05, passed 2-25-2008; Ord. 09-28, passed 11-23-2009)
§ 150.99 PENALTY
(A) In addition to the remedies provided in § 150.32, whoever fails to conform to any of the provisions of this Zoning Code, or fails to obey any lawful order of the City Manager issued pursuant to such provisions, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not to exceed $150 for each offense, and each day’s continuance of the violation shall be considered a separate offense.
(B) Any person or entity which undertakes to do a specific piece of work or service in construction, alteration or addition using their own means or methods, without submitting themselves to the control of another in respect to all details of the work or service; who fails to conform to any provision of this Zoning Code; or who fails to obey any lawful order of the City Manager issued pursuant to such provisions, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $150 for each offense. Each day’s continuation of the violation shall be considered a separate offense. If the violator is a person or entity regularly engaged in construction, alteration or addition, then they shall be fined not more than $150 for each offense and each day’s continuation of the violation shall be considered a separate offense.
(1985 Code, § 150.99) (Ord. 1084, passed 1-17-1972; Ord. 88-46, passed 11-7-1988; Ord. 04-22, passed 9-13-2004)
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 151:
Subdivision Regulations
97
7722743.2
CHAPTER 151: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
General Provisions
151.001 Definitions
Administrative Procedures
151.015 Applicability of procedures
151.016 Preliminary information
151.017 Preliminary conference
151.018 Submission and processing of preliminary plat
151.019 Submission and approval of subdivision improvement plans
151.020 Issuance of permits
151.021 Submission, processing and approval of subdivision plat
151.022 Establishing a minor subdivision
Form and Content of Plats
151.035 Preliminary plat
151.036 Subdivision plat
Rules for Layout of Subdivisions
151.050 Interpretation by Planning Commission
151.051 Conformity to major street plan
151.052 Street extensions
151.053 Dedicated rights-of-way
151.054 Intersections
151.055 Horizontal and vertical curves
151.056 Street grades and elevations
151.057 Dead-end streets
151.058 Private streets and reserve strips
151.059 Street names
151.060 Provision of alleys
151.061 Flood hazard areas
151.062 Blocks
151.063 Lot regulations
151.064 Pedestrian ways
151.065 Easements
151.066 Public sites
Public Improvement Regulations
151.080 General requirements; bond
151.081 Improvements to be made in official streets only
151.082 Street specifications
151.083 Alley specifications
151.084 Storm drainage
151.085 Sidewalks
151.086 Street name signs
151.087 Sanitary facilities
151.088 Water distribution system
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 151:
Subdivision Regulations
98
7722743.2
151.089 Fire hydrants
151.090 Utility connections
151.091 Grading, excavations and filling
151.092 Street trees
Construction of Public Improvements
151.105 Preconstruction meeting and work schedule
151.106 Inspections
151.107 Duties of the subdivider or contractor
151.108 Grade stakes
151.109 Repair of damage; final cleanup
151.110 Maintenance of improvements
151.111 Construction agreements; maintenance guarantees
Variances
151.125 Variances to be based on hardship
151.126 Conditions upon grant of variance
151.127 Public hearing; notice of decision
Charges and Fees
151.140 Preliminary plat fees
151.141 Final plan checking and field inspection fees
151.142 Payment of fees
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.001 DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ALLEY
A minor right-of-way used primarily for vehicular access to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
ASSURANCE OF COMPLETION
A contract secured by a bond in an amount and with surety satisfactory to the City Manager, guaranteeing completion of public improvements which are shown on the subdivision improvement plan as the responsibility of the subdivider.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE
The line indicating the minimum horizontal distance between the street line and buildings or any projection thereof, other than steps and porches.
CROSSWALKWAY
A right-of-way used primarily for pedestrian travel through or across any portion of a block.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 151:
Subdivision Regulations
99
7722743.2
CUL-DE-SAC
A short, minor street, having but one end open for motor traffic, the other being permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround.
EASEMENT
A grant by a property owner of the use, for a specific purpose or purposes, of a designated strip of land to the general public, a corporation or other individuals.
EXPRESSWAY
A motorway of considerable continuity designed for fast, uninterrupted flow of vehicular traffic; having a right-of-way of varying width; no direct access from abutting property to express traffic lanes; and no street crossing or intersection at grade.
EXPRESSWAY, MODIFIED
An expressway whose potential traffic volume does not justify all of the expressway features.
LOT
A unit area of land within a subdivision intended for transfer of ownership or for building development.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE
A lot with opposite ends abutting on streets.
LOT, PANHANDLE
A lot which utilizes a narrow strip of land not a building site having an average width of less than 50 feet and an average length of more than 60 feet to provide access to, or legal frontage on, a public street.
MOTORWAY
A principal arterial route designated as an expressway, modified expressway or thoroughfare.
PLAT OF SUBDIVISION
A map showing the division of any tract of land into two or more parcels, and prepared for the purpose of recording. (See § 151.036 for the items of information which the plat normally includes.)
PROTECTIVE COVENANT
A restriction on the use of private property within a subdivision for the purpose of providing mutual protection against undesirable aspects of development.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
Any of the following: roadway pavement, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, crosswalks, water mains, sanitary and storm sewers and other appurtenant construction so related to the subdivision improvement plan.
RIGHT-OF-WAY
The entire strip of land lying between the property lines of a street or other motorway, alley, crosswalkway or easement.
STREET
A right-of-way designated for vehicular and pedestrian traffic, regardless of its designation by name, such as street, avenue, land, place or the like.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 151:
Subdivision Regulations
100
7722743.2
STREET, IMPORTANT NEIGHBORHOOD
A street designated to serve as an important traffic-way for a neighborhood, or as a feeder to a thoroughfare. The determination of such street classification in any specific instance shall rest with the City Planning Commission.
STREET, MINOR
Any street other than an expressway, modified expressway, thoroughfare or important neighborhood street.
SUBDIVISION
As defined in R.C. § 711.001:
(1) The division of any parcel of land shown as a unit or as contiguous units on the last preceding tax roll, into two or more parcels, sites or lots, any one of which is less than five acres for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership; provided, however, that the division or partition of land into parcels of more than five acres not involving any new streets or easements of access, and the sale or exchange does not create additional building sites, shall be exempted; or
(2) The improvement of one or more parcels of land for residential, commercial or industrial structures or groups of structures involving the division or allocation of land for the opening, widening or extension of any street or streets, except private streets serving industrial structures; the division or allocation of land as open spaces for common use by owners, occupants or lease holders or as easements for the extension and maintenance of public sewer, water, storm drainage or other public utilities. (R.C. § 711.001(B))
SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT PLAN
A drawing showing a proposed subdivision of land together with the public improvements which are to be installed therein. Such drawing is not recordable. (See §§ 151.080 through 151.092 and 151.105 through 151.111 for the items of information which the plan normally includes.)
THOROUGHFARE
A street of considerable continuity designed as a major traffic-way. This category does not include an expressway or modified expressway.
ZONING
Regulation by districts of the height, area, and use of buildings, use of land, and density of population.
(1985 Code, § 151.001) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES
§ 151.015 APPLICABILITY OF PROCEDURES
Any person desiring to subdivide any lot, tract or parcel of land or to change or rearrange any such lot, tract or parcel shall comply with the procedures established herein.
(1985 Code, § 151.010) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
§ 151.016 PRELIMINARY INFORMATION
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 151:
Subdivision Regulations
101
7722743.2
The subdivider shall notify the City Manager in writing of his or her intention to subdivide a property. Such notification shall include mention or illustration of any aspect or feature which will affect the design or layout of the subdivision. For clarity, preliminary information may utilize a map to illustrate various features or aspects of the property.
(1985 Code, § 151.011) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
§ 151.017 PRELIMINARY CONFERENCE
(A) Within one week after the submission of the preliminary information, or other such time as is agreeable to the City Manager and the subdivider, to discuss the design elements and other pertinent elements of the proposed subdivision. To this conference the subdivider should bring the following data:
(1) Intended Land Use. Designation of land proposed for residential, industrial, commercial or other type land use;
(2) Location Map With Reference to the Community. A map which shall show the overall relationship of the proposed subdivision to main traffic arteries, existing minor streets, existing water mains and sanitary and storm sewer facilities with an indication of the size of each, of all shopping centers, schools, parks, playgrounds, railroads, airports, hospitals, churches or other community facilities or features which will either serve or influence the proposed subdivision; and
(3) Site Analysis Sheet. A topographic survey or topographic map of the property to be subdivided at a scale which will give all pertinent information without becoming a size which is cumbersome. Such survey or map shall contain thereon the proposed subdivision name, a scale, north arrow, date, the perimeter, boundary of the proposed subdivision, all existing public utilities, natural features such as rock outcrops, tree masses and watercourses which are either on, adjacent to or near the property to be subdivided.
(B) At this meeting, the following topics will be discussed:
(1) The City Manager will make certain that the subdivider is acquainted with the procedures set up by this chapter; and
(2) The elements of design for the proposed subdivision:
(a) Setback requirements;
(b) Alignments and width of streets;
(c) Rights-of-way required;
(d) Needs of major street plan;
(e) Minimum lot requirements;
(f) Minimum frontage requirements;
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 151:
Subdivision Regulations
102
7722743.2
(g) Hazards which require special attention;
(h) Streets which must be extended;
(i) Street access to adjacent undeveloped property;
(j) Handling of waterways on the site; and
(k) Other appropriate topics.
(1985 Code, § 151.012) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
§ 151.018 SUBMISSION AND PROCESSING OF PRELIMINARY PLAT
(A) Submission of Preliminary Plat. After the conference described in § 151.017, the subdivider shall file eight copies of the preliminary plat, prepared in accordance with § 151.035, with the City Manager at least two weeks prior to the meeting of the Planning Commission at which action is desired. A letter to the Commission requesting the plat be processed and containing any other pertinent information or requests the subdivider wishes to convey shall accompany the submission of the preliminary plat.
(B) Processing of the Preliminary Plat.
(1) The preliminary plat and the letter of submission shall be checked by the City Manager as to its conformance and the requirements of the preliminary plat as stated in § 151.035. If the preliminary plat does not meet the requirements of § 151.035, the elements of design discussed at the preliminary conference, the requirements of the major street plan, the requirements of the Zoning Code or any other part of these regulations, the City Manager shall return the preliminary plat to the subdivider with a letter of rejection stating the reasons for its rejection. However, at his or her discretion, the City Manager may forward the preliminary plat not meeting all requirements to the Commission with a statement of the irregularities for its conditional approval or rejection. If the plat is found satisfactory, the City Manager will submit it to the Commission with a written recommendation for the Commission’s review and decision.
(2) The Commission may approve the plat, approve it with conditions or disapprove it. Upon approval of the preliminary plat by the Commission, the Commission’s Secretary will indicate upon each copy that it has been approved. One copy shall be returned to the subdivider, one copy shall be returned to the City Manager and two copies shall be retained by the Commission. If disapproved, the Commission’s Secretary shall return, to the subdivider, one copy of the preliminary plat marked “Disapproved by the Madeira Planning Commission,” along with a letter stating the reason or reasons for its disapproval. One copy shall be given to the City Manager and two copies filed by the Commission’s Secretary.
(1985 Code, § 151.013) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 151:
Subdivision Regulations
103
7722743.2
§ 151.019 SUBMISSION AND APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT PLANS
(A) Submission of the Subdivision Improvement Plan. On receipt of the approved preliminary plat, the subdivider may instruct a registered professional engineer to prepare plans for streets and sidewalks, sanitary facilities and stormwater drainage, in accordance with the specifications established or referred to herein. The subdivider, or his or her engineer, shall submit to the City Manager three copies of the improvement plans prepared according to accepted practices, which should not exceed 30 by 42 inches and be drawn at a scale of 50 feet or less to the inch horizontally and ten feet or less to the inch vertically. The plans should be accompanied by stormwater run-off sheets and calculations, and if necessary, percolation tests, all certified by a registered professional engineer.
(B) Checking and Approval of the Subdivision Improvement Plans. The improvement plans shall be checked by the City Manager to ensure that they meet the specifications established in §§ 151.050 through 151.066, 151.080 through 151.092 and 151.105 through 151.111 for streets, sanitary facilities and all associated appurtenances. If found satisfactory, the City Manager shall approve the plans and transmit one copy to the subdivider. If unsatisfactory, the City Manager shall approve with modification, or disapprove the plans and shall notify the subdivider thereof, including a statement of modifications or reasons for disapproval.
(1985 Code, § 151.014) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
§ 151.020 ISSUANCE OF PERMITS
Upon approval of the improvement plans, the subdivider may then obtain from the City Manager the necessary permits to proceed with the complete or partial development of the subdivision, as set forth in §§ 151.080 through 151.092 and 151.105 through 151.111 of these regulations.
(1985 Code, § 151.015) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
§ 151.021 SUBMISSION, PROCESSING AND APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION PLAT
(A) Submission of Subdivision Plat. After the completion of all improvements to the satisfaction of the City Manager, or after successful completion of the posting of an accepted performance bond, the final plat will be accepted and processed by the City Manager. The subdivider and three clear and legible copies of the subdivision plat, as described in § 151.036 of these regulations. The subdivision plat shall be accompanied by a certificate of title showing the ownership of all lands to be dedicated for public use and that the title thereof is free and unencumbered.
(B) Processing the Subdivision Plat. The City Manager will check the subdivision plat as to description, certification, computations, lot areas and numbers, monuments, conformity with the approved preliminary plat and other pertinent aspects. If found satisfactory, the City Manager will transmit to the Commission the subdivision plat, and two copies, along with the attorney’s report of title and a certification that:
(1) The technical details of the subdivision plat itself have been checked and found to be satisfactory; and
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 151:
Subdivision Regulations
104
7722743.2
(2) Either all improvements have been completed in a satisfactory manner, or that a satisfactory performance bond agreement has been furnished.
(C) Approval of Subdivision Plat.
(1) After the subdivision plat, together with such certificates, have been received by the Commission, and provided that the subdivision plat is found to conform to the preliminary plat as approved, the Commission will approve the subdivision plat and the Chairperson shall so certify on the original copy. The Commission shall take action on the subdivision plat within 60 days after its submission to the City Manager. The original copy of the approved subdivision plat, with signatures of approval, shall be returned to the subdivider for recording with the County Clerk.
(2) If the approved subdivision plat is not recorded within six months after the approval date, such approval shall be null and void. The Commission’s Secretary shall transmit two copies of the subdivision plat, with the certificate of title, to the City Council, for necessary action on the proposed dedications. One copy shall be retained for the files of the Commission. In the event the subdivision plat is disapproved, the original drawing and two copies shall be returned to the subdivider accompanied by a letter from the Commission’s Secretary stating the action taken and the reasons for disapproval of the subdivision plat.
(1985 Code, § 151.016) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
§ 151.022 ESTABLISHING A MINOR SUBDIVISION
(A) A proposed division of a parcel of land along an existing public street, not involving the opening, widening or extension of any street or road, and involving no more than five lots after the original tract has been completely subdivided, may be submitted to a representative designated by the Commission for the purpose of reviewing such proposed division, and if found not contrary to applicable platting, subdividing or zoning regulations, he or she shall within seven working days after submission of such proposed division approve the same, and, on presentation of a conveyance of said parcel, stamp the same “Approved by the Madeira Planning Commission, No Plat Required.” Such representative may require the submission of a sketch and such other information as is pertinent to his or her determination hereunder.
(B) Plats of subdivision will not be required for subdivisions as defined in R.C. § 711.001 for subdivisions not involving the opening or extension of any street or easement of access and in which past subdivision and development has so far proceeded that the preparation and recording of a plat would serve no public or planning purpose. The representative is authorized to approve conveyances without a plat in such cases as are expected herein. In case of doubt, such representative may refer the question to the Planning Commission. If such representative refuses approval for a subdivision without a plat, the applicant may appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(1985 Code, § 151.017) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
Statutory reference: Approval by planning authority without plat, see R.C. § 711.131
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 151:
Subdivision Regulations
105
7722743.2
FORM AND CONTENT OF PLATS
§ 151.035 PRELIMINARY PLAT
(A) Form of Preliminary Plat. The subdivider shall file with the City Manager eight copies of the preliminary plat for review. The minimum dimensions of this plat shall be 18 inches by 26 inches. No plat shall be greater than 30 inches in width nor 42 inches in length. The plat shall be drawn at a scale of 100 feet or less to the inch. The preliminary plat shall be accompanied by a letter of submission which requests that the plat be processed and which points out any feature or subject concerning the subdivision which the subdivider considers pertinent.
(B) Content of Preliminary Plat. The preliminary plat shall clearly show:
(1) Proposed name of the subdivision, which shall not duplicate or too closely approximate, phonetically or in spelling, the name of any other subdivision in the county;
(2) Locations by section, township, range, county, state;
(3) Names and addresses of owner or developer, of the technician who made the plan, and of engineer responsible for engineering details;
(4) Sufficient information to accurately locate the plat (Note: references to existing thoroughfares, plats and the like may be used if they do not exist within reasonable distances of the proposed subdivision; a vicinity plat on a small scale shall accompany the preliminary plat);
(5) The boundary lines of the tract accurately indicated by a heavy, solid line and the acreage comprised therein;
(6) The lines and names of all existing or platted streets and other public ways adjacent to or in connection with the tract and other important features within 200 feet of the boundary lines, such as railroad lines, watercourses, exceptional topography and the like;
(7) The lot lines and subdivision names of adjacent subdivisions and the property lines and owners of record of all adjacent parcels that are unsubdivided;
(8) Location and dimension of all existing easements and rights-of-way within the tract or adjacent thereto;
(9) All existing sewers, water mains, culverts and other underground structures within the tract or adjacent thereto;
(10) Sources of water supply;
(11) Provision for sewerage and sewage disposal;
(12) Approximate contour lines having the following interval:
(a) Five-foot contour interval for ground slopes between 5% and 15%; and
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 151:
Subdivision Regulations
106
7722743.2
(b) Ten-foot contour interval for ground slopes exceeding 15%.
(13) The layout and names of proposed streets, alleys, easements and lots, and dimensions signifying widths of streets, alleys, easements, and lots and depth of lots (Note: proposed street names shall not duplicate or too closely approximate, phonetically or in spelling, existing street names in the county);
(14) Lot and block numbers proposed;
(15) Statement of the lot area of the smallest lot in the subdivision;
(16) Building setback lines shown graphically with dimensions along all streets;
(17) A statement declaring that all requirements for front, rear and side yards will be met;
(18) Parcels of land intended to be dedicated or temporarily reserved for public use, or to be reserved by deed covenant for use of all property owners in the subdivision, or parcels of land or lots to be used for any purpose other than private residential shall be so designated;
(19) Approximate location of areas subject to inundation or stormwater overflow, and all areas covered by water and all watercourses which are to be preserved and used in the development of the subdivision;
(20) An outline of the proposed deed restrictions;
(21) The approximate profile of each street with tentative grades indicated;
(22) The cross-section of proposed streets showing width of roadways and location of sidewalks;
(23) Zoning district boundary line as established under the Zoning Code (Chapter 150); and
(24) North point, scale and date.
(1985 Code, § 151.025) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
§ 151.036 SUBDIVISION PLAT
(A) Form of Subdivision Plat. Each subdivision plat shall be submitted in the form of an original drawing, in waterproof ink, together with three clear and legible copies.
(B) Specifications For and Contents of Subdivision Plat. Subdivision plats shall be drawn at a scale of 50 feet to one inch, with at least a two-inch margin on the left side, and not larger than 30 inches in width and 42 inches in length, and shall clearly show:
(1) Boundary lines, with accurate lengths, angles and bearings. These boundaries shall be determined by an accurate survey in the field, which shall be balanced and closed;
(2) The exact location and width of all existing and recorded streets intersecting or adjoining the boundaries of the subdivision tract;
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 151:
Subdivision Regulations
107
7722743.2
(3) The exact location and width of all adjoining lots or property lines;
(4) All dimensions shall be accurate to hundredths of a foot, and angles and bearings accurate to the exact number of minutes for the following:
(a) Streets and alley lanes, their names, bearings, angles of intersection and widths;
(b) The lengths of all arcs, radii, points of curvature, tangent bearings;
(c) All easements and rights-of-way for public services (the limitations of easements rights shall be stated on the plat); and
(d) All lot lines, with dimensions, bearings and angles (if other than right angles to street and alley lines).
(5) Building setback, lines and distances from rights-of-way;
(6) All lots, consecutively numbered or lettered with no omissions or duplications;
(7) Accurate description of location, material, and size of all monuments (R.C. § 711.03 requires at least four permanent monuments for each subdivision of ten lots or less);
(8) The accurate outline of all land that is offered for dedication for public use, with the purpose indicated thereon, and of all property proposed to be reserved by private covenant for the common use of the property owners in the subdivision;
(9) Private restrictions, if any, and boundaries for each type of restriction;
(10) Protective covenants. If recorded separately, reference to book and page of recording shall be made on the subdivision plat;
(11) The sidelines of all easements shall be shown by fine dash lines;
(12) Name of the subdivision;
(13) The names and addresses of the subdivider and of the engineer or surveyor;
(14) A certification by a state-registered engineer or surveyor to the effect that the plat accurately represents a survey made by him or her, that all monuments shown thereon actually exist or will be installed, and that their position is correctly shown;
(15) A certification that the applicant is the owner and a statement by such owner dedicating streets, rights-of-way, and any other sites for public use, and creating any easements and specifying the purpose of such easements; and
(16) North point, scale and date.
(C) Plats Required; Exemptions. No subdivision defined in R.C. § 711.001, shall be made of land within the jurisdiction of the Planning Commission without the preparation and recording of a plat of
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 151:
Subdivision Regulations
108
7722743.2
subdivision in accordance with this chapter, except as exempted from such platting by this chapter or by R.C. § 711.131.
(1985 Code, § 151.026) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
RULES FOR LAYOUT OF SUBDIVISIONS
§ 151.050 INTERPRETATION BY PLANNING COMMISSION
All contested interpretations of these rules and regulations shall be decided by the Planning Commission.
(1985 Code, § 151.035) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
§ 151.051 CONFORMITY TO MAJOR STREET PLAN
The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to such major street plan, adopted by the Planning Commission, as may be in force at the time such streets are planned and constructed, and shall be considered in its relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, and in its appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets and the prospective development and access to adjacent land. Where not shown on the major street plan, the arrangement and other design standards of streets shall conform to the provisions found herein.
(1985 Code, § 151.036) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
§ 151.052 STREET EXTENSIONS
(A) Existing Streets. The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provisions for the proper continuation of existing streets in adjoining areas.
(B) Adjacent Property. Where areas adjoining a proposed subdivision are not subdivided and are appropriate for a subdivision, arrangements of streets in new subdivisions shall make provisions of the practical development of the adjacent property, permit a feasible extension of streets, and be in general conformity with a plan for the most advantageous development of the entire neighborhood. (1985 Code, § 151.037) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
§ 151.053 DEDICATED RIGHTS-OF-WAY
(A) Minimum Right-Of-Way Widths.
(1) Expressways, modified expressways and thoroughfares: 100 feet;
(2) Important neighborhood streets and state roads: 60 feet;
(3) Minor streets: 60 feet for pavements 44 and 36 feet in width, 50 feet for pavements less than 36 feet in width. Cul-de-sacs shall terminate in a circular area with a minimum diameter of 80 feet. T-turnarounds are permitted on residential streets if the abutting lots have depth of no more than 110 feet from the normal street right-of-way line. T-turnarounds are recommended for industrial subdivisions. They shall measure 100 feet by 60 feet;
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 151:
Subdivision Regulations
109
7722743.2
(4) Alleys: 20 feet; and
(5) Crosswalkways: a minimum of four feet on each side of the designated centerline, or such width as may be required for necessary maintenance of utility involved.
(B) Existing Streets. Subdivisions platted along existing streets shall dedicate additional rights-of-way if necessary to meet the minimum street width requirements set forth in the foregoing section. Such dedication shall be in accordance with the following:
(1) At least the minimum right-of-way width shall be dedicated where the subdivision is on both sides of the existing street; and
(2) When the subdivision is located on only one side of an existing street; one-half of the required right-of-way width, measured from the centerline of the existing roadway, shall be dedicated. However, in no case shall the owner or owners of such property be forced to dedicate from their land more than one-half the total right-of-way width. Dedication of less than minimum width of rights-of-way for streets proposed along the boundaries of land to be subdivided shall be prohibited.
(1985 Code, § 151.038) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
§ 151.054 INTERSECTIONS
(A) Right-Of-Way. Streets and alleys at their intersections shall be provided with at least 20-foot radius turns at property lines in all subdivisions other than industrial subdivisions, in which case the radii shall be such as to provide 40-foot radii at curb lines. These minimum radii shall be increased when the angle of intersection is less than 75 degrees. In business districts a cutoff may be substituted for the circular arc. Where two alleys intersect, a ten-foot cutoff shall be provided.
(B) Slope. Whenever a street intersects another street, no part of the centerline of one street within 50 feet of the near curb line of the other street shall have a slope above such intersection in excess of 8% or below such intersection in excess of 6% and the maximum grade of either street within an intersection shall be 4%.
(C) Angle of Intersection. The centerlines of streets shall intersect as nearly at right angles as possible, but in no case shall they intersect at less than 75 degrees or more than 105 degrees.
(D) Jogs. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 200 feet shall be avoided.
(1985 Code, § 151.039) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
§ 151.055 HORIZONTAL AND VERTICAL CURVES
Sight distance on all streets shall be established in accordance with the following.
(A) Curvature. The minimum radius of curvature for arterial streets shall be 300 feet on the centerline, and for local service streets 100 feet on the centerline.
(B) Reverse Curves. A tangent of at least 100 feet in length shall be provided between reverse curves.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 151:
Subdivision Regulations
110
7722743.2
(C) Grade Changes. All changes of grade shall be connected by vertical curves of minimum length equal to 15 times the algebraic difference in the rate of grade for main and secondary thoroughfares and one-half this minimum length for minor or local service streets.
(1985 Code, § 151.040) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
§ 151.056 STREET GRADES AND ELEVATIONS
The grade of no street shall be less than 0.8% or exceed 12% unless necessitated by exceptional topography, and the grade of main or secondary thoroughfares shall not exceed 7%.
(1985 Code, § 151.041) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
§ 151.057 DEAD-END STREETS
Dead-end streets designed to be so permanently, shall be provided with a turnaround having an outside diameter of at least 80 feet at the property line.
(1985 Code, § 151.042) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
§ 151.058 PRIVATE STREETS AND RESERVE STRIPS
(A) If at all feasible, new private streets, alleys or ways shall not be created or extended and existing ones shall be brought into the ultimate plan for the area.
(B) Reserve strips controlling the access to streets or other public rights-of-way shall not be approved unless such strips are deemed necessary for the protection of the public welfare or substantial property rights as determined by the Planning Commission.
(C) Where deemed necessary by the Planning Commission, a temporary turnaround or a temporary connection to another street shall be provided by the subdivider. Such streets shall be built in accordance with specifications on file in the City Manager’s office.
(1985 Code, § 151.043) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
§ 151.059 STREET NAMES
(A) Duplication. The name of a new street shall not duplicate existing or platted street names in the county or approximate such names in spelling or sound of pronunciation or by the use of alternate suffixes such as “Lane,” “Way,” “Drive,” “Court,” “Avenue” or “Street.”
(B) Continuation of Streets. New streets in continuation or when in alignment with an existing or platted street shall bear the name as such street.
(C) Approval of Street Name. All street names shall be approved by the Planning Commission before approval of the subdivision plat.
(1985 Code, § 151.044) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 151:
Subdivision Regulations
111
7722743.2
§ 151.060 PROVISION OF ALLEYS
(A) Residential Alleys. Alleys shall be avoided in residential districts.
(B) Commercial and Industrial Alleys. In commercial and industrial areas, adequate alleys or off-street loading and unloading space, where needed for loading and unloading or access purposes, shall be provided.
(1985 Code, § 151.045) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
§ 151.061 FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
(A) Prohibition of Development in Flood Susceptible Areas. Land subject to flooding and land deemed to be topographically unsuitable for residential development shall not be platted for residential use or for any other use which may increase the danger of health, life, property or aggravate erosion or flood hazards. Such land within the subdivision shall be set aside on the plat for such uses as will not be endangered by periodic or occasional inundation or will not result in conditions contrary to the public welfare. To ensure that lots will be located where they will provide flood-free home sites, the Commission may require the subdivider to provide elevation and flood profiles sufficient to demonstrate the sites will be free from the danger of flooding.
(B) Stream Easement. If a stream flows through or adjacent to the proposed subdivision, the plat shall provide for a floodway easement. For the smaller streams, the plat shall also provide for channel improvement to carry all reasonable floods within banks. The lower floor elevations of houses shall be high enough to be well above the extraordinary flood. The floodway easement shall be wide enough to provide for future enlargement of the stream channel as adjacent areas become more highly developed and runoff rates are increased.
(C) Streets. Approval will not be given for subdivision streets which would be subject to inundation or flooding. In order that no portion of the subdivision would become isolated by floods all streets must have flood-free elevations.
(1985 Code, § 151.046) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
Cross-reference: Construction in flood hazard areas, see Ch. 160
§ 151.062 BLOCKS
(A) Arrangement. The arrangement of blocks shall be such as to provide for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic.
(B) Length. Blocks shall not exceed 1,200 feet or be less than 400 feet in length except as the Planning Commission considers necessary to secure efficient use of land or desired features of street layout.
(C) Width. The width blocks shall ordinarily be sufficient to allow for two tiers of lots with rear easements as required.
(1985 Code, § 151.047) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 151:
Subdivision Regulations
112
7722743.2
§ 151.063 LOT REGULATIONS
(A) Size. Lot arrangement and design shall be such that lots will provide satisfactory sites for buildings and shall be properly related to topography. All platted lots shall conform to or exceed the requirements of the zoning district in which they are located and the use for which they are intended.
(B) Frontage and Width.
(1) Lots fronting on a street having a centerline radius of less than 600 feet and lots fronting on the rounded end of a cul-de-sac shall conform to the minimum width at the building line, and the minimum frontage at street right-of-way as required by the Zoning Code (Chapter 150);
(2) Double Frontage. Lots with double frontage shall be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development with traffic arteries or otherwise required by topography or orientation; and
(3) Corner Lots. Corner lots shall be made wider than the required minimum width for interior lots to permit conformance to the setback line on the side street. In no case shall a corner lot be so narrow that minimum zoning requirements cannot be met.
(C) Lot Depth.
(1) Conformance to Zoning. Each lot shall be of such a depth that front yard and rear yard requirements of the Zoning Code plus a reasonable building site shall be provided.
(2) Maximum Depth. The maximum depth of a lot shall not be greater than three times the width of the lot except in unusual cases, and lots which contain over five acres of area. Lots over five acres of area shall not be less than 250 feet in width at any location.
(3) Extra Depth and Width in Certain Cases. Additional depth shall be required where a residential lot in a subdivision backs up to a railroad right-of-way, a high pressure gasoline or gas line, arterial road, and industrial area or other existing land use which has a detrimental effect on the residential use of the property and where no street is provided at the rear of such lot. Where a residential lot has its side line adjacent to any of the above, appropriate additional width shall be required.
(D) Usable Lots.
(1) Building Lots. All subdivisions shall result in the creation of lots which are developable and capable of being built upon. No subdivision shall create lots which are impractical for improvement due to steepness of terrain, dangerous soil conditions, location of watercourses or other natural physical conditions.
(2) Uninhabitable Lots. Proposed lots which do not provide a site capable of being built upon or are not free from flooding shall be deemed to be uninhabitable and shall not be platted for residential occupancy nor for such other uses as may increase danger to health, life or property, or aggravate flood hazards, but such land within the subdivision shall be set aside for such uses which are not endangered by periodic or occasional inundation or which will not produce unsatisfactory living conditions. Acceptable fill material as defined in § 153.14
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 151:
Subdivision Regulations
113
7722743.2
may be used in inundated areas to render lots habitable if such fill does not inhibit the flow of the waters and thereby unduly increase flood heights.
(3) Strips or Parcels. No remnants of property shall be left which do not conform to lot requirements or which are not required for a private or public utility purpose, or which are not accepted by the city for an appropriate use.
(4) Lot Side Lines. The side lines of lots shall normally be straight and so far as practical, should preferably be at right angles to straight street lines and radial to curved street lines of that street toward which the lot faces.
(E) Large Lots. When land is subdivided into parcels which are larger than normal lots, these shall be of such shape and dimensions as to render possible the re-subdivision of any such parcels into normal lots and streets in accordance with these regulations.
(1985 Code, § 151.048) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
Cross-reference: Zoning code lot requirements, see § 150.29
§ 151.064 PEDESTRIAN WAYS
(A) Location. Pedestrian ways, at least ten feet in width including a paved walkway at least four feet in width, may be required as follows:
(1) Near the center and entirely across the block for blocks which are over 900 feet in length;
(2) To correct dead-end streets; or
(3) To provide access to parks, schools, shopping centers or similar facilities.
(B) Grade. The grade of no pedestrian way shall exceed 15% unless steps of an acceptable design are constructed.
(1985 Code, § 151.049) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
§ 151.065 EASEMENTS
(A) Utility Easements. Public utility easements at least ten feet in total width may be required along the rear and sides of lots where needed for the accommodation of a public utility, drainage or sanitary structure, or any combination of the above. Where deemed necessary by the Planning Commission, additional easement width shall be provided.
(B) Watercourses. The subdivider shall dedicate rights-of-way or provide easements for storm drainage purpose which conform substantially with the lines of any natural watercourses, channels, streams or creeks which traverse the subdivision or for any new channel which is established to substitute for a natural watercourse, channel, stream or creek. Such rights-of-way or easements shall be of a width which will provide for the maintenance needs of the channel and incidental structures.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 151:
Subdivision Regulations
114
7722743.2
(C) Slope Easements. Where a cut or fill road slope is outside the normal right-of-way of the street, a slope easement shall be provided of sufficient width to permit maintenance of the slopes by the city.
(1985 Code, § 151.050) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
§ 151.066 PUBLIC SITES
Due consideration must be given to the allocation of suitable property for schools, parks and playgrounds, to be dedicated, or to be reserved for the common use of all property owners within the subdivision by covenant in the deeds. Especially appropriate for such preservation are areas with unusual natural feature or beauty and areas of historical significance. The Planning Commission may require that at least 5% of the net area of every plat, exclusive of streets, should be set aside as a play area or park. Where the tract contains less than 40 acres, such reservation for open space should be combined, wherever possible, with similar reservations of adjoining tracts.
(1985 Code, § 151.051) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT REGULATIONS
§ 151.080 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS; BOND
(A) For subdivisions platted within the jurisdiction of the Planning Commission and in which improvements as mentioned hereafter or elsewhere in these regulations are involved, such improvements shall have been:
(1) Constructed or installed; and
(2) Accepted for maintenance by the appropriate agency or organization prior to the consideration of the subdivision plat by the Commission.
(B) However, in lieu of such completion and acceptance, the Commission may accept the existence of a bond, certified by the City Law Director as valid and enforceable by the city, to secure to the city the actual construction and installation of such improvements or utilities at a time and according to the approved improvement plans.
(1985 Code, § 151.065) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
§ 151.081 IMPROVEMENTS TO BE MADE IN OFFICIAL STREETS ONLY
No board, public officer or authority shall accept, lay out, improve or authorize utilities to be laid in any street within the territory for which the Planning Commission has adopted a major street plan unless the street has received the legal status of a public street prior to the adoption of the major street plan; or unless the street corresponds with a street shown on the major street plan; or unless the street is shown on a subdivision plat or a street plat which has been approved by the Planning Commission. (1985 Code, § 151.066) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 151:
Subdivision Regulations
115
7722743.2
§ 151.082 STREET SPECIFICATIONS
Streets shall be graded, surfaced and improved in accordance with plans, profiles and cross-sections prepared by the subdivider and approved by the City Manager. The plans shall detail construction in accordance with specifications on file in the City Manager’s office. Under no circumstances shall any street be constructed with a traveling surface less than 27 feet wide. The Planning Commission may require construction with a traveling surface greater than 27 feet wide for streets other than minor streets. All subsurface drainage facilities and utilities shall be installed prior to placing the street surface. (1985 Code, § 151.067) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
§ 151.083 ALLEY SPECIFICATIONS
All alleys shall be graded, surfaced and improved in accordance with plans, profiles and cross-sections prepared by the subdivider and approved by the City Manager. The work shall be performed in the manner prescribed in the applicable specifications of the city.
(1985 Code, § 151.068) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
§ 151.084 STORM DRAINAGE
(A) An adequate drainage system including necessary stabilized open ditches, pipes, culverts, intersectional drains, drop inlets, bridges and the like shall be provided for proper drainage of all surface water. Cross drains shall be provided to accommodate all natural water flow and they shall be of sufficient length to permit full width roadways and the required slopes. The size openings to be provided shall be determined by accepted engineering practice, but in no case shall the pipe be less than 12 inches in diameter. The design of storm drainage facilities shall be in accordance with storm drainage design criteria prepared by the City Engineer and approved by the City Manager. Where any natural watercourse is to be disturbed or blocked, adequate provision shall be made to handle the water. Cross drains shall be built on a straight line and grade and shall be laid on a firm base, but not on rock.
(B) Pipes shall be laid with their spigot ends pointing in the direction of the flow and with their ends fitted and matched to provide tight joints and a smooth uniform invert. They shall be placed at a sufficient depth below the roadbed to avoid dangerous pressure of impact, and in no case shall the top of the pipe be less than two feet below the roadbed. The City Manager will refer storm drainage plans to the City Engineer for approval of design.
(1985 Code, § 151.069) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
§ 151.085 SIDEWALKS
Concrete sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of all streets, in accordance with applicable specifications of the city.
(1985 Code, § 151.070) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 151:
Subdivision Regulations
116
7722743.2
§ 151.086 STREET NAME SIGNS
Street name signs of a type which conforms to applicable specifications of the city shall be installed as follows:
(A) One street sign at the intersection of two minor streets; and
(B) Two street signs on diagonally opposite corners where a minor street intersects with a major thoroughfare or collector street, or where a collector street intersects a major thoroughfare, or where two collector streets or two major thoroughfares intersect.
(1985 Code, § 151.071) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
§ 151.087 SANITARY FACILITIES
(A) The subdivision shall be provided with a sanitary sewerage network which shall be connected to a sanitary sewer system of a governmental subdivision or its agency, and comply with the requirements of the appropriate public authority.
(B) Upon written determination by the Metropolitan Sewer District that sanitary sewers are not accessible, aerobic treatment systems will be permitted if approval has been obtained from all appropriate governmental agencies, including the Board of Health and the Metropolitan Sewer District, and the State Environmental Protection Agency. The aerobic treatment system will comply with all applicable sections of the State Department of Health’s Home Sewage Disposal Rules as existent on the date of adoption of this division (O.A.C. §§ 3701-29-01 to 3701-29-21, effective July l, 1977). In addition, the following requirements apply:
(1) Each lot must have its own aerobic system;
(2) Class I aerobic systems shall be used;
(3) Pickup lines are the responsibility of each homeowner; two or more pickup lines shall be considered a sewer system;
(4) Discharge to be piped to the evident watercourse;
(5) Chlorinators suitable for Class I systems must be installed, maintained and secured by a lock box, all to be maintained at the property owner’s expense;
(6) The system must be serviced at intervals in accordance with manufacturer’s recommendation, or every six months. The homeowner shall maintain adequate records and make those records available to the City Manager upon request;
(7) The homeowner must permit such inspections as are requested by the County Board of Health or the city; and
(8) In any zoning district, the minimum lot size shall be 20,000 square feet and 80 foot minimum width (excluding handle of panhandle lot).
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 151:
Subdivision Regulations
117
7722743.2
(C) Whenever the Metropolitan Sewer District determines that a sanitary sewer is available to a property, the aerobic sewage system shall be abandoned and the property sewer directly connected to the sanitary sewer within 24 months.
(D) All lots shall have installed by the builder and approved by the Metropolitan Sewer District, piping for future sanitary sewers, which shall be connected at the earliest time unless this requirement is waived or modified by the Planning Commission.
(1985 Code, § 151.072) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970; Ord. 88-27, passed 6-4-1988)
§ 151.088 WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM
In the city, the water distribution system shall be designed and installed to meet the approval of the City Manager and the director of the affected water district.
(1985 Code, § 151.073) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
§ 151.089 FIRE HYDRANTS
Standard fire hydrants shall be installed by the subdivider as a part of the water distribution system in accordance with the specifications established by the City Manager. Installation of fire hydrants shall be such that each lot is within 250 feet of the fire hydrant when measured along a public right-of-way. (1985 Code, § 151.074) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
§ 151.090 UTILITY CONNECTIONS
Each lot shall be provided with a source of standard electrical currents. A network of rights-of-way and easements shall be provided for utility services. Such easements will be located at the rear of lots whenever feasible, and shall be in conformance with the needs of the utility company. All utility services shall be underground as provided for in Ordinance 1017, which is made a part of these regulations. (1985 Code, § 151.075) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
§ 151.091 GRADING, EXCAVATIONS AND FILLING
(A) All grading, excavating and filling shall be in accordance with Chapter 153.
(B) Grading shall consist of all clearing and grubbing, excavation, embankment, ditching, rolling, beading and shaping required to bring the entire width of the right-of-way to the required alignment, grade and cross-section shown on the plans.
(1) Preparation of Subgrade. The entire right-of-way area shall first be cleared of all tree stumps, roots, brush and other objectionable materials and of all trees not intended for preservation. The subgrade shall be properly shaped, rolled and uniformly compacted in accordance with the latest edition of Construction and Material Specifications issued by the State of Ohio Department of Highways. The City Manager may require tests by a testing laboratory to verify conformance with compaction requirements.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 151:
Subdivision Regulations
118
7722743.2
(2) Cuts. In cuts, all tree stumps, boulders, organic material, soft clay, spongy materials and other objectionable materials shall be removed to a depth of at least two feet below the natural ground surface. Fill material will comply with § 153.14.
(3) Fills. In fills, all tree stumps, boulders, organic material, soft clay, spongy materials and other objectionable materials shall be removed to a depth of at least two feet below the natural ground surface. Fill material will comply with § 153.14.
(4) Cut Slope. No proposed cut slope shall be steeper than one and one-half horizontal to one vertical, except as hereinafter provided.
(5) Fill Slope. No fill slope, existing or proposed, shall be steeper than two vertical to one horizontal, except as hereinafter provided.
(6) Retaining Walls.
(a) Retaining walls of a permanent material and of a design satisfactory to the City Manager may be utilized in areas of excessive slopes; and
(b) Retaining walls may be required whenever topographic conditions warrant or where necessary to retain fill or cut slopes within the rights-of-way or slope easement.
(7) Top Soil. If grading results in the stripping of top soil, the top soil shall not be removed from the site or used as spoil and shall be uniformly spread over the lots as grading is finished.
(8) Trees. As many trees as can be reasonably utilized in the final development plan shall be retained and the grading adjusted to the existing grade of the trees.
(9) Drainage System Requirements. The design of storm drainage facilities shall be in accordance with storm drainage design criteria prepared by the City Engineer and approved by the City Manager. (See § 151.084.)
(10) Road Drainage System.
(a) The road storm system shall serve as the primary drainage system.
(b) It shall be designed to carry roadway, adjacent land and house stormwater drainage.
(c) No stormwater shall be permitted to be run into the sanitary sewer system.
(i) Curb drainage inlets shall be provided at intervals along roadways provided with curb and gutter drainage facilities, and a catch basin shall be installed with each inlet.
(ii) Inlet spacing shall be adequate to limit the spread of water to two feet into the roadway. Storm drain inlets will be spaced so that crosswalks will not be flooded during the design storm intensity of four inches per hour.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 151:
Subdivision Regulations
119
7722743.2
(11) Proximity of Open Watercourse to Houses. No open watercourse or ditch shall be constructed within 100 feet of the rear of a house, as measured from the house to the edge of the ditch easement.
(12) Drainage Courses Along Side Lot Lines. Any major storm drainage courses carried along side lot lines shall be enclosed with approved pipe.
(1985 Code, § 151.076) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
§ 151.092 STREET TREES
Street trees shall be provided as required by the Planning Commission as follows.
(A) Species. The trees shall be species which are resistant to damage and disease and which do not cause interference with underground utilities or street lighting.
(B) Location.
(1) Street trees shall be spaced so that there will be approximately ten feet between branch tips when the trees are fully grown.
(2) No trees shall be planted within 40 feet of the intersection of two street right-of-way lines.
(3) Approaches to buildings should be considered when locating trees.
(C) Tree Size. Trees shall be at least one and one-half inches in diameter one foot above the ground. Lowest branches shall be not less than seven feet and no more than ten feet above the ground.
(1985 Code, § 151.077) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
CONSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
§ 151.105 PRECONSTRUCTION MEETING AND WORK SCHEDULE
Prior to the commencement of any project involving the Planning Commission or the City Manager, a preconstruction meeting will be held to discuss the project in regard to procedure, materials, inspections and the like.
(1985 Code, § 151.085) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
§ 151.106 INSPECTIONS
(A) Responsible Official. The City Manager shall be responsible for the inspection of all improvements.
(B) Authority and Duties of Inspectors.
(1) Inspectors employed by the city shall be authorized to inspect all work done and all materials furnished. Such inspection may extend to all or any part of the work and to the preparation, fabrication or manufacture of the materials to be used. The inspector shall not be authorized
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 151:
Subdivision Regulations
120
7722743.2
to revoke, alter or waive any requirements of the specifications or plans. He or she shall be authorized to call the attention of the contractor to any failure of the work or materials to conform to the specifications and contract. He or she shall have the authority to reject materials which do not meet specification requirements or suspend the portion of the work involved until any question at issue can be referred to and decided by the City Manager.
(2) Periodic inspection during the installation of improvements shall be made by the inspector to ensure conformity with the approved plans and specifications as contained in the subdivider’s construction agreement.
(C) Final Inspection. Upon completion of all the improvements, the subdivider shall request, in writing, a final inspection by the City Manager. The City Manager shall make a final inspection of streets, sanitary and storm sewers.
(1985 Code, § 151.086) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
§ 151.107 DUTIES OF THE SUBDIVIDER OR CONTRACTOR
The subdivider or contractor shall have available on the project, at all times, two copies of all required plans and specifications. He or she shall cooperate with the inspector and with other contractors in every way possible. The subdivider and/or contractor shall, at all times, have a competent superintendent acting as his or her agent on the project. The superintendent shall be capable of reading and thoroughly understanding the plans and specifications and he or she shall receive instructions from the inspector. The superintendent shall have full authority to execute the orders or directions of the inspector and to promptly supply such materials, tools, plant equipment and labor as may be required. The inspector’s orders should be executed without delay. A superintendent shall be furnished irrespective of the amount of work sublet.
(1985 Code, § 151.087) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
§ 151.108 GRADE STAKES
Pavement and pipe grade stakes shall be set at 25-foot intervals on horizontal and vertical curves and for all grades less than l%. Tangent pavement grades and pipe grades over l% may be set at a maximum interval of 50 feet. The inspector may ask for additional grade stakes if it is deemed necessary. (1985 Code, § 151.088) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
§ 151.109 REPAIR OF DAMAGE; FINAL CLEANUP
(A) Any damage done to the improvements by construction traffic, local traffic or by any other means shall be repaired or the damaged materials replaced before the next item of construction is begun.
(B) Upon completion of the work and before acceptance, the subdivider or contractor shall clean up all ground occupied or affected by him or her in connection with the work. The entire area shall be kept in a neat and presentable condition during the entire duration of the project, and left in a neat and presentable condition satisfactory to the inspector.
(1985 Code, § 151.089) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 151:
Subdivision Regulations
121
7722743.2
§ 151.110 MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS
The subdivider shall be responsible for the maintenance of the improvements installed and shall be responsible for providing the services necessary to guarantee access to all occupied lots, including plowing snow, until final acceptance by City Council. The subdivider shall be given adequate and appropriate notice by the City Manager of the need for the maintenance or service within an appropriate time. The City Manager may perform said service and bill the subdivider for said service. Payment shall be guaranteed by the performance bond. The subdivider shall maintain all improvements for such periods specified in the maintenance guarantees.
(1985 Code, § 151.090) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
§ 151.111 CONSTRUCTION AGREEMENTS; MAINTENANCE GUARANTEES
All bonds and insurance required under this section shall be secured from companies authorized to do business in the State of Ohio and shall be deposited and remain at all times with the City Clerk.
(A) Construction Agreement. To assure construction and installation of improvements required by these regulations, the subdivider shall execute a construction agreement with the City Manager in form and substance approved by the city’s legal counsel. This agreement shall provide that all such improvements shall be constructed and installed at the subdivider’s expense in compliance with the standards and specifications for each of the various types of improvements; such improvements shall be available to and for the benefit of the land within the subdivision and surrounding land which is in the same service or drainage area. Any further provisions that the city’s legal counsel may deem necessary in the public interest may be added. The construction agreement shall further provide that when a performance guarantee has been provided and if the improvements are not completed within the specified time, the city, upon proper notice, may complete the improvements and recover full costs and expenses thereof from the subdivider, and may appropriate such portion of bonds posted for the faithful performance of said works.
(B) Commencement of Improvements. No construction of any improvements or clearing, grubbing and grading shall commence prior to the approval of the construction agreement by the City Manager.
(C) Maintenance Guarantee. The maintenance bond shall be of such amount as determined by the City Manager and shall be arranged for a period of one year for streets constructed with concrete pavement (includes a one-year period for all other improvements also).
(1985 Code, § 151.091) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
VARIANCES
§ 151.125 VARIANCES TO BE BASED ON HARDSHIP
Where the Board of Zoning Appeals finds that unique practical difficulties and extraordinary hardships from unusual conditions may result from strict compliance with any of these regulations, it may vary the regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured; provided that such variation will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 151:
Subdivision Regulations
122
7722743.2
(1985 Code, § 151.100) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
§ 151.126 CONDITIONS UPON GRANT OF VARIANCE
In granting variances and modifications, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall require and may impose such additional requirements and conditions regarding the location, character and other features of the proposed uses as it may deem necessary to secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements of these subdivision regulations, to carry out the intent and purpose of the subdivision regulations, and to otherwise safeguard the public health, safety and general welfare.
(1985 Code, § 151.101) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
§ 151.127 PUBLIC HEARING; NOTICE OF DECISION
(A) Prior to making a decision on any application, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall notify by mail of the time and place of a public hearing, the property owner or petitioner and all abutting property owners who, in the opinion of the Board of Zoning Appeals, may be affected by such variance.
(B) Following the public hearing and the completion of any additional studies or acquisitions of additional data necessitated by the hearing, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall make a decision within 30 days and notify the property owner or petitioner of such decision.
(1985 Code, § 151.102) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
CHARGES AND FEES
§ 151.140 PRELIMINARY PLAT FEES
(A) Fees For Preliminary Plats. There shall be required by the Planning Commission a fee for each subdivision plat submitted for approval. Such fee will not exceed the following:
(1) For plats of three to six lots, tracts or parcels or less, a minimum fee of $750;
(2) For plats of seven to 12 lots, tracts or parcels, a minimum fee of $1,500;
(3) For plats of 13 to 18 lots, tracts or parcels, a minimum fee of $2,250; and
(4) For plats in excess of 18 lots, tracts or parcels, a fee of $3,000, plus $100 for each additional lot, tract, or parcel in excess of 18.
(B) Architectural Review Office Fee. The Architectural Review Office fee shall be an additional 25% of the preliminary plat fee as established by Chapter 161.
(1985 Code, § 151.110) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970; Ord. 88-11, passed 3-7-1988)
§ 151.141 FINAL PLAN CHECKING AND FIELD INSPECTION FEES
(A) At the time final subdivision plans, development plans, plans, profiles and specifications are submitted for review, the City Manager shall prepare an estimate of the cost of reviewing and
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 151:
Subdivision Regulations
123
7722743.2
inspection of all improvement plans. The subdivider shall thereupon deposit an additional amount of money, as well as any Architectural Review Office fee, equal to the estimated cost. All work done by the City Manager in connection with checking, computing and correcting such plans for improvements shall be charged against the deposit.
(B) If, during the progress of the work, the cost thereof appears to exceed the amount so deposited, the City Manager shall notify the subdivider of this fact and shall do no further work in connection with such review until the subdivider has deposited such additional sum of money determined necessary by the City Manager to cover the cost of the work. The subdivider shall also pay to the City Manager a fee to defray the total cost of field inspection of the improvements.
(C) The inspection fee shall be determined by the City Manager. The subdivider is held responsible for all inspection fees which will be payable monthly. The bond posted by the subdivider guarantees the payment of all inspection fees and no bonds will be released until all inspection fees have been paid in full.
(D) The City Manager shall be under no duty to proceed to view any plans or have any plans reviewed until such deposit is placed with the city.
(1985 Code, § 151.111) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970; Ord. 88-11, passed 3-7-1988)
§ 151.142 PAYMENT OF FEES
The filing fee, plan checking and field inspection fees shall be paid in legal tender or by check or money order made payable to the city and deposited with the City Manager.
(1985 Code, § 151.112) (Ord. 1030, passed 10-19-1970)
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 152:
Building Code and Regulations
124
7722743.2
CHAPTER 152: BUILDING CODE AND REGULATIONS
152.01 Building Department established
152.02 Building Codes adopted by reference
152.03 Administration of Building Code
152.04 Building permit required and building permit fees
152.05 Conformance to Building and Zoning Codes; revocation
152.06 Unsafe, dangerous, or unsanitary buildings
152.07 Erection and removal of structures within certain areas
152.08 Notice to repair or demolish building; action by city
152.09 Order to vacate buildings
152.10Notice in writing to vacate building
152.11 References in codes to city and officials
152.12 Variances and appeals for the Residential Building Code
152.99 Penalty
§ 152.01 BUILDING DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED
There is established a Building Department for the city, with authority to approve plans and specifications and enforce the City Building Code within the corporate limits of the city.
(1985 Code, § 152.01) (Ord. 726, passed 2-6-1961; Ord. 1087, passed 3-20-1972)
§ 152.02 BUILDING CODES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE
A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the office of the Building Department of the city being marked and designated as the Residential Building Code of Ohio for One-, Two- and Three-Family Dwellings as adopted by the Ohio Board of Building Standards pursuant to R.C. § 3781.10, be and is hereby adopted as the Residential Code of the city for regulating and governing the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, location, removal and demolition of detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories in height with separate means of egress as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Residential Code on file in the office of the city are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any.
(1985 Code, § 152.02) (Ord. 91-22, passed 3-4-1991; Ord. 05-19, passed 8-22-2005; Ord. 06-26, passed 9-25-2006)
§ 152.03 ADMINISTRATION OF BUILDING CODE
The Building Department of the city shall be administered by the City Manager, acting as Building Inspector. All plans and specifications for the erection within this city of public buildings or parts and appurtenances thereof that may be used as places of resort, assembly, education, entertainment, lodging, dwelling, trade, manufacture, repair, storage, traffic or occupancy, or use for any other purpose, by the public excepting only single-family, two-family and three-family dwelling houses, shall be approved, and the construction of the buildings shall be inspected by an architect or professional engineer that is registered
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 152:
Building Code and Regulations
125
7722743.2
in the state and has at least five years’ experience in building construction or design, if the City Manager is not himself or herself so qualified for such building plan approval and inspection, engaged for such purposes as a member of the staff of the Building Department, either on a full-time or part-time basis.
(1985 Code, § 152.03) (Ord. 726, passed 2-6-1961; Ord. 1087, passed 3-20-1972)
Cross-reference: Withholding of building permit, see § 153.21
§ 152.04 BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED AND BUILDING PERMIT FEES
(A) General.
(1) All commercial, public building and proposed subdivision and housing development projects will require submission of plans (preliminary or final) to the Department of Buildings of the city for approval and will require a plan review fee of $75 to be paid at time of submission of plans.
(2) Projects covered by divisions (A)(1), (A)(2) and (B) will require approvals from the following agencies prior to construction:
(a) City of Madeira;
(b) County Board of Health;
(c) Madeira-Indian Hill Fire Department; and
(d) IBI-Electrical Inspection.
(3) Any alterations, repairs, additions or modifications to existing structures and/or including lot improvements on real property will require the submission of an application for building permit of the city. This application shall be submitted whether a building permit fee is required or not.
(B) Commercial and Public Buildings.
(1) New Buildings, Alterations, Additions and Repairs. A flat fee of $100 for plan review plus $5 per $1,000 based on estimated costs will be charged. This cost shall include site development (landscaping, paving, parking, parking lots and the like), heating, cooling, ventilating systems and wrecking. All commercial plans shall be subject to the ARO fee as outlined in Chapter 161 and a 3% State Board of Building Standards review fee levied by the state.
(2) Re-Roofing and Fences. A flat fee of $50 shall be charged.
(3) Gutters and Downspouts/Storm Drains. A flat fee of $50 shall be charged.
(4) Ductless Space Heaters, Floor Furnaces, Fireplaces, Infrared Heaters or Other Low Heat Producing Appliances.
(a) 500,000 BTU and under: $70 first unit, $25 each additional unit in same building; and
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 152:
Building Code and Regulations
126
7722743.2
(b) Over 500,000 BTU, fee to be figured in accordance with division (C)(2) below.
(5) Power or Process Steam Boilers. A flat fee of $70 per unit shall be charged, plus an additional $25 for each additional unit.
(6) Signs and billboards. Signs and billboards will require a separate permit under this division.
(a) Walls signs. One dollar per square foot, minimum fee of $50.
(b) Projecting signs. One dollar per square foot, minimum fee of $50.
(c) Roof signs, including billboards and advertising roof signs. One dollar per square foot, with a minimum fee of $50.
(d) Temporary signs. Five dollars.
(e) Ground signs, including billboards and other advertising signs fastened to the ground. One dollar per square foot, minimum fee of $50.
(7) Fire Protection Sprinkler System.
(a) Fire protection (sprinkler and fire suppression systems) will require a separate permit.
(b) Permit fee for wet or dry type system shall be $15 per 1,000 aggregate square feet, gravity or pressure tanks, or fire pumps included as an integral part of the system.
(8) Fire Suppression Systems. Dry chemical for hoods, ducts, surface protection:
(a) Where the cost is not more than $500, the fee is $50;
(b) Where the cost is more than $500, but less than $1,000, the fee is $75; and
(c) Where the cost is $1,000 or more, the fee is $75 plus $40 for each $1,000 or fraction thereof over $1,000.
(9) Smoke, Fire, and Security Systems. Fee shall be based on furnished and installed contract price cost basis using fee schedule contained in division (B) above.
(10) Drainage Reviews. Fee shall be based on the per hour rate established per contract with the City Engineer.
(11) Temporary Structures. Temporary structures with a construction cost of less than $5,000. A flat fee of $50 plus $5 for each 100 square feet of area or fraction thereof, based on outside dimensions.
(C) Residential, Single and Two-Family Dwellings. (Three-family or more dwellings will be governed by divisions (A)(1) and (B) above.)
(1) New Dwelling. Flat fee of $950 for plan review plus $100 for each 1,000 square feet of area or fraction thereof, based on outside dimensions of the structure of each floor level to include
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 152:
Building Code and Regulations
127
7722743.2
basement, cellar and sub-cellar floors. This fee when stated or shown on the original submission includes fees for driveway curb cuts, patios, street openings, parking lots, heating systems and other items normally requiring a permit if done separately.
(2) Alterations, Additions and Repairs, Including Detached Garages.
(a) General. Based on the estimated cost of work the fee schedule shall be as follows:
(i) Where the cost is not more than $500, the fee is $40;
(ii) Where the cost is more than $500, but not more than $1,000, the fee is $65; and
(iii) Where the cost is more than $1,000, the fee is $65 plus $15 for each $1,000 or fraction thereof, over and above the first $1,000.Detached sheds and other accessory or temporary structures with a construction cost of less than $5,000. A flat fee of $30 plus $5 for each 100 square feet of area or fraction thereof, based on outside dimensions shall be charged.
(b) Reroofing and Fences. A flat fee of $50 shall be charged.
(c) Gutters and Downspouts/Storm Drains. A flat fee of $50 shall be charged.
(d) Swimming Pools. Family type swimming pools manufactured for above-ground and partially in-ground up to 20 feet in diameter, or 20 feet square/rectangular shall be charged $50. Above 20 feet and in-ground construction pools shall be included in (C)(2)(b) above.
(D) Moving of Buildings. A permit shall be obtained for each operation of moving a building from a location in the city to another location. Where the new location is upon another lot in the city, a permit shall be obtained for constructing a new basement or foundation and such information shall be provided as would be provided for any new building, such as proposed elevation of floors in relation to ground, proposed grading of yard, location of sewers, and the like. The fee for the moving work shall be based on the estimated cost of the moving. It shall be determined in accordance with division (C)(2) above.
(E) Wrecking. A flat fee of $50 per building or structure, up to two stories including basement and roof, plus a flat fee of $15 for each additional story and sub-basement shall be charged.
(F) New or Replaced Furnaces/Air Conditioning.
(1) Furnaces. A flat fee of $70 shall be charged for the first unit and an additional $25 for each additional unit.
(2) Air Conditioning. A flat fee of $70 shall be charged for the first unit and an additional $25 for each additional unit.
(G) Ductless space heaters, floor furnaces, fireplaces, infrared heaters, or other low heat producing appliances.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 152:
Building Code and Regulations
128
7722743.2
(1) BTU and under; $70 first unit, $25 each additional unit in same building; and
(2) Over 500,000 BTU, fee to be figured in accordance with division (C)(2) above.
(1985 Code, § 152.04) (Ord. 87-18, passed 5-4-1987; Ord. 88-46, passed 11-7-1988; Ord. 88-62, passed 7-10-1989; Ord. 89-89, passed 11-29-1989; Ord. 92-81, passed 12-7-1992; Ord. 93-20, passed 3-15-1993; Ord. 97-68, passed 1-12-1998; Ord. 02-46, passed 1-13-2003; Ord. 04-33, passed 12-13-2004)
§ 152.05 CONFORMANCE TO BUILDING AND ZONING CODES; REVOCATION
No dwelling house or public building shall hereafter be erected, constructed, repaired, altered or removed, nor shall the equipment of any such building or of the premises thereof be hereafter erected, constructed, installed, repaired, altered or removed, except in conformity with the City Building Code governing the same, and pursuant to approval of the plans and specifications in connection therewith, and issuance of a building permit therefor, by the Building Department. It shall likewise be unlawful to occupy or use any such building or equipment that has been erected, constructed, altered or otherwise dealt with in violation of such code. Plans and specifications submitted for such approval shall clearly indicate the intentions of the applicant relative to all items, elements and aspects of construction, occupancy, and use regulated by the code and the City Zoning Code; and at the time of such submission for approval, one complete set shall be furnished to the Building Department for its permanent retention. All dimensions shown on such plans relative to location and size of lots shall be based on actual survey; and the lot to be built upon, and the location of the structure to be built thereon, shall be staked out before construction is started. Building permits shall expire when no construction is started thereunder within six months from date of issuance, and may be revoked when construction thereunder is discontinued for one year, or when there is violation thereof under any of the provisions of such Building or Zoning Code or any of the terms of such permits, or when the continuance of any work thereunder becomes dangerous to life or property.
(1985 Code, § 152.05) (Ord. 726, passed 2-6-1961; Ord. 854, passed 10-18-1965; Ord. 1087, passed 3-20-1972) Penalty, see § 152.99
§ 152.06 UNSAFE, DANGEROUS OR UNSANITARY BUILDINGS
Whenever it shall appear that an unsafe, dangerous or unsanitary condition exists in connection with any building subject to the provisions of this chapter, or that any condition exists constituting a violation of any provision of this chapter or of any law relating to the same subject matter, the Building Inspector shall forthwith give notice of such condition or violation to the owner or agent in charge of such building, and shall order the same to be made safe, secure or sanitary, and to be placed in substantial compliance with the provisions of this chapter, or to be taken down and removed.
(1985 Code, § 152.06) (Ord. 726, passed 2-6-1961; Ord. 1087, passed 3-20-1972) Penalty, see § 152.99
§ 152.07 ERECTION AND REMOVAL OF STRUCTURES WITHIN CERTAIN AREAS
(A) The erection of any structure or of any additions to any structure is prohibited in the following described area in the city unless the outer walls and frame of the structures or additions are constructed of brick and mortar, stone, concrete or other fireproof material.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 152:
Building Code and Regulations
129
7722743.2
(B) This section shall not prohibit the use of ornamental wooden trim on structures so long as it meets with the approval of the Building Inspector.
(C) The areas to be covered by the restrictions in this section known as the fire limits of the city shall be all areas that are presently located or hereafter located in Business “A,” Business “B” and Business “O” under the existing Zoning Code or any amendments thereto.
(D) No structure or addition to a structure shall be moved from one lot to another within this area or moved from an area not covered by this section into the fire limits ordinance section unless the outer walls and frames and additions meet the requirements of division (A) above.
(E) This section shall not apply to any temporary building not over one story in height erected for the temporary use of any builder or contractor engaged in construction operations within this area, the erection and use of which is necessary to the carrying out of the operations. No building shall be erected or moved into the area without a permit therefor from the City Manager. The building shall be removed by the builder or contractor promptly upon completion of the operations.
(F) Any structure or any addition to any structure erected contrary to, or not removed in accordance with, the provisions of this section shall, after 30 days’ written notice to the owners or agent of the owners of the structure or addition, be removed by and pursuant to the order of the Manager, and the expense of removal shall be charged to the owners.
(G) The provisions of this section shall govern. They shall prevail over any prior ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with these provisions.
(1985 Code, § 152.07) (Ord. 989, passed 11-12-1970; Ord. 1087, passed 3-20-1972; Ord. 1155, passed 3-18-1974) Penalty, see § 152.99
§ 152.08 NOTICE TO REPAIR OR DEMOLISH BUILDING; ACTION BY CITY
(A) If any such building shall in the opinion of the Building Inspector represent an immediate hazard to life or property, his or her notice shall order remedial action to be taken forthwith, and shall require the owner or agent served to advise him or her in writing immediately as to the intention of such owner or agent with reference thereto. If, within 24 hours after service of a notice, the owner or agent fails so to advise the Building Inspector, or, in lieu thereof, fails to comply fully with the order, or if at any time the owner or agent refuses to comply with the order, or advises the Building Inspector of his or her intention to comply and then fails to proceed promptly with such compliance, or commences such compliance and fails diligently to carry it to completion, the Building Inspector shall be authorized to enter upon the subject premises, without further delay, with force sufficient to make such building or any part thereof, secure or to demolish or remove it as he or she may consider necessary for the public safety and welfare. The owner of the subject premises, or any other persons responsible therefor, shall be liable to the city for the entire cost thereby incurred.
(B) In any event, and in every case the Building Inspector shall cause a written or printed notice to be placed on the premises as a warning to the public.
(1985 Code, § 152.08) (Ord. 726, passed 2-6-1961; Ord. 1087, passed 3-20-1972) Penalty, § 152.99
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 152:
Building Code and Regulations
130
7722743.2
§ 152.09 ORDER TO VACATE BUILDINGS
The Building Inspector shall be authorized to order the vacation of buildings when occupied; or when any work, operation or construction is being performed therein or thereon is in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or is in his or her opinion, unsafe or unsanitary; or when the owner, agent or tenant fails or refuses to comply with any lawful order issued by the Building Inspector. (1985 Code, § 152.09) (Ord. 726, passed 2-6-1961; Ord. 1087, passed 3-20-1972) Penalty, see § 152.99
§ 152.10 NOTICE IN WRITING TO VACATE BUILDING
Every order of vacation shall be in writing and shall be served upon the owner, agent or tenant, stating the reasons for the order and specifying the time by which such vacation must be effected. When the Building Inspector shall deem it necessary, a notice of vacation shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the subject building. After the posting of any such notice or the service of any such order of vacation, it shall be unlawful to occupy or permit the occupancy of the subject premises, or any portion thereof, until the provisions of this chapter and the requirements of all lawful orders issued by the Building Inspector are complied with. When it shall appear to the Building Inspector that the reasons for his or her order of vacation have ceased to exist and that the subject building and the occupancy thereof are in compliance with law and his or her orders, he or she shall in writing rescind such order of vacation. (1985 Code, § 152.10) (Ord. 726, passed 2-6-1961; Ord. 1087, passed 3-20-1972) Penalty, see § 152.99
§ 152.11 REFERENCES IN CODES TO CITY AND OFFICIALS
All references to the state or the county, or to officials, departments or agencies of the state or county, or to the Ohio Revised Code or the County Building Code, in the Ohio Building Code or the County Building Code shall be deemed to refer to the city, its equivalent officials or departments, and the provisions of this chapter, as applicable, and any other references of a particular nature in the Ohio Building Code or County Building Code context thereof as the City Building Code.
(1985 Code, § 152.11) (Ord. 726, passed 2-6-1961; Ord. 1087, passed 3-20-1972)
§ 152.12 VARIANCES AND APPEALS PROCESS FOR THE RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CODE
(A) Purpose. The city has adopted the Hamilton County Building Code which in turn has adopted the Residential Code of Ohio (Chapters 4101:8-1 to 4101:8-43 of the Ohio Administrative Code, as amended and Chapter 3781of the Ohio Revised Code, as amended). The purpose of this section is to promote the public health, safety and welfare by creating a local appeals process in order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the City Manager or Building Inspector relative to the application of the Residential Code of Ohio (Chapters 4101:8-1 to 4101:8-43 of the Ohio Administrative Code, as amended and Chapter 3781of the Ohio Revised Code, as amended).
(B) Appeals Process.
(1) Any owner, builder, contractor or any person, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in a residential property (“eligible appellant”) has the right to appeal any decision, order or determination made by the City Manager or Building Inspector relative to the
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 152:
Building Code and Regulations
131
7722743.2
application of the Residential Code of Ohio to said residential property. An eligible appellant desiring to appeal any decision, order or determination made by the City Manager or Building Inspector may do so by filing a written appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(2) Requests for an appeals hearing shall be made in writing to the Board of Zoning Appeals within 30 days of the date of the decision, order or determination of the City Manager or Building Inspector. Each request shall be accompanied with a processing fee of $75. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall schedule a hearing within 45 days of receipt of the request and notify the appellant of the hearing time, date and location by regular mail.
(3) All adjudication proceedings of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be conducted in accordance with R.C. §§ 119.09 and 119.13, as required by R.C. § 3781.031. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the authority to affirm, modify or reverse the order, decision or ruling of the City Manager or the Building Inspector and the authority to grant a variance from the terms of the Residential Code of Ohio as set forth below. All decisions of the Board of Zoning Appeals pertaining to appeals and variances related to the Residential Code of Ohio shall be in writing.
(a) A decision, order or determination made by the City Manager or Building Inspector may be reversed or modified, in full or in part, by the Board of Zoning Appeals if it finds:
(i) The decision, order or determination is contrary to the Residential Code of Ohio or any other applicable law, rules, regulations and ordinances;
(ii) The decision, order or determination is contrary to a reasonable interpretation or application of the Residential Code of Ohio or any other applicable law, rules, regulations and ordinances; or
(iii) That a variance from the provisions of the Residential Code of Ohio, rules, regulations or ordinances, in a specific case, depending on the facts established by the appellant, will not be contrary to the public interest or safety of persons using said premises and where a literal enforcement of such code provisions would result in unnecessary hardship.
(b) Such determination by the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be based on the evidence presented at the hearing.
(4) For purposes of the appeals hearing, the Board of Zoning Appeals may solicit the attendance of witnesses, production of records or documents and may take the testimony of witnesses. All testimony shall be under oath, with a record made and kept, along with such evidence as submitted.
(5) The Board of Zoning Appeals shall render its decision in writing within 45 days after the conclusion of the appeals hearing. A certified copy of the decision shall be mailed to the appellant by regular mail. Decisions of the Board of Zoning Appeals, including all conditions, shall be enforced by the City Manager or Building Inspector in keeping with the deadlines set by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 152:
Building Code and Regulations
132
7722743.2
(6) All decisions of the Board of Zoning Appeals are final. However, an appeal from the decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals may be made to the Court of Common Pleas in accordance with the applicable law, rule or regulation. Such appeals must be made within 30 days of the date of the written order of the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(7) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this section, all appeals related to the Commercial Building Code (Chapters 4101:1-1 et seq. of the Ohio Administrative Code, as amended and Chapter 3781 of the Ohio Revised Code, amended) shall be to the Hamilton County Board of Building Appeals, if so contracted by the City Council or the Ohio Board of Building Appeals, in accordance with the Ohio Revised Code.
(1985 Code, § 152.12) (Ord. 91-22, passed 3-4-1991; Ord. 13-12, passed 3-11-2013)
§ 152.13 PENALTY
(A) Any person or entity who owns or controls any buildings, and violates any regulation under, or provision or amendment of this chapter, or violates any certificate or permit issued thereunder or fails to obey any lawful order of the Building Inspector issued pursuant thereto shall upon conviction for such violation or failure be fined not more than $150. Each day in which such person or entity continues in such violation or failure shall be deemed a separate offense.
(B) Any person or entity who assists in any violation shall upon conviction of such assistance be fined not more than $150. Each day in which a person or entity continues to assist in such violation shall be deemed a separate offense.
(1985 Code, § 152.99) (Ord. 726, passed 2-6-1961; Ord. 1087, passed 3-20-1972; Ord. 88-46, passed 11-7-1988; Ord. 04-21, passed 8-23-2004)
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 153:
Excavating, Filling and Grading of Land
133
7722743.2
CHAPTER 153: EXCAVATING, FILLING AND GRADING OF LAND
153.01 Excavation, filling and grading regulated
153.02 Permit required
153.03 Application for permit
153.04 Exemptions from permit requirement
153.05 Discretion of City Manager to waive requirements
153.06 Permit fee
153.07 Permits valid for one year
153.08 Reports to City Manager; when required
153.09 Bond required for excavation or fill
153.10 Work during winter months restricted
153.11 Limitations on slope of cut
153.12 Steepness of cut slope
153.13 Terraces on filled slopes
153.14 Acceptable fill material
153.15 Compaction of fills
153.16 Planting required to control erosion
153.17 Grading hillside areas restricted
153.18 Notice to correct unstable property
153.19 Land or fill constituting menace to property or public way
153.20 Maintenance of retaining walls and structure
153.21 Authority to withhold building permit
153.22 Utility service constituting threat or hazard
153.23 Filling natural watercourse or altering natural flow of water
153.24 Changing natural drainage of property
153.25 City not liable for permits
153.26 Appeal to Board of Zoning Appeals
153.99 Penalty
Cross-reference: Grading, excavations and fitting in subdivisions, see § 151.091
§ 153.01 EXCAVATION, FILLING AND GRADING REGULATED
No person or corporation shall excavate, fill or grade any land other than as provided by this chapter, except that this chapter shall not apply to any excavation, removal, fill or deposit of any earth or other materials within any property that is used or dedicated to be used for cemetery purposes; provided, as to this exception, that no excavation, removal, fill or deposit affects the lateral support of or increases the stresses in or pressure upon any adjacent or contiguous property not owned by the owner of the cemetery property.
(1985 Code, § 153.01) Penalty, see § 153.99
§ 153.02 PERMIT REQUIRED
No owner of any property or any person in possession or control of any property shall hereafter permit or allow any excavating, grading or filling to be done on the property unless a permit has been issued.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 153:
Excavating, Filling and Grading of Land
134
7722743.2
(1985 Code, § 153.02) Penalty, see § 153.99
§ 153.03 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT
No grading permit shall be issued except on the basis of plans and specifications submitted to the City Manager, which plans and specifications shall include a contour map showing the present contours of the subject land and the proposed contours thereof, a plot plan showing the location of the proposed grading, reports and recommendations from a state-licensed professional engineer relative to surface and subsurface exploration and conditions of the subject land, a description of the type and features of the soil of the subject land, the location of the top and toe of all proposed cuts and fills, the location of all “daylight” lines, the proposed amount of cut and fill, the details and location of any proposed drainage structures, walls, cribbing and surface protection, and the location of the proposed disposal site for any contemplated excess material. Such plans and specifications and accompanying maps and other required submissions shall be prepared by a state-licensed professional engineer, and shall not be acceptable unless so prepared.
(1985 Code, § 153.03) Penalty, see § 153.99
§ 153.04 EXEMPTIONS FROM PERMIT REQUIREMENT
No permit shall be required for any excavation that does not exceed three feet in vertical depth at its deepest point, or for any fill of less than five cubic yards of material, or for any fill that does not exceed three feet in vertical depth at its deepest point and has no slope at any point steeper than five horizontal units of measurement per one vertical unit of measurement, or for any excavation, below finish grade, for basements and footings of buildings, swimming pools or other underground structures authorized by valid building permits.
(1985 Code, § 153.04) Penalty, see § 153.99
§ 153.05 DISCRETION OF CITY MANAGER TO WAIVE REQUIREMENTS
The City Manager may waive all requirements of this chapter for plans and specifications if the information in the application for any particular excavating, filling or grading permit is sufficient to indicate that the proposed excavating, filling or grading will meet all other requirements of this chapter.
(1985 Code, § 153.05) Penalty, see § 153.99
§ 153.06 PERMIT FEE
Before issuing any grading permit, the City Manager shall collect a fee, the amount of which shall be $10 for each 1,000 cubic yards (or fraction thereof), plus $3 for each 1,000 cubic yards (or fraction thereof) in excess of 1,000 cubic yards, of earth or other materials moved.
(1985 Code, § 153.06) Penalty, see § 153.99
§ 153.07 PERMITS VALID FOR ONE YEAR
Excavating, filling or grading permits shall be valid for one year. However, the work so authorized must be started within 90 days after issuance of the permits.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 153:
Excavating, Filling and Grading of Land
135
7722743.2
(1985 Code, § 153.07) Penalty, see § 153.99
§ 153.08 REPORTS TO CITY MANAGER; WHEN REQUIRED
The person to whom any permit is granted shall report to the City Manager when he or she is ready to begin work under the permit, and shall so report not less than two days before the work is begun. He or she shall also report to the City Manager when all rough grading has been completed, and when excavations are complete and ready for detaining and crib walls, and when reinforcing steel is in place and concrete is ready to be poured, and when all work including installation of all drainage and other structures has been completed, and shall so report immediately upon completion of each stage of work.
(1985 Code, § 153.08) Penalty, see § 153.99
§ 153.09 BOND REQUIRED FOR EXCAVATION OR FILL
Before a permit is issued for excavation or fill of 250 cubic yards or more of earth in any hillside area, the owner of the property on which the excavation is proposed to be made or the fill is proposed to be deposited shall file with the City Manager a bond, naming the city as obligee thereof, and with corporate surety authorized to do business in the state as a surety, in an amount sufficient to cover the entire cost of the work of the excavation or fill. The City Manager may waive this requirement if he or she finds that the proposed excavation or fill is not of such nature that it will be either actually or potentially hazardous.
(1985 Code, § 153.09) Penalty, see § 153.99
§ 153.10 WORK DURING WINTER MONTHS RESTRICTED
No grading, excavating or filling work involving the movement of more than 250 cubic yards of earth or other materials shall be authorized on any single site during the period between December 1 and April 15 in any year, if the City Manager determines that such work will, if performed during such period, endanger public health or safety.
(1985 Code, § 153.10) Penalty, see § 153.99
§ 153.11 LIMITATIONS ON SLOPE OF CUT
No cut slope shall exceed a vertical height of 100 feet unless horizontal benches with minimum widths of 30 feet are installed at each 100 feet of vertical height.
(1985 Code, § 153.11) Penalty, see § 153.99
§ 153.12 STEEPNESS OF CUT SLOPE
No excavation shall be made with a cut face steeper in slope than two horizontal units of measurement per one vertical unit measurement, except that the City Manager may permit an excavation to be made with a steeper cut face if an applicant demonstrates satisfactorily by means of appropriate subsurface exploration and the written opinion of a state-licensed professional engineer that the material making up the proposed slope of the proposed excavation, and the material underlying the proposed slope, are capable of standing on a steeper slope.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 153:
Excavating, Filling and Grading of Land
136
7722743.2
(1985 Code, § 153.12) Penalty, see § 153.99
§ 153.13 TERRACES ON FILLED SLOPES
Intervening paved terraces on filled slopes shall have minimum widths of eight feet, and shall be spaced at vertical intervals of 25 feet.
(1985 Code, § 153.13) Penalty, see § 153.99
§ 153.14 ACCEPTABLE FILL MATERIAL
No material other than acceptable fill materials, as defined herein, shall be used in any fill.
(A) Acceptable Fill Materials.
(1) Soil. All earth materials, organic or inorganic, which have resulted from natural processes such as weathering, decay and chemical action in which more than 35% by weight of the grains or particles will pass a No. 200 sieve;
(2) Granular Materials. Natural or synthetic mineral aggregate, such as broken or crushed rock, gravel, slag, sand or cinders, which can be readily incorporated in an eight-inch layer, and in which at least 65% by weight of the grains or particles are retained on a No. 200 sieve;
(3) Shale. Laminated material, formed by the consolidation in nature of soil, having a finely stratified structure;
(4) Rock. Sandstone, limestone, glacial boulders, brick and old concrete which cannot readily be incorporated in an eight-inch layer; and
(5) Random Material. A mixture of previously defined materials which can be readily incorporated in an eight-inch layer.
(B) Top Eight Inches. The top eight inches of any fill shall be soil or granular materials as defined in divisions (A)(1) and (A)(2) above.
(1985 Code, § 153.14) Penalty, see § 153.99
§ 153.15 COMPACTION OF FILLS
All fills shall be compacted to at least 90% relative compaction, as determined by ASTM method D1557-58T. If, however, the required degree of compaction cannot be attained on any particular slope, the slope shall be cut back until material having the required degree of compaction is exposed. Fills in nonhillside areas need not be compacted, however, where they do not exceed one foot in depth. (1985 Code, § 153.15) Penalty, see § 153.99
§ 153.16 PLANTING REQUIRED TO CONTROL EROSION.
All fill and cut slopes in hillside areas that are determined by the City Manager to be subject to erosion shall be planted with suitable ground cover plants to protect the slopes against erosion, and the owner of each
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 153:
Excavating, Filling and Grading of Land
137
7722743.2
property on which any slope is created shall be responsible for so planting the slope and for maintaining the planting thereon until such time as the slope is adequately stabilized by ground cover. (1985 Code, § 153.16) Penalty, see § 153.99
§ 153.17 GRADING HILLSIDE AREAS RESTRICTED.
No person shall conduct under any circumstances any grading operation for other than building site development in hillside areas, except that grading not connected with such development may be conducted when the City Manager finds that the grading will enhance the physical stabilization of property, or that the grading is not detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, and is in conformity with the approved master plan for such areas.
(1985 Code, § 153.17) Penalty, see § 153.99
§ 153.18 NOTICE TO CORRECT UNSTABLE PROPERTY.
Whenever the City Manager determines that any property is unstable because of any landslide, subsidence or inundation, he or she shall give written notice thereof to the owner of the property, specifying the conditions creating the instability, and the owner shall, upon receipt of the notice, correct the condition of instability in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and the requirements and conditions set forth in the notice, provided that the requirements and conditions represent reasonable implementation of the provisions of this chapter.
(1985 Code, § 153.18) Penalty, see § 153.99
§ 153.19 LAND OR FILL CONSTITUTING MENACE TO PROPERTY OR PUBLIC WAY
Whenever the City Manager determines that any land or any existing excavation or fill has become a menace to person or health, endangers any public or private property, or affects the safety, usability or stability of any public way, the owner or other person in possession of the property on which the excavation or fill exists shall, upon receipt of written notice thereof from the City Manager, correct the condition creating the menace or danger or affecting the public way, and shall do so in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the requirements and conditions set forth in the notice, provided that the requirements and conditions represent reasonable implementation of the provisions of this chapter. (1985 Code, § 153.19) Penalty, see § 153.99
§ 153.20 MAINTENANCE OF RETAINING WALLS AND STRUCTURE
The owner of any property in any hillside area on which any excavation or fill has been made pursuant to any permit granted under the provisions of this chapter, and any person in possession of the property, shall maintain in good condition and repair all retaining walls, cribbing, drainage structures and other protective devices shown in the approved plans and specifications on which the permit was granted.
(1985 Code, § 153.20) Penalty, see § 153.99
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 153:
Excavating, Filling and Grading of Land
138
7722743.2
§ 153.21 AUTHORITY TO WITHHOLD BUILDING PERMIT
The City Manager shall have the authority to withhold any building permit where the proposed building site is in an area of unstable soil or subject to slides, and to continue to withhold the permit until such time as the owner of the site furnishes him or her with the written opinion of a professional engineer licensed in the state stating that the soil in or adjacent to the site is not of such nature as to endanger the proposed building, or that adequate provision has been made in the plans and specifications on which the application for the permit is based to protect against damage to the proposed building by reason of slides or of any unstable soil. The City Manager shall have the same authority with regard to permits for proposed buildings in areas subject to inundation, except that the required written statement of a state- licensed professional engineer shall relate to the safety of the proposed building in terms of the threat of inundation.
(1985 Code, § 153.21) Penalty, see § 153.99
Cross-reference: Building permits, see Ch. 152
§ 153.22 UTILITY SERVICE CONSTITUTING THREAT OR HAZARD
Whenever the City Manager determines that any utility service constitutes or materially contributes to any hazard to person, health, property or public welfare, the City Manager may order the service to be disconnected to the extent necessary to eliminate the hazard.
(1985 Code, § 153.22) Penalty, see § 153.99
§ 153.23 FILLING NATURAL WATERCOURSE OR ALTERING NATURAL FLOW OF WATER
No person or corporation shall fill any natural watercourse, or in any manner impair, accelerate or alter the natural flow of the water in any watercourse, without the written consent of the City Manager and the construction, at the expense of the person or corporation, of such permanent additions to the sewer system of the city, and the granting of such easements in connection therewith, as may be required by the City Manager for the purpose of providing drainage and passage for the water that might otherwise have been naturally drained and accommodated, within banks, by the watercourse. In determining whether or not to grant consent, the City Manager shall take into consideration the rights of lower riparian owners within the city, or shall notify the owners of the three next lower riparian properties under wholly different ownership, of the upper riparian owner’s request to fill, or impair, accelerate or alter the flow of water in the watercourse, and withhold the granting of any consent for not less than 30 days after notification.
(1985 Code, § 153.23) Penalty, see § 153.99
Cross-reference: Surface water runoff, see Ch. 51
Debris in watercourse, see § 96.15 through 96.17
§ 153.24 CHANGING NATURAL DRAINAGE OF PROPERTY.
No person or corporation shall change the grade of any part of his, her or its property in such manner as to change to the substantial detriment or damage of any other property owner within the city, and without the written consent of each such other property owner so affected, the natural drainage of the property, nor shall
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 153:
Excavating, Filling and Grading of Land
139
7722743.2
he, she or it construct or install any structure or piece of material in or on the property the effect of which would be to change the natural drainage to the substantial detriment or damage of any other owner, without such written consents.
(1985 Code, § 153.24) Penalty, see § 153.99
§ 153.25 CITY NOT LIABLE FOR PERMITS
Failure by the City Manager to observe or recognize any hazardous condition or to deny a permit where any dangerous condition exists or may be created by the work so authorized shall not relieve the owner, person or corporation in possession of any property from his, her or its responsibility for any such condition or damages resulting therefrom, or resulting from any condition created by the work performed on the property pursuant to any permit, and shall not create in the city, its officers, agents or employees, any responsibility for any such conditions or damages.
(1985 Code, § 153.25) Penalty, see § 153.99
§ 153.26 APPEAL TO BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
Appeals from any decision or action of the City Manager in the administration or enforcement of the provisions of this chapter may be taken to the Board of Zoning Appeals of the city, and the Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the authority to permit, on appeal in any given case, methods, standards or materials other than those required by this chapter if, in its opinion, strict compliance with the provisions of this chapter is unnecessary in such case, provided deviant methods, standards or materials other than those required by this chapter are consistent with the objectives of this chapter.
(1985 Code, § 153.26) Penalty, see § 153.99
Cross-reference: Board of Zoning Appeals, see Ch. 168
§ 153.27 PENALTY
Whoever shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not more than $150, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation or failure occurs or continues. In the event of any violation or failure by a corporation such violation or failure shall equally be deemed committed by the president of the corporation who shall be in such event deemed personally amenable to the provisions of this chapter, and subject to the fine hereunder by reason of such violation or failure.
(1985 Code, § 153.99) (Ord. 04-21, passed 8-23-2004)
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 154:
Planning Commission
140
7722743.2
CHAPTER 154: PLANNING COMMISSION
General Provisions
154.01 Planning Commission established
Sewer, Street and Sidewalks
154.15 Specifications for sewers, streets and sidewalks
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.01 PLANNING COMMISSION ESTABLISHED
(A) Appointment. See Charter Art. VII, § l.
(B) Powers and Duties. See Charter Art. VII, § 2.
(C) Action of Council Necessary. See Charter Art. VII, § 3.
(D) Appeals. See Charter Art. VII, § 4.
(E) Membership. The Planning Commission shall consist of seven voting members.
(F) Terms of Council Appointee. One Council member appointed to the Planning Commission shall serve until his or her Council term expires.
(1985 Code, § 154.01) (Ord. 85-32, passed 1-6-1986)
Cross-reference: Interpretation of subdivision rules, see § 151.050
Subdivision variance, power to grant, see § 151.125
SEWER, STREET AND SIDEWALKS
§ 154.15 SPECIFICATIONS FOR SEWERS, STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
(A) The contractor shall give two weeks’ advance notice of the expected start of construction, but this requirement may be waived by application in writing to the City Manager.
(B) Specifications.
(1) The construction specifications of the County Engineering Department shall be and are adopted by reference, and shall apply on all construction and materials of sewers.
(2) On all sidewalk and street construction, the construction and materials shall comply with specifications and plats submitted by the developer and approved by the Planning Commission.
(3) The Planning Commission shall in all future developments require the preliminary plat to specify the materials and type of construction of all streets and sidewalks.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 154:
Planning Commission
141
7722743.2
(4) Upon approval of the construction, plats and specifications for sewers, streets and sidewalks, the contractor will then obtain from the City Manager the necessary permits to proceed with the work.
(1985 Code, § 154.11) (Ord. 88-46, passed 11-7-1988)
Cross-reference: Preliminary plat, see § 151.035
Street specifications, see § 151.082
Streets and sidewalks, see Ch. 93
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 155:
Comprehensive Park and Recreation Plan
142
7722743.2
CHAPTER 155: COMPREHENSIVE PARK AND RECREATION PLAN
155.01 Comprehensive park and recreation plan adopted
§ 155.01 COMPREHENSIVE PARK AND RECREATION PLAN ADOPTED
(A) A comprehensive park and recreation plan attached to Ordinance 1046 and made a part thereof is approved and adopted as part of the already existing comprehensive plan for the city.
(B) Council empowers and directs both the City Planning Commission and the City Manager to take all necessary steps to implement the comprehensive park and recreation plan adopted, and to take all necessary steps to obtain grants from either or both the federal or state government.
(1985 Code, § 155.01) (Ord. 1046, passed - -)
Cross-reference: City parks, see Ch. 94 Recreation Board, see Ch. 33Madeira - Land Usage
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 156:
Swimming Pool Construction
143
7722743.2
CHAPTER 156: SWIMMING POOL CONSTRUCTION
156.01 Location of swimming pools in yards
156.02 Pools not requiring foundation or subsurface support
156.03 Requirements for swimming pool construction
156.04 Construction of club pool; parking area
156.05 Club pool; fence; inspection of water
156.06 Club pool; hours of operation; conduct
156.07 Compliance with provisions of Building Code
156.99 Penalty
§ 156.01 LOCATION OF SWIMMING POOLS IN YARDS
No person shall hereafter construct, install or erect or attempt to construct, install or erect within the city on any parcel of real property having an area of less than five acres, any pool or other enclosure, whether above or below the surface of the ground, designed or intended to be used for the purpose of swimming, recreational bathing, wading or other recreational water activity unless the area of the surface of the water contained therein does not exceed one-fourth of the area of the rear yard of any structure on the same lot or parcel, and unless no part of the water-containing portion of the pool or enclosure lies within 15 feet of the side line or within 15 feet of the rear line of the lot or parcel on which it is constructed or placed. No part of any pool or enclosure shall be constructed in the front yard of any structure on the same lot or parcel.
(1985 Code, § 156.01) Penalty, see § 156.99
§ 156.02 POOLS NOT REQUIRING FOUNDATION OR SUBSURFACE SUPPORT
(A) Notwithstanding the provisions of § 156.01, any private pool or enclosure complying with all other requirements of this chapter, not constructed or consisting in any part of concrete, and not requiring construction or placement of any foundation or subsurface support, may be installed above grade on any parcel provided that:
(1) No part of the pool or enclosure is within five feet of the side line or within five feet of the rear line of the lot or parcel on which it is installed or placed, or within the front yard of any structure on the same lot or parcel;
(2) All competent occupants of each lot or parcel, any part of which is located within 15 feet of any part of the pool or enclosure (or all competent owners of each other lot or parcel, if the other lot or parcel is then unoccupied, and whether or not the occupants are then actually present or absent from the other lot or parcel), consent in writing to the installation; and
(3) The owners or occupants of the lot or parcel on which the pool or enclosure is installed under the provisions of this section shall remove the pool or enclosure or reinstall it in compliance with § 156.01 within seven days after receiving from any competent owner or occupant of any other lot or parcel a written request to remove the pool or enclosure.
(B) The owners or occupants, any one or more of whom receives any request to remove, shall be jointly and severally responsible for compliance herewith, whether or not informed of the receipt. The
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 156:
Swimming Pool Construction
144
7722743.2
owners and occupants referred to in division (A)(3) above are those in ownership or occupancy at the time of the delivery of the request to remove. The request to remove may be made at any time, with or without cause, and regardless of the lapse of time after installation of any pool or enclosure, or after any owner or occupant may have acquired ownership or entered into occupancy.
(1985 Code, § 156.02) Penalty, see § 156.99
§ 156.03 REQUIREMENTS FOR SWIMMING POOL CONSTRUCTION
(A) No owner or occupant of any parcel of real property within the city shall hereafter construct, install, erect, maintain, use or permit the use of, or permit the continued existence of, any private pool or enclosure on the parcel unless the pool or enclosure has a perimeter not exceeding 25 feet and a depth not exceeding two feet, or unless the pool or enclosure is screened during all hours in which it is not in use and is surrounded by a fence or wall:
(1) Not less than 42, nor more than 78 inches in height above grade;
(2) Located in reasonably close proximity to the pool or enclosure; and
(3) The structure of which is sufficiently rigid to prevent the passage of small children. Any required fence or wall erected to a height of 78 inches, or any lesser height, may be of solid construction and without interstices for its entire height, provided the pool or enclosure it surrounds is located in the yard to the rear of and on the same premises with a dwelling, and that the fence or wall does not at any point extend forward of the rear line of the dwelling.
(B) No owner or occupant shall hereafter maintain, use or permit the use of, or permit the continued existence of, any ladder as a means of access to any pool or enclosure that is erected, located or Swimming Pool Construction maintained above the surface of the ground, and has a perimeter in excess of 25 feet and a depth in excess of two feet, or equip any pool or enclosure with any ladder, or permit the same to be so equipped or to continue to be so equipped, or permit any ladder to be attached or continue to be attached to any pool or enclosure, unless the ladder is readily detachable from the pool or enclosure. The owner or occupant shall detach and remove the ladder from the pool or enclosure promptly upon each termination of the use of the pool or enclosure and shall store the ladder in the dwelling or garage on the same premises with the pool or enclosure during all hours in which the pool or enclosure is not in use. Use of the pool or enclosure shall be deemed to terminate at the end of each season and each day, and of each lesser period of actual use.
(C) No fence or wall shall be erected or constructed without securing a permit therefor from the City Manager. The City Manager shall, in that connection, have the right to require that plans and specifications be submitted by any permit applicant prior to the issuance of any permit.
(1985 Code, § 156.03) Penalty, see § 156.99
§ 156.04 CONSTRUCTION OF CLUB POOL; PARKING AREA
No person shall hereafter construct, install or erect or attempt to construct, install or erect on any parcel of real property within the city any CLUB POOL, which, as used in this chapter, shall be defined as a swimming pool that ten or more persons not of the same family have at any time and by way of membership, securities, part ownership or other arrangement, the right to use, without providing on the same
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 156:
Swimming Pool Construction
145
7722743.2
parcel or on contiguous parcels under the same ownership as the pool, paved parking accommodations having an aggregate area, exclusive of areas necessary for reasonable ingress and egress, at least six times greater than the area of the surface of the water contained in the pool when full. (1985 Code, § 156.04) Penalty, see § 156.99
§ 156.05 CLUB POOL; FENCE; INSPECTION OF WATER.
No person shall hereafter construct, install, erect, maintain, use or permit the use of, or permit the continued existence of any club pool within the city unless the pool is surrounded by a fence at least seven feet in height above grade and located in reasonably close proximity to the pool, unless the required parking accommodations are maintained, and unless the water in the pool is periodically inspected in accordance with the regulations of the County Board of Health. A FENCE shall for the purposes of this section be defined as a chain link barrier with three strands of barbed wire on top.
(1985 Code, § 156.05) Penalty, see § 156.99
§ 156.06 CLUB POOL; HOURS OF OPERATION; CONDUCT
No person shall hereafter use any club pool within the city or carry on activity within the fence required by § 156.05 at any time from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. No person shall, within the area of any club pool fence within the city, conduct himself or herself in an unduly loud manner to the disturbance of the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. No adult person having the right to use any club pool within the city shall permit any floodlights at the pool to be burning during the period the club pool is not to be in use, except as may be required by any emergency.
(1985 Code, § 156.06) Penalty, see § 156.99
§ 156.07 COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS OF BUILDING CODE
Pools subject to the provisions of § 156.03 hereof shall be considered APPURTENANCES within the meaning of the Building Code, and shall not be constructed except pursuant to building permits lawfully issued.
(1985 Code, § 156.07) Penalty, see § 156.99
Cross-reference: Building Code, see Ch. 152
§ 156.99 PENALTY
Any person or entity who violates or assists in violation of any provision of this chapter shall upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $150. Any day that such violation continues shall be a separate offense. However, if the violator is a person or entity regularly engaged in construction, alteration or addition, then they shall be fined not more than $150 for each offense and each day’s continuation of the violation shall be considered a separate offense. In addition to the remedy provided above and any remedy provided under the Ohio Revised Code, the City Law Director shall have the authority and is authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in law or in equity on behalf of the city, any board or official thereof, to prevent the construction, installation or erection of any pool or enclosure in violation of this chapter, or to force the removal of any pool or enclosure so constructed, installed or erected, or to restrain,
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 156:
Swimming Pool Construction
146
7722743.2
correct or abate the violation, or to restrain the use of any pool or enclosure that does not in its construction and facilities and in the facilities connected therewith or in its operation, comply with requirements of this chapter.
(1985 Code, § 156.99) (Ord. 88-46, passed 11-7-1988; Ord. 04-21, passed 8-23-2004)
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 157:
House and Building Numbering Regulations
147
7722743.2
CHAPTER 157: HOUSE AND BUILDING NUMBERING REGULATIONS
157.01 Purpose of number control
157.02 Location and visibility requirements
157.03 Assignment of numbers
157.04 Sub-property numbers for mobile homes, apartments, office buildings
157.05 City Manager review
157.99 Penalty
§ 157.01 PURPOSE OF NUMBER CONTROL
The purpose is to establish a reasonable system for the identification of dwelling units and businesses in a manner that will enable immediate recognition of street addresses from the nearest abutting public right-of-way or private street. This is essential for the purposes of locating premises by emergency and safety personnel, day or night, and for the assistance in the delivery of goods and services to the residents and business persons of the city.
(1985 Code, § 157.01) (Ord. 90-66, passed 9-17-1990)
§ 157.02 LOCATION AND VISIBILITY REQUIREMENTS
(A) On each building, dwelling unit or separate business location which is assigned an identifying number pursuant to § 157.03, the real property number assigned shall be displayed in a manner that makes it easily visible and legible to the average person from a location in the public right-of-way which abuts the front of the building or from the equivalent private drive. These numbers must be displayed in Arabic numerals. The view must be clear and unobstructed from the adjoining street, whether it is a public or private right-of-way. The numbers must be visible both at night and day, and must be reasonably visible at times of inclement weather.
(B) In determining whether the display of the real property numbers satisfies the requirements of division (A) above, the following criteria shall be considered:
(1) The real property number should be displayed within 50 feet of the abutting right-of-way;
(2) The numbers must be Arabic numerals and be not less than three inches in height, and reasonably proportional in width. Script numbers alone are not satisfactory because of the difficulty of immediate recognition;
(3) The numbers must distinctly contrast with the background upon which they are mounted;
(4) The numbers should be displayed either on the applicable building or on a sign or mailbox in the adjacent front yard. Its location should not be easily susceptible to being blocked by either vegetation, snow, motor vehicles or other objects that may periodically hinder its view from the public right-of-way. Numbers which are obscured by the flag on a mailbox or displayed on only one side of a curbside mailbox are not generally acceptable;
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 157:
House and Building Numbering Regulations
148
7722743.2
(5) If numbers are displayed on only one side of a rural-type mail box (two side displays are recommended) the numbers should generally be displayed on the side of the mailbox which faces the on-coming traffic for that side of the street;
(6) The number must be maintained in good repair, including maintenance of contrasting colors; and
(7) Curb painted numbers are not satisfactory by themselves since they may be obscured by vehicles and snow.
(C) On corner lots, the property numbers shall be displayed so that it is visible from the assigned street address of the property, irrespective of the location of the driveway.
(D) Small signs, not exceeding one-half square feet total area, used for displaying street numbers in front yards may be erected without permits.
(E) Owner or occupant surnames, given names, business or location names are not acceptable in lieu of the display of Arabic numerals.
(F) Numbers on mailboxes or other displays which do not clearly designate which specific building is so numbered are not, by themselves, satisfactory.
(1985 Code, § 157.02) (Ord. 90-66, passed 9-17-1990) Penalty, see § 157.99
§ 157.03 ASSIGNMENT OF NUMBERS
(A) It shall be the duty of the City Manager or his or her designee to assign the property numbers required by this chapter. Numbers that are not in sequence may be permitted to remain assigned to the property if the City Manager determines that safety personnel are aware of the problem and that changing the numbers will create significant inconvenience.
(B) The following shall be general guidelines for assignment of property numbers.
(1) Principal buildings on streets or avenues shall be numbered eastwardly or northwardly with the even numbers on the north or east side and odd numbers on the south or west side of the street. One hundred numbers shall be allotted to each block of the usual length of blocks, so that the numbers in consecutive blocks shall commence with consecutive hundreds and hundreds and one.
(2) On all streets running north and south, numbers shall be given so that the numbers would be in the 7200 series in a block immediately north of Euclid Avenue.
(3) On all streets running east and west, numbers shall be given so that the numbers would be in the 7700 series in a block immediately east of Miami Avenue.
(1985 Code, § 157.03) (Ord. 90-66, passed 9-17-1990)
§ 157.04 SUB-PROPERTY NUMBERS FOR MOBILE HOMES, APARTMENTS, OFFICE BUILDINGS
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 157:
House and Building Numbering Regulations
149
7722743.2
(A) In addition to the posting and maintenance of property numbers, sub-numbers using Arabic numerals, shall be posted whenever more than one dwelling unit or business is located on a single premises. It is the responsibility of the owner, agent or occupant, whichever appropriate of a mobile home park, apartment or office building, to assign sub-property numbers to individual lots, apartments or offices, as the case may be, and to procure and install the proper numbers. Sub-numbers shall be assigned in sequence beginning at the main entrance of a mobile home park and from first to top floor in apartment or office buildings.
(B) Lot numbers of a mobile home park shall be prominently displayed on each mobile home, a post, fence or otherwise clearly visible from the main drive. Numbers must be located in a manner that clearly indicates which mobile home it identifies.
(C) Individual apartment or office numbers shall be affixed to the outside of each entrance door, or adjacent thereto.
(D) The primary property number assigned to the entire mobile home park, apartment or office building shall be displayed and meet all other provisions of this chapter.
(1985 Code, § 157.04) (Ord. 90-66, passed 9-17-1990) Penalty, see § 157.99
§ 157.05 CITY MANAGER REVIEW
(A) In those cases wherein noncompliance with the requirements of this chapter is alleged, the matter shall be first reviewed by the City Manager or his or her designee.
(B) If it is determined that a property number is displayed that meets the purpose of this chapter and satisfies the need to identify the property by safety personnel, then the City Manager shall issue a variance for that property.
(C) If it is determined not to be in compliance, a citation may be issued.
(1985 Code, § 157.05) (Ord. 90-66, passed 9-17-1990)
§ 157.99 PENALTY
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(1985 Code, § 157.99) (Ord. 90-66, passed 9-17-1990)
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 158:
Property Maintenance Code
150
7722743.2
CHAPTER 158: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
General Provisions
158.01 Purpose
158.02 Scope
158.03 Definitions
Dangerous and Unsafe Buildings
158.05 Defects
Environmental Requirements
158.10 General
158.11 Property areas and structures
158.12 Fire protection features
158.13 General maintenance and repair
158.14 Animals or fowl
Space and Occupancy Requirements
158.20 Basic facilities
158.21 Installation and maintenance
158.22 Occupancy of dwelling units below grade
Responsibilities of Persons
158.25 General
158.26 Responsibilities of owners or operators
158.27 Responsibilities of occupants
158.28 Maintenance of property being developed or excavated during periods of inactivity
Administration and Enforcement
158.30 Enforcement officer
158.31 Coordination of enforcement
158.32 Inspections
158.33 Unsafe, dangerous and unsanitary buildings
158.34 Service of notice
158.35 Written order of vacation
158.36 Failure to comply with code regulations
Shrubbery; Standing Water
158.40 Definitions; keeping down weeds
158.41 Definitions; removing standing water
158.99 Penalty
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 158:
Property Maintenance Code
151
7722743.2
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 158.01 PURPOSE
The purpose of this Property Maintenance Code is to establish a minimum standard necessary for the preservation of the public safety, health and general welfare in all buildings or premises used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes or other human occupation, as well as all other types of unoccupied structures and to assign the responsibility of owners, operators and occupants of such buildings, structures and accessory buildings.
(1985 Code, § 158.01) (Ord. 93-27, passed 6-21-1993)
§ 158.02 SCOPE
(A) The provisions of this Property Maintenance Code are supplementary to the sections of the Building Code. Conditions not in compliance with the requirements of this Code or the Building Code relating to the construction, use and maintenance of buildings and structures are deemed to be safety and sanitation hazards. All the provisions of this Code and Building Code as related above shall be retroactive and shall apply to all buildings and structures; except whenever the applicable provisions of the Building Code exceed this Code or other legal requirements that were in effect at the time of either the original construction, addition or reconstruction, as applicable, then the least restrictive requirements of that particular construction, addition or reconstruction shall apply.
(B) However, if the City Manager determines that the application of the least restrictive requirement will result in an unsafe, unsanitary or other hazardous condition, the City Manager shall apply a more restrictive requirement up to, but not exceeding, the requirements of the then-current Building Code.
(C) Appeals from the City Manager’s application of the more restrictive requirement shall be heard by the Board of Zoning Appeals upon proper application.
(D) The final determination shall be by a majority vote of Board of Zoning Appeals members.
(E) A public hearing shall not be required. If this Code is determined to be in conflict with the Building Code, the Building Code shall apply.
(1985 Code, § 158.02) (Ord. 93-27, passed 6-21-1993)
§ 158.03 DEFINITIONS
(A) For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words are hereby defined.
(B) Words used in the present tense shall include the future.
(C) The singular number shall include the plural and the plural, the singular.
(D) The word “building” shall include the word “structure” and the word “shall” is mandatory and not merely directory.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 158:
Property Maintenance Code
152
7722743.2
DETERIORATION
The condition or appearance of the exterior of a building or part thereof, characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling or cracking, peeling, rusting or other evidence of physical decay, neglect or lack of maintenance.
EXTERIOR OF THE PREMISES
Those portions of a building which are exposed to public view and the open space of any premises outside of any building.
GARBAGE
Animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
INFESTATION
The presence of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests on the premises which constitute a health hazard.
NUISANCE
That which is defined by the statutes of the state and declared thereby to be a NUISANCE, and also includes conditions dangerous to human life or detrimental to the health of persons on or near the premises where the conditions exist, and where the conditions are perilous by active and negligent operation thereof, and unsanitary conditions or anything offensive to the senses or dangerous to health.
OCCUPANT
Any person living and sleeping in a dwelling unit or having actual possession of said dwelling unit or any person who leases or rents a nonresidential building, structure or any portion thereof.
OWNER
Any person, who, alone or jointly or severally with others, shall have legal or equitable title to any premises, with or without the accompanying actual possession thereof; or shall have charge, care or control as owner or agent of the owner; or as executor, administrator, trustee, receiver or guardian of an estate, or as a mortgagee in possession.
PERSON
Any individual, corporation, association, partnership, trustee, lessee, agent or assignee.
PREMISES
A lot, plot or parcel of land, including the buildings or structures thereon.
REFUSE
All putrescible and non-putrescible solid wastes (except body wastes) including but not limited to garbage, rubbish, ashes, dead animals and industrial wastes; an accumulation of brush, broken glass, stumps and roots that present a safety hazard, and includes garbage, trash and debris which present an unsanitary and/or safety hazard.
RUBBISH
Non-putrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, crockery, plastics and similar materials.
(1985 Code, § 158.03) (Ord. 93-27, passed 6-21-1993)
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 158:
Property Maintenance Code
153
7722743.2
DANGEROUS AND UNSAFE BUILDINGS
§ 158.05 DEFECTS
All buildings or structures having defects as set forth herein shall be deemed dangerous or unsafe:
(A) Those whose walls, floors, foundations or other members are so out of plumb, level, original position or so deteriorated, or overloaded as to be unlikely to perform their intended structural function, or are in such condition or of such size as to cause stresses in any structural members likely to result in failure or collapse;
(B) Those which are or have become so dilapidated, termite-infested, decayed or unsafe, or which so substantially fail to provide the basic elements of shelter or safety that, for that reason, they are unfit for human habitation or dangerous to life or property;
(C) Those which are not provided with required and approved safe and adequate means of egress;
(D) Those which in the opinion of the City Manager and a responsible officer of the fire company constitute a serious fire hazard because of their use, construction, unprotected exposure or lack of maintenance; and
(E) Those which are unsanitary or are a hazard to safety, health or general welfare of any occupants or the public.
(1985 Code, § 158.05) (Ord. 93-27, passed 6-21-1993) Penalty, see § 158.99
ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS
§ 158.10 GENERAL
The provisions of §§ 158.10 through 158.14 shall govern the minimum conditions of buildings and structures. Every building or structure and the premises on which it stands shall comply with the conditions herein prescribed as they apply thereto.
(1985 Code, § 158.10) (Ord. 93-27, passed 6-21-1993)
§ 158.11 PROPERTY AREAS AND STRUCTURES
(A) General. No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or otherwise permit or let to another for occupancy any building which does not comply with the following requirements. The City Manager shall cause inspections to be made of such premises, as necessary, to secure compliance with these requirements.
(B) Sanitation. All interior and exterior property areas shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition free from any accumulation of rubbish and garbage that might constitute a health hazard.
(C) Grading and Drainage. All premises shall be graded and maintained to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon or within any building or structure located thereon.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 158:
Property Maintenance Code
154
7722743.2
(D) Noxious Weeds. All property areas shall be kept free from species of weeds or plant growth which are noxious or detrimental to the public health.
(E) Insect and Rodent Harborage. Buildings shall be kept free from insect and rodent infestation. Every owner and occupant of a building shall be jointly responsible for the extermination of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests in all interior and exterior areas of the premises.
(F) Foundation, Walls and Roof. Every foundation, interior wall, exterior wall, roof and all other exterior and interior surfaces shall be maintained in good condition. No building shall be deemed to comply with the requirements of this Code unless:
(1) The foundation wall, floor and ceiling elements adequately support the building at all points;
(2) All foundations, exterior walls and roofs shall be reasonably free of holes, large cracks and deteriorated material, and shall be maintained so as to be reasonably weathertight and watertight;
(3) All exterior walls, woodwork and exposed metal portions of every building that are inadequately protected against the weather due to the lack of paint or other protective coating shall be painted or otherwise protected against decay, corrosion or deterioration. All exterior walls are to be structurally sound. No exterior wall shall be covered by paint or other fabric or material with a design or color or combination of colors that creates an excessive visual distraction such that it is offensive and objectionable to persons of ordinary sensibilities and thereby negatively impacts the desirability of adjoining properties; and
(4) All roofs shall be tight, have no defects which admit rain, and shall be equipped with gutters and downspouts connected to a sewer approved for storm drainage, or shall be connected to the street gutter or, if necessary, the stormwater shall be disposed of on the property in a manner approved by the City Manager. Where sidewalks are present the drain line shall run under the sidewalk.
(G) Chimneys, Flues and Vents. All chimneys, flues and vents shall be maintained in good state of maintenance and repair, adequately supported and properly flashed to exclude rain.
(H) Stairs, Porches and Railings. Stairs and other exit facilities shall be adequate for safety. No building shall be deemed to comply with the requirements of this Code unless:
(1) No flight of stairs or porch has pulled away from supporting or adjacent structures such as to create an unsafe condition;
(2) No flight of stairs has rotting, termite-infested or deteriorating supports;
(3) Every stair tread and rail is sound and is securely fastened in position;
(4) Every stair tread is strong enough to bear a concentrated load of at least 400 pounds without danger of breaking through;
(5) Every flight of stairs and porch is free of holes, grooves and cracks which are large enough to constitute possible accident hazard; and
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 158:
Property Maintenance Code
155
7722743.2
(6) Every porch has a sound floor and is free of loose, warped, protruding or rotting floorboards or excessively broken concrete or other material or deteriorating supports.
(I) Windows, Doors and Hatchways. Every window, exterior door and basement hatchway shall be substantially tight and shall be maintained in sound condition and repair. No building shall be deemed to comply with the requirement of this Code unless:
(1) Every window is fully supplied with windowpanes which are without open cracks or holes;
(2) Every window sash is in good condition and fits reasonably tight within its frame;
(3) Every exterior door, door hinge and door latch is in good condition;
(4) Every exterior door, when closed, fits reasonably well and is tight in its frame;
(5) All windows and doors and their frames are constructed and maintained in such relation to wall construction as to exclude rain and to substantially exclude wind from entering the structure; and
(6) Every basement hatchway is so constructed and maintained as to prevent the entrance of rodents, rain, and surface drainage water into the dwelling.
(J) Safe Egress. Every building shall have safe unobstructed means of egress leading to safe and open space at ground level.
(K) Screens. Crawl spaces and open foundations with provisions for external ventilation shall have guards or screens for protection against rodents and insects.
(1985 Code, § 158.11) (Ord. 93-27, passed 6-21-1993) Penalty, see § 158.99
§ 158.12 FIRE PROTECTION FEATURES
Every building intended for human occupancy shall be protected with such fire-protective features as may be required for the adequate protection of the occupants thereof. The minimum requirements for such protection shall be as required by the city.
(1985 Code, § 158.12) (Ord. 93-27, passed 6-21-1993) Penalty, see § 158.99
§ 158.13 GENERAL MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR
(A) Every plumbing installation, gutter and downspout, supplied facility, piece of equipment or utility shall be constructed or installed so that it will function safely and shall be maintained in satisfactory working condition.
(B) No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment or utility which is required under this Property Maintenance Code to be removed, shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling let or occupied by him or her except for such temporary interruption as may be necessary while actual repairs or alterations are in process or during temporary emergencies.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 158:
Property Maintenance Code
156
7722743.2
(C) No object shall be placed and no restraining devices shall be installed so as to interfere with the proper functioning of a required fire door or other protective device or system.
(D) Each gas outlet, including a valve or cock outlet that is not being used immediately, and each unused gas illuminating fixture shall be removed and the line shall be securely closed gastight with a threaded plug or cap or, in lieu thereof, a quick disconnect device that is listed by the American Gas Association, Inc., Laboratories.
(1985 Code, § 158.13) (Ord. 93-27, passed 6-21-1993) Penalty, see § 158.99
§ 158.14 ANIMALS OR FOWL
It shall be unlawful to raise, breed or harbor any animals or fowl for commercial purposes within the limits of the city, or for any other purpose wherein they constitute a potential hazard or public nuisance.
(1985 Code, § 158.14) (Ord. 93-27, passed 6-21-1993) Penalty, see § 158.99
SPACE AND OCCUPANCY REQUIREMENTS
§ 158.20 BASIC FACILITIES
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let another for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking or eating therein any dwelling unit which does not comply with the following requirements.
(A) Sanitary Facilities. The following minimum sanitary facilities shall be supplied and maintained.
(1) Toilet. Every dwelling unit shall contain within its walls a room, separate from the habitable rooms, which affords privacy and which is equipped with a flush toilet.
(2) Lavatory. Every dwelling unit shall contain a lavatory.
(3) Bathtub or Shower. Every dwelling unit shall contain a room which affords privacy to a person in the room, and which is equipped with a bathtub or shower.
(4) Kitchen Sink. Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink apart from the lavatory required under division (A)(3) above.
(B) Water and Sewer System. Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub or shower, and toilet required under the provisions of §§ 158.20 through 158.22 shall be properly connected to either a public water and sewer system or to an approved private water system. At no time shall it be permitted to discharge waste into any waste disposal unit except as approved by the city. All sinks, lavatories, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied with running water.
(C) Operation of Heating Facilities and Incinerators. Every heating or water-heating facility shall be installed and shall operate in accordance with the requirements of the air pollution control ordinances of the city and the Madeira-Indian Hill Fire Department.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 158:
Property Maintenance Code
157
7722743.2
(D) Garbage and Rubbish Storage Facilities.
(1) Every dwelling, multi-family dwelling and dwelling unit shall be supplied with approved containers and covers for the storage of rubbish. The owner, operator or agent in control of the dwelling or multi-family dwelling shall be responsible for the removal of the rubbish.
(2) No dwelling or dwelling unit shall be deemed to comply with the requirements of this Code unless:
(a) Rubbish and garbage stored outdoors is stored in one or more rubbish storage boxes or containers which are fly-tight, rodent-proof and reasonably waterproof; and
(b) Rubbish and garbage stored in the basement or cellar or in an enclosed structure such as a shed, is stored in nonflammable containers.
(1985 Code, § 158.20) (Ord. 93-27, passed 6-21-1993) Penalty, see § 158.99
§ 158.21 INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE
(A) Gas Systems and Fixtures. All gas systems and fixtures shall be installed and maintained in accordance with Duke Energy specifications.
(B) Electrical Outlets and Fixtures.
(1) Every electrical outlet and fixture shall be properly installed and maintained according to the specifications of the National Electrical Code.
(2) No building shall be deemed to comply with the requirement of this Code unless:
(a) No temporary wiring is used, except extension cords which run directly from portable electric fixtures to convenience outlets and which do not lie underneath floor-covering materials or extend through doorways, transoms or other similar apertures through structural elements; and
(b) Each electric circuit has wire and compatible fuses or circuit breakers necessary to carry the electric load, and protect against accidental overloading, as specified by the National Electrical Code.
(C) Correction of Defective System. Where it is found, in the opinion of the City Manager, that the electrical system in a building constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the building itself by reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient outlets, improper wiring or installation, deterioration or damage of the above, or for similar reasons, he or she shall order the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard.
(D) Heating Facilities. Every building intended for occupancy shall have heating facilities. The owner of the heating facilities shall be required to see that they are properly installed, safely maintained, in good working condition and capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms located therein.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 158:
Property Maintenance Code
158
7722743.2
(1985 Code, § 158.21) (Ord. 93-27, passed 6-21-1993) Penalty, see § 158.99
§ 158.22 OCCUPANCY OF DWELLING UNITS BELOW GRADE
No cellar or basement space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit unless provided with adequate ventilation and natural or artificial light.
(1985 Code, § 158.22) (Ord. 93-27, passed 6-21-1993) Penalty, see § 158.99
RESPONSIBILITIES OF PERSONS
§ 158.25 GENERAL
(A) Where in this Property Maintenance Code the obligation for observance is not otherwise clearly designated, the respective responsibilities of owner, operator and occupant shall be as specified in §§ 158.26 and 158.27.
(B) A contract between the owner and operator, the operator and occupant, or the owner and occupant, with regard to compliance with the provisions of this Code, shall not relieve any part of their direct responsibility under this Code.
(C) Every owner shall be responsible for complying with all the provision of this Code, other than those specifically excepted.
(1985 Code, § 158.25) (Ord. 93-27, passed 6-21-1993)
§ 158.26 RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS OR OPERATORS
The responsibilities of owners or operators shall be as follows.
(A) Every owner or operator of a dwelling containing two or more apartments or dwelling units shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof.
(B) No owner or operator shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any vacant apartment or dwelling unit unless it is reasonably clean, sanitary and fit for human occupancy. The owner or operator of a multiple dwelling containing two or more household units shall supply approved rubbish and garbage disposal facilities or approved garbage storage containers for all the apartments or household units in the dwelling, shall be responsible for the clean and sanitary maintenance of the common storage or disposal facilities, and shall be responsible for the removal of the rubbish.
(C) Every owner or operator of every rooming house shall dispose of all garbage and rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in storage or disposal facilities which are safe and sanitary.
(D) Every owner or occupant of any building shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests as follows:
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 158:
Property Maintenance Code
159
7722743.2
(1) Whenever infestation exists in any apartment or household unit in any dwelling or in the shared or public areas of any dwelling, and it is not practicable to establish occupant responsibility; or
(2) Whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner or operator to maintain a building in a rodent-proof or substantially insect-proof condition.
(1985 Code, § 158.26) (Ord. 93-27, passed 6-21-1993) Penalty, see § 158.99
§ 158.27 RESPONSIBILITIES OF OCCUPANTS
(A) The responsibilities of occupants shall be as follows.
(1) Every occupant of a building shall maintain in a clean and sanitary condition all parts of the premises which he or she occupies, uses and controls; and shall be responsible for his or her own misuse of areas or facilities available in common.
(2) Every occupant of a building occupied by more than one apartment, household unit or business shall provide himself or herself with approved storage containers or disposal facilities, and shall dispose of all rubbish, ashes, garbage and other wastes in a clean and sanitary manner by placing them in an approved storage or disposal facility, in accordance with regulations of the Board of Health.
(3) Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall be responsible for hanging all screens and double or storm doors and windows whenever the same are required under the provisions of this Code, except where the owner has agreed to supply those services.
(4) Occupants of a single-family dwelling shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests therein or on the premises.
(5) Occupants of any building shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests therein or on the premises whenever the occupants are at fault.
(6) Occupants of a building shall keep all facilities, including plumbing fixtures and cooking equipment, in a clean and sanitary condition, and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care and the proper use and operation thereof.
(7) No occupant shall deposit material in any plumbing or electrical fixture which will result in stoppage of or damage to the fixture. It shall be the responsibility of the occupant to correct any stoppages determined to be due to improper use or neglect.
(8) The occupant, when moving to another location, shall leave the vacated premises in a reasonably clean and sanitary condition.
(B) Any occupant of a building or premises who creates a condition which constitutes a violation of the standards established by this Code shall be punishable for a violation in accordance with the penalty provisions of § 158.99.
(1985 Code, § 158.27) (Ord. 93-27, passed 6-21-1993) Penalty, see § 158.99
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 158:
Property Maintenance Code
160
7722743.2
§ 158.28 MAINTENANCE OF PROPERTY BEING DEVELOPED OR EXCAVATED DURING PERIODS OF INACTIVITY
(A) Background, Purpose and Intent.
(1) The purpose and intent of this section is to establish minimum standards for the maintenance of property being developed or excavated and construction sites during periods of inactivity. The requirements contained in this section are designed to minimize the possibility of property damage and personal injury and simultaneously minimize the adverse visual effects of halted or abandoned construction projects through cooperative efforts between the property owners, developer, surrounding property owners, the county and the city. The City Council believes that the requirements of this section appropriately balance the rights provided to developers and property owners with the rights of the city and surrounding property owners.
(2) The city recognizes that the Board of County Commissioners has adopted Rules and Regulations for the Construction, Operation, Maintenance and use of the Storm Drainage System of Hamilton County, Ohio (“County Rules and Regulations”). The city intends to supplement such regulations, but in cases of inconsistency or preemption, defer to the County Rules and Regulations. The city further intends to supplement rather than override any other provisions of this Chapter 158 and the Building Code as they apply to the property that is subject to this section.
(3) Additionally, the purposes of this section are to:
(a) Prevent incomplete, abandoned or halted construction from increasing flood or drainage hazards to others;
(b) Promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizens from the hazards of flooding and diminished property values;
(c) Lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control, repairs to public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations;
(d) Maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the potential for creating blight areas; and
(e) Preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses and floodplains in order to moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat, preserve recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance community and economic development.
(B) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
COMMENCED
The beginning of a designated activity to a degree that it visually alters the property.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 158:
Property Maintenance Code
161
7722743.2
DESIGNATED ACTIVITY
The commencement of any construction or demolition activity, including but not limited to the removal of large trees, grading or excavation.
PERIOD OF INACTIVITY
The voluntary or involuntary cessation of a significant part of the designated activity for 45 consecutive days. Furthermore, insignificant activity, such as simply moving equipment, materials or dirt without meaningful re-commencement of designated activities as determined by the City Manager shall not toll the running of the 45-day period.
REQUIREMENTS.
Any person who owns a vacant, developed or undeveloped property on which one or more or a combination of designated activity are commenced and are subsequently subject to a period of inactivity, shall undertake, as applicable, in the discretion of the City Manager, one or more of the following:
(a) Prepare the ground, apply lime and fertilizer, sow seed, mulch, apply nitrogen, water, maintain and undertake all reasonable steps taken in the industry to provide a viable grass coverage that stabilizes the ground surface against erosion;
(b) Keep property free of brush and weeds, dead and dying trees and other growth which are inimical to the preservation of public health, safety or general welfare of the public or which may constitute a fire hazard; Prune hedges, trees and other foliage along property lines so that they do not impinge on neighboring properties, rights-of-way, or overhang or obstruct sidewalks;
(c) Immediately remove all construction equipment, vehicles or construction materials from the property; and/or
(d) Fill holes, depressions and voids created or exposed by clearing or excavation operations with soil.
(2) Upon notice and verification by the City Manager that the designated activity is subject to a period of inactivity, the City Manager shall follow the enforcement procedures in §§ 158.30 through 158.36 of the City Property Maintenance Code.
(C) Preemption. In the event of a conflict between the County Rules and Regulations and this section, the provisions of the County Rules and Regulations shall prevail. In the event of a conflict between the City Building Code or City Zoning Code and this section, the applicable provisions of the Building Code or the Zoning Code shall prevail.
(D) Reservation of Rights. The city expressly reserves all rights and remedies afforded to it under other provisions of the codified ordinances of the city and other state and federal law.
(E) Severability. If any section, division, clause or phrase of this section is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this section.
(1985 Code, § 158.28) (Ord. 08-11, passed 3-24-2008) Penalty, see § 158.99
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 158:
Property Maintenance Code
162
7722743.2
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 158.30 ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the City Manager or his or her approved representative to enforce the provisions of this Property Maintenance Code as herein provided.
(1985 Code, § 158.30) (Ord. 93-27, passed 6-21-1993)
§ 158.31 COORDINATION OF ENFORCEMENT
Whenever, in the opinion of the City Manager, it is necessary or desirable to have inspections of any condition by more than one department, he or she shall arrange for this to be done in such a manner that the owners or occupants of buildings shall not be subjected to visits by numerous inspectors nor to conflicting order.
(1985 Code, § 158.31) (Ord. 93-27, passed 6-21-1993)
§ 158.32 INSPECTIONS
Where there exists a reasonable cause to suspect that a condition exists adverse to the safety, health and welfare of the people, the City Manager shall make or cause to be made inspections by his or her authorized representative, the Board of Health or the Fire Inspector to determine the conditions of dwellings, multi-family dwellings, dwelling units, rooming houses, rooming units and premises in order to safeguard the safety, health and welfare of the public under the provisions of this Code. All reports of inspections shall be in writing and signed by the person making same or responsible for making same. City Manager is hereby authorized to seek and obtain from a court of law an administrative search warrant whenever it is deemed necessary to gain entrance onto property or into a building for inspection of premises where there is reasonable cause to believe a violation may exist.
(1985 Code, § 158.32) (Ord. 93-27, passed 6-21-1993)
§ 158.33 UNSAFE, DANGEROUS AND UNSANITARY BUILDINGS
Whenever, upon inspection it shall appear that an unsafe, dangerous or unsanitary condition exists in connection with any building or premises subject to the provisions of this Code or that any condition exists constituting a violation of any provision of this Code or any law relating to the same subject matter, the City Manager shall give notice of the condition or violation to the owner or agent in charge of the building, and shall order the same to be made safe, secure or sanitary and to be placed in substantial compliance with the provisions of this Code, or to be taken down and removed. The City Manager or a designated representative, in addition to any other citations, notices, penalties or remedies provided by law or ordinance, is authorized to proceed in a manner consistent with and pursuant to R.C. §§ 715.26 and 715.261 to maintain the public health, safety and welfare and to recover costs as appropriate.
(1985 Code, § 158.33) (Ord. 93-27, passed 6-21-1993) Penalty, see § 158.99
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 158:
Property Maintenance Code
163
7722743.2
§ 158.34 SERVICE OF NOTICE
Unless otherwise specifically provided for, the service of any notice required by the provisions of this Code to be served on the owner, agent, contractor or other person responsible for the work or violation in connection with any violation of the code or the construction, reconstruction, repair, removal, vacation or wrecking of any building, object or device on such property may be made in any of the following ways:
(A) By personal delivery to the party involved;
(B) By certified mail addressed to the party involved at his or her residence or place of business; or
(C) Where the residence and place of business of the party is unknown and cannot be ascertained with reasonable diligence or where, for any other reason, personal service or service by mail cannot be made, the notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises.
(1985 Code, § 158.34) (Ord. 93-27, passed 6-21-1993)
§ 158.35 WRITTEN ORDER OF VACATION
(A) Every order of vacation shall be in writing, and shall be served upon the owner, agent or tenant stating the reasons for the order of vacation and directing that the building, if it is occupied, be vacated by a specific time. The City Manager shall place a notice of vacation in a conspicuous place on the building. After the posting of the notice or order of vacation, it shall be unlawful to occupy or permit the occupancy of the premises or any portion thereof until the provisions of law and the orders issued by the City Manager are complied with.
(B) Failure to comply with any lawful order of the City Manager within the time specified in the order of notice shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable as provided for in § 158.99.
(1985 Code, § 158.35) (Ord. 93-27, passed 6-21-1993) Penalty, see § 158.99
§ 158.36 FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH CODE REGULATIONS
If, after service of any lawful order from the City Manager, the owner, agent, contractor or other person responsible for the work or violation refuses to comply with the order or does not comply within the period stated in the order of notice, such failure to comply shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable as provided for in § 158.99 of this code.
(1985 Code, § 158.36) (Ord. 93-27, passed 6-21-1993) Penalty, see § 158.99
SHRUBBERY; STANDING WATER
§ 158.40 DEFINITIONS; KEEPING DOWN WEEDS
(A) For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
FARM CROP
Shall include any field crops, tobacco, fruits and vegetables.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 158:
Property Maintenance Code
164
7722743.2
FRONT YARD
Any section of land between a dwelling or other building and the roadway upon which such dwelling or building is situated.
NOXIOUS
Harmful or offensive.
RANK
Excessive in growth; exceeding ten inches in height.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON
Any person owning or having charge of land within the city, including but not limited to the owner, lessee, agent or tenant having charge of the land involved.
(B) Any person owning or having charge of land within the city shall keep such land free and clear from all rank or noxious weeds, grasses and vegetation, except trees, shrubs, garden variety flowers and farm crops, by cutting or other effective legal means of control.
(C) Any person owning or having charge of land within the city shall keep such land free from all weeds, grasses and vegetation, except trees, shrubs, garden variety flowers and farm crops, by cutting or other effective legal means of control whenever such weeds, grasses or vegetation are pollinating or are about to spread or mature seeds, and at any other time as is necessary to keep the growth of such weeds under ten inches in height.
(D) If the owner or other responsible person fails to cut the weeds, grasses and vegetation before they exceed ten inches in height, then such owner or responsible person shall have the duty and obligation to remove all or substantially all clippings and waste resulting from the cutting of such weeds, grasses and vegetation.
(E) Any person owning or having charge of land within the city shall not plant, maintain or cultivate farm crops in the front yard of such property.
(F) Shrubbery or other vegetation shall not be permitted to grow in a manner that is a danger to the occupants of a dwelling or other building or to the public health, safety and welfare, or in a manner that creates, extends or intensifies blighting or deteriorating conditions. Such manner shall include but is not limited to:
(1) Shrubbery or vegetation that is overgrown to the point that it impedes the delivery of governmental services, such as police, fire and rescue services;
(2) Shrubbery or vegetation that is overgrown to the point that it infringes on any neighboring property owner’s right of quiet enjoyment of his or her property; or
(3) Shrubbery or vegetation that has grown in a manner such that it has infiltrated the siding or other building materials of a dwelling.
(1985 Code, § 158.40) (Ord. 08-20, passed 4-28-2008)
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 158:
Property Maintenance Code
165
7722743.2
§ 158.41 DEFINITIONS; REMOVING STANDING WATER
(A) For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
HUMAN-MADE AREA
Any area of land which was altered or depressed by any means other than natural means.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON
Any person owning or having charge of land within the city, including but not limited to the owner, lessee, agent or tenant having charge of the land involved.
STANDING WATER
Water that is not flowing; stagnant.
(B) (1) Any person owning or having charge of land within the city shall keep such land free and clear from all excessive standing water or any human-made areas of standing water by any effective legal means.
(2) If the owner or other responsible person fails to comply with this section, then the owner or other responsible person shall have the duty and obligation to remove all such standing water. No owner or other responsible person is permitted to divert such standing water onto the property of another.
(C) Water shall not be permitted to stand in a manner that is dangerous to the occupants of a dwelling or other building or to the public health, safety and welfare, or in a manner that creates, extends or intensifies blighting or deterioration conditions. Such manner shall include but is not limited to:
(1) Water that has collected to the point that it impedes the delivery of governmental services, such as police, fire and rescue services;
(2) Water that has collected to the point that it infringes on any neighboring property owner’s right of quiet enjoyment of his or her property;
(3) Water that has collected in such a manner that it has infiltrated the building materials of a dwelling;
(4) Water that has collected that attracts, or creates a risk of attracting, insects, including but not limited to mosquitoes; or
(5) Water that has collected that creates an environment conducive to the development of health risks, including but not limited to mold, mildew and bacteria.
(1985 Code, § 158.41) (Ord. 08-20, passed 4-28-2008)
§ 158.99 PENALTY
Any person or entity that owns or controls any property area or structure, and violates or assists in violation of any regulation, provision or amendment of this Property Maintenance Code, or fails to obey any lawful
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 158:
Property Maintenance Code
166
7722743.2
order of the City Manager issued in pursuance thereof, shall be in violation of the Property Maintenance Code and fined not more than $150. Each and every day in which the person continues in violation or failure to comply with Housing Code shall be deemed a separate offense.
(1985 Code, § 158.99) (Ord. 93-27, passed 6-21-1993; Ord. 04-21, passed 8-23-2004)
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 159:
Signs
167
7722743.2
CHAPTER 159: SIGNS
159.01 Purpose
159.02 Application and objectives
159.03 Definitions
159.04 Permits required
159.05 Illuminated signs; electrical inspection
159.06 Inspection
159.07 Unsafe and unlawful signs
159.08 Signs allowed in certain districts
159.09 Number of on-premises advertising signs
159.10 Face of sign shall be smooth
159.11 Location of sign
159.12 Signs not permitted in any district
159.13 Materials required
159.14 Illumination
159.15 Permanent freestanding signs; height and area limitations
159.16 Commercial corridor signs
159.17 Wall and window signs; limitation of placement and area
159.18 Multiple sign copy area
159.19 Temporary signs
159.20Temporary signs in residential districts
159.21 Nonconforming existing signs
159.22 Maintenance
159.23 Variances
159.24 Permit application procedure
159.25 Nuisance
159.26 First Amendment protection
159.99 Penalty
§ 159.01 PURPOSE
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and establish the orderly development of signs as a means of communication, including commercial, informational and political messages while protecting the public health, safety and welfare of the city. To that end, this chapter is intended to accomplish the following specific objectives:
(A) To ensure that signs are installed, maintained and regulated so as not to endanger pedestrian safety and auto traffic safety, or cause property damages or bodily injury;
(B) To minimize or eliminate sign clutter, distractions and obstructions-of-view that contribute to pedestrian traffic and auto traffic hazards;
(C) To enhance and protect the visual attractiveness of the city and help to preserve property values and attract sources of economic development and growth;
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 159:
Signs
168
7722743.2
(D) To allow for adequate and effective signs for business identification and advertising communication while limiting the excessive number, height and size of signs for the benefit of private enterprise and the community-at-large;
(E) To coordinate the type, placement and scale of signs in an equitable manner;
(F) To protect and promote the integrity and character of specific areas of the city and compatibility with the overall residential nature of the city;
(G) To promote equal treatment under the law through accurate record keeping, reasonable permit processing, reasonable permit fees and consistent enforcement; and
(H) To allow a reasonable means for persons to exercise their right of freedom of speech while protecting the community from visual blight associated with uncontrolled proliferation of temporary signs.
(1985 Code, § 159.01) (Ord. 93-08, passed 3-1-1993)
§ 159.02 APPLICATION AND OBJECTIVES
This chapter shall be considered a companion code to those portions of the Ohio Basic Building Code, County Building Code, the City Building Code and such rules and regulations as may otherwise be deemed applicable to these matters. The general objectives of this chapter are as follows:
(A) To establish a permit system to control the types of signs in commercial and industrial zones and, to a more limited degree, the variety of signs in residential zones;
(B) To allow certain small temporary or directional signs unique to residential or noncommercial uses to be erected with the minimum of delay, cost and administrative entanglements for limited periods of time or for limited noncommercial purposes;
(C) To prohibit all signs not expressly permitted by this chapter;
(D) To establish reasonable fees for the permit process which are roughly commensurate with the administrative review necessary;
(E) To provide procedures for considering unusual circumstances and hardships through appeals and variance applications;
(F) To provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter; and
(G) To establish sign regulations for the varying zoning districts within the city which reasonably recognize the distinction between commercial and residential districts.
(1985 Code, § 159.02) (Ord. 93-08, passed 3-1-1993)
§ 159.03 DEFINITIONS
The following words and phrases are explained as follows with the intention that they be interpreted in this chapter to have the meanings described to them in this section. The words and phrases may be cumulative
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 159:
Signs
169
7722743.2
and are not intended to be exclusive. For example, even though a ground sign and an illuminated sign are separately defined, both definitions may apply to the same sign. If the definition of any word or phrase is unclear, or the word or phrase is used elsewhere in the chapter in a context which makes its intended use unclear, such word or phrase shall be construed in the manner that best fulfills the purposes and objectives set forth in §§ 159.01 and 159.02.
ANIMATED SIGN
Any sign that uses movement or change of lighting, either natural or artificial, to depict action or create a special effect or scene.
AREA OF BUILDING WALL
The length times the height of a wall. It shall include the area of any windows located within the wall. The roof of a building shall not be included as part of the height of the wall.
AREA OF SIGN
This is the area within a polygon formed by the edges of the frame of a sign or the surface of the sign capable of displaying a message or the background of a message, whichever is greatest. The AREA OF A SIGN will generally not include the structural supports for freestanding signs unless those supports display all or a part of a message thereon.
BACKGROUND
The portion of the facing of a sign which is free of letters, words, logos, symbols and other representations that actively convey the message of the sign.
BANNER
Any type of temporary sign made of cloth or other light fabric designed and intended to be displayed without a rigid frame. Generally, the face of the sign is made of fabric or plastic and is anchored and secured by cord, rope or similar lines.
BEACON
A type of attraction device which may or may not be part of a larger display. This device is a stationary or revolving light which flashes or projects illumination, single color or multi-colored, in any manner which is intended to attract or divert attention. While this definition includes lighting devices which are required or necessary under safety regulations prescribed by governmental agencies and flashing lights on emergency vehicles, those used for public safety are not intended to be regulated by this chapter.
BUILDING MARKER
Corner stones and tablets which are used as a memorial or to show the name of a building or the date of the erection of the building, where such cornerstones or tablet is built into the wall of a building and is constructed of bronze, brass, marble or stone or other incombustible material.
BUILDING SIGN
Any sign attached to any part of a building such as but not limited to a projecting sign, a wall sign, an awning sign, a roof sign or a window sign. This is intended to be contrasted with the other general category of signs, which is the freestanding sign.
BULLETIN BOARD
See INSTITUTIONAL BULLETIN BOARD.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 159:
Signs
170
7722743.2
BUSINESS CENTER
Any lot or adjoining lots under single ownership on which there is located more than one separately owned and operated business (other than home occupations) each of which business occupies separate floor space from other businesses located on the lot or lots and is located in a business or manufacturing zoning district.
CANOPY SIGN
Any sign that is part of or attached to an awning, canopy or other fabric, plastic or structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window or outdoors area.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN
A device which is designed so that all or a portion of a message, information, design or illustration may be changed or rearranged without replacing the background or the frame of the sign. Examples of this type of sign include but are not limited to signs at service stations which display the price of gas or other commodities, boards which may be written or drawn upon and then wiped clear for a new message, devices by which letters or other symbols or pictures may be affixed either by magnetic means, by hooks, grooves or snaps or any similar mechanical or electronic arrangement such as bulletin boards and movie marquees.
COMMERCIAL CORRIDOR SIGN
A freestanding sign designed to primarily display its commercial message to vehicular traffic traveling on a state or federal roadway with a minimum of four lanes. In addition, such sign shall be erected in an area adjacent to such a roadway and be located on property located in an “O,” “A” or “B” Business District and which has frontage along such roadway.
COMMERCIAL MESSAGE
Any display of words, logos, symbols, pictures or combination thereof which is capable and which is intended to call attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment.
COMMERCIAL SIGN
Any sign which displays a commercial message.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN
See INFORMATIONAL SIGN.
ERECT
To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix and also includes the painting of wall signs.
ESTATE SALE SIGN
See GARAGE SALE SIGN.
FLASHING SIGN
An illuminated sign in which artificial or reflected light is not maintained stationary and constant intensity and color at all times when in use.
FREESTANDING SIGN
A sign designed to be self-supporting, and independent for support from buildings and other structures. A sign which is primarily self-supporting but is incidentally attached to a building or other structure for additional support or for other reasons shall generally be considered to be a FREESTANDING SIGN. This type of sign may also be referred to as a GROUND SIGN or POLE SIGN.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 159:
Signs
171
7722743.2
GARAGE SALE SIGN
A sign displaying a message that personal household possessions are for sale. The only message on such a sign shall be either the words “garage sale,” “yard sale,” “estate sale” or “rummage sale,” the hours of such sale and the address or direction to such sale.
GROUND SIGN
See FREESTANDING SIGN.
IDENTIFICATION SIGN
See INFORMATIONAL SIGN.
INFORMATIONAL SIGN
A sign which provides only information regarding location, direction (such as “entrance” “exit”) and which bears no commercial message. Examples of INFORMATIONAL SIGNS include but are not limited to signs with the following messages: “no parking,” “entrance,” “loading only,” “telephone,” street address, “no trespassing,” office hours, “open,” “full service,” “self-service” and similar directives.
INSTITUTIONAL BULLETIN BOARDS
A changeable copy sign which displays only messages relating to public or charitable events such as meetings, bazaars, fund raising events and recognition of achievement in other than commercial ventures.
MAINTENANCE (MAINTAIN)
The cleaning, painting, repair or replacement of defective parts of a sign in a manner that does not alter the original copy, original colors, design or structure of the sign. See also REPAIRS.
NAMEPLATE
A sign with the name, address and/or profession of a person occupying the lot or part of a building thereon.
NONCONFORMING SIGN
One of the following:
(1) A sign which was erected legally but which does not comply with the subsequently enacted sign restrictions or regulations; or
(2) A sign which does not conform to the explicit regulations of the Sign Code but for which a variance or other authorized approval has been granted. Any such variance (by the Board of Zoning Appeals) or authorized approval (by the City Manager) shall be noted on the permit for such a sign.
PERSONAL MESSAGE SIGN
A sign with a message incidental to residential use of property such as birth announcements (“It’s a Girl”), “Welcome Home” and similar messages of a noncommercial nature.
POLE SIGN
See FREESTANDING SIGN.
POLITICAL SIGN
A sign indicating support or disapproval of a public issue or political candidate.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 159:
Signs
172
7722743.2
PORTABLE SIGN
A sign designed in a manner that emphasizes its portability and ease of relocation. A primary feature of such signs is that the supporting structure need not be attached to a building or affixed to the ground. Such signs include portable swinger signs, “A” frame signs, sandwich board signs, portable signs on wheels, vehicles, platforms or other means of resting the sign and supporting structure on the ground. PORTABLE SIGNS are distinguished from temporary signs that are designed to be primarily anchored by cords (such as banners) or by staking (typical political and real estate signs).
PROJECT OR CONSTRUCTION SIGN
A sign which directs attention to the promotion, development and construction of the property on which it is located and which identifies the architects, engineers, contractors, developers and other individuals or firms involved with the construction. The length of time such sign is displayed shall be dependent upon the scope of the project undertaken on such property.
PROJECTING SIGN
A sign, other than a wall sign, erected on the outside wall of a building, which projects at an angle from the wall to which it is attached.
REAL ESTATE SIGN
A sign advertising the sale, rental or lease of the premises on which the sign is displayed, or which indicates the sale of the premises is pending or the property sold.
REMOTE SIGNS OR BILLBOARDS
Signs or billboards displaying a commercial message or advertising any services or commodities not available on the site on which the sign is erected.
REPAIRS
Routine and systematic work done to a sign to keep it in good order, using similar materials, not involving changes in materials or design which constitute rebuilding and reconstruction. See also MAINTENANCE.
RUMMAGE SALE SIGN
See GARAGE SALE SIGN.
ROOF SIGN
Any sign erected, constructed, painted or maintained upon or over the roof of any building, and having its principal support on the roof or walls of the building.
SETBACK FROM ADJACENT PROPERTY
The distance from the adjacent side or rear property lines. Setback requirements vary as to the zoning district of the adjacent property.
SIGN(S)
Any writing, word, number, pictorial, illustration, decoration, emblem, symbol, trademark, flag, banner, pennant insignia, flashing light, beacon or other device which is placed in a manner that the communication, announcement, message, attraction, advertisement or promotion inherent to the device is visible or appears to be intended to be visible to persons on adjoining property or nearby public rights-of-way.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 159:
Signs
173
7722743.2
STREET MAIL BOX
A mail receptacle containing only the identification of a postal address and/or name of resident located at the street curb, conforming to United States postal regulations.
SUBDIVISION SIGN
A permanent sign containing only the subdivision name and other information approved by the Planning Commission.
TEMPORARY SIGN
(1) A sign which has either or both of the following characteristics:
(a) The primary purpose of the sign will be completed by the occurrence of an event which is likely to take place within a period of a few days to a few months such as an election or sale of real estate; and/or
(b) The material of which the sign is made or the manner in which the sign is affixed to the ground or a structure are of such nature as not to be suitable for permanent display because exposure to the elements will unreasonably deface the message, discolor or tear the material or loosen the methods by which such a sign is anchored.
(2) Examples of TEMPORARY SIGNS include but are not limited to political signs, “For Sale” signs, garage sale signs, sale signs and some project signs.
TENANT
Single business unit exclusively occupying and operating in a separately secured building or portion thereof.
VEHICULAR PORTABLE SIGN
A sign mounted or painted on a vehicle or trailer, and includes vehicles parked strategically with sign messages in order to advertise a product or business. Flashing, blinking, revolving and visible reflective spotlights are prohibited.
WALL SIGN
A sign integral with the exterior face of an exterior wall of a building, or attached to and parallel with the wall and projecting not more than 12 inches therefrom.
YARD SALE SIGN.
See GARAGE SALE SIGN.
(1985 Code, § 159.03) (Ord. 93-08, passed 3-1-1993)
§ 159.04 PERMITS REQUIRED
Unless otherwise provided for in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to build, erect, structurally or otherwise alter, or relocate within the city any permanent or temporary sign or other advertising device, as defined in this chapter, without first obtaining a building permit from the City Manager and making payment of any required permit fee. All illuminated signs shall, in addition, be subject to the provisions of the Electrical Code, and the permit fees required thereunder. Section 161.08(A)(8) requires ARO approval for
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 159:
Signs
174
7722743.2
all signs, except temporary signs, prior to the issuance of a permit. Permits shall be obtained in accordance with § 159.24.
(1985 Code, § 159.04) (Ord. 93-08, passed 3-1-1993) Penalty, see § 159.99
§ 159.05 ILLUMINATED SIGNS; ELECTRICAL INSPECTION
The application for a permit for erection of a sign or other advertising structure in which electrical wiring and connections are to be used shall be submitted to the City Manager. The City Manager shall be responsible to see that an examination is made of the plans and specifications respecting all wiring and connections to determine if the same comply with the Electrical Code of the city. He or she shall disapprove the application for permit if noncompliance with such Code is found.
(1985 Code, § 159.05) (Ord. 93-08, passed 3-1-1993)
§ 159.06 INSPECTION
The City Manager may cause the inspection of, at such times as he or she deems necessary, each sign or other advertising structure regulated by this chapter for the purpose of ascertaining whether the same is properly erected, maintained in good condition and in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(1985 Code, § 159.06) (Ord. 93-08, passed 3-1-1993)
§ 159.07 UNSAFE AND UNLAWFUL SIGNS
(A) If the City Manager shall determine that any sign or other advertising structure is unsafe or insecure, or is a menace to the public, or has been constructed or erected or is being maintained in violation of the provisions of this chapter, he or she shall give written notice to the owner or tenant of the property on which the sign is located. It is sufficient if notice is delivered and left on the premises where the sign is located. The notice shall identify the problem with the sign and provide a reasonable period (not less than ten nor more than 30 days) for the problem to be corrected except for temporary signs, which problem shall be corrected immediately. No criminal citation shall be issued prior to the date set forth on said notice. In addition, any such sign is hereby deemed to be a nuisance, subject to all remedies available at law.
(B) The City Manager may cause any sign or other advertising structure which is an immediate peril to persons or property to be removed summarily and without notice. In such a case, a citation may be issued without notices and without delay. No additional or different signs, temporary or permanent, shall be erected on property on which a sign or advertising structure is in violation of this chapter.
(1985 Code, § 159.07) (Ord. 93-08, passed 3-1-1993) Penalty, see § 159.99
§ 159.08 SIGNS ALLOWED IN CERTAIN DISTRICTS
(A) The following types of permanent signs shall be permitted in all districts where the principal uses to which they are related are permitted. Permits shall not be required for signs enumerated in this section.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 159:
Signs
175
7722743.2
(B) However, the City Manager may direct the removal or relocation of any of the following signs if he or she determines them to be distracting, hinder visibility or not serve the purpose intended pursuant to this section:
(1) House numbers and nameplates identifying the address and resident of a parcel of land and not exceeding one square foot in area;
(2) Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of erection when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other noncombustible material and not exceeding two square feet in area;
(3) Traffic or other municipal, governmental and public utility signs such as the following: legal notices, railroad crossings, danger or other emergency signs;
(4) No more than two identification signs may be permitted at each vehicle entrance to a completed residential development and placed only on private property by permission of the owner of that property. Such identification signs must, however, have been approved by Planning Commission as part of its subdivision approval. Each sign shall have a surface area not to exceed 20 square feet;
(5) Signs painted on or otherwise attached to motor vehicles which are legally licensed and primarily used on the highways for commercial or business purposes such as transportation of persons, goods or equipment; provided that no such vehicle displaying a sign may be parked within the required front setback of any lot or on any public right-of-way for the primary purpose of advertising any service, product or facility;
(6) Vending machines and vending structures shall be allowed signs only attached to the machine or structure, and advertise only the contents in the vending machine. Such signs must be painted on or otherwise permanently affixed to the surface of the vending machine, and may not project therefrom;
(7) Automobile full-service stations and automobile fuel-only stations may display the following special signs which are deemed customary and necessary to their respective businesses:
(a) Customary lettering or other insignia on a fuel pump consisting of the brand of fuel sold, lead warning sign and other signs required by law and not exceeding a total of three square feet on each pump;
(b) A single non-illuminated double-faced sign per fuel pump island, each of which shall not exceed four square feet in area, may be placed on a fuel pump island; such sign may extend a maximum of two feet above pumps; and
(c) Directional signs indicating which pump islands are “full service” and which are “self-serve.”
(8) Private traffic-control signs such as “in,” “out,” “drive-in window,” “entrance,” “exit” and the like may be installed without a permit as long as the sign contains no advertising for the business or use. No such sign shall exceed one square foot in area. No such sign shall hinder the visibility of motorists or pedestrians; and
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 159:
Signs
176
7722743.2
(9) Institutional bulletin boards located on the premises to which the sign pertains. Each sign is subject to the appropriate area, height and placement requirements.
(1985 Code, § 159.08) (Ord. 93-08, passed 3-1-1993) Penalty, see § 159.99
§ 159.09 NUMBER OF ON-PREMISES ADVERTISING SIGNS
(A) This section regulates the number of commercial signs which may be displayed by businesses located only in a business or manufacturing zoning district. The intent is to allow separate businesses located on a single lot or adjoining lots under single ownership to announce their location to vehicular traffic on adjacent rights-of-way, but to minimize the visual clutter that occurs when numerous signs are placed or freestanding signs or multiple freestanding signs and wall signs are placed on close proximity. This creates confusion and distraction and promotes competition to display the most garish and largest sign.
(B) In addition, the speed limits, traffic density, number of lanes of travel, setback of buildings from the adjacent roadways and number of businesses located on a single lot or promoted under a single marketing strategy (such as a large shopping mall) have been considered as factors in establishing the following regulations.
(1) Generally, one freestanding sign shall be permitted per lot or business center. If a lot or business center has frontage and vehicular access on more than one street (corner lot or through lot), one additional freestanding sign (that is, secondary freestanding sign) may be located near the additional access point; provided, however, that the additional freestanding sign shall be restricted in height and area commensurate with available frontage, traffic density, lanes of vehicular travel on roadway, proximity of businesses and residential areas and parking to that access point, and the distance separating the points of access. Such restrictions on the secondary freestanding sign shall be determined by the ARO based upon the foregoing factors.
(2) Where more than one business is on a lot or business center, multiple sign facings advertising the various businesses may be permitted with the approval of the City Manager and ARO provided all such signs are displayed on a single supporting structure. If a secondary freestanding sign is permitted in accordance with division (B)(1) above, multiple sign facings may be displayed on each freestanding sign, subject to the total area limitations.
(3) In addition to a freestanding sign (division (B)(1) above) or signs (division (B)(2) above), one wall sign identifying business or product furnished within the building may be permitted for each business located in a separate building or separate area of a building. Such wall signs must be located on the portion of the building actually occupied by such business and no sign shall exceed six square feet in area.
(1985 Code, § 159.09) (Ord. 93-08, passed 3-1-1993) Penalty, see § 159.99
§ 159.10 FACE OF SIGN SHALL BE SMOOTH
All signs or other advertising structures which are constructed on street lines, or within five feet thereof, shall have a smooth surface and no nails, tacks or wires shall be permitted to protrude therefrom. However, raised letters, numbers or trim are permitted.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 159:
Signs
177
7722743.2
(1985 Code, § 159.10) (Ord. 93-08, passed 3-1-1993) Penalty, see § 159.99
§ 159.11 LOCATION OF SIGN
It shall be unlawful for any sign to be located on, above or extend over public property or the public right-of-way, except for traffic signs or other public service signs approved by the City Manager.
(1985 Code, § 159.11) (Ord. 93-08, passed 3-1-1993) Penalty, see § 159.99
§ 159.12 SIGNS NOT PERMITTED IN ANY DISTRICT
The following signs shall not be permitted, erected or maintained in any district:
(A) Signs which rotate or move in any plane;
(B) Any sign or sign structure which:
(1) Is structurally unsafe;
(2) Constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation or abandonment;
(3) Is not kept in good repair; or
(4) Is capable of causing electrical shocks to persons likely to come in contact with it.
(C) Any sign which, by reason of its size, location, content, coloring or manner of illumination, constitutes a traffic hazard or a detriment to traffic safety by obstructing the vision of drivers, or by obstructing or detracting from the visibility of any traffic sign or control device on public streets and roads;
(D) Any sign which obstructs free ingress to or egress from a required door, window, fire escape or other required entrance or exit way;
(E) Signs which make use of words such as “Stop,” “Look,” “Danger” or any other words, phrases, symbols or characters, in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic. However, appropriate signs shall be allowed without permit when necessary to warn persons concerning high voltage, explosive gases or temporary dangers associated with construction;
(F) Any sign or other advertising structure containing any obscene matter;
(G) Any sign unlawfully installed, erected or maintained;
(H) Any sign now or hereafter existing which no longer advertises a bona fide business conducted or a product sold on the premises. Such sign and its supporting structure shall be removed within a period of 90 days after the business ceases operation. A request for a variance may be made to the Board of Zoning Appeals, which shall grant the variance if it determines that it is probable that the next occupant is likely to use sign or supporting structure, that the sign will be kept in good repair and that the sign otherwise conforms to this chapter;
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 159:
Signs
178
7722743.2
(I) Exterior exposed gaseous tube type signs (neon);
(J) Billboards;
(K) Signs which incorporate in any manner flashing or moving lights;
(L) Mobile or portable signs whether on wheels, runners, casters, parked trailers, parked vehicles or other mobile devices or any other temporary sign except as specifically permitted in this chapter;
(M) Signs which are painted on or attached to any trees, telephone poles, public benches, street lights or traffic-control devices, unless for a valid public purpose and unless specifically permitted in writing by the City Manager for good and necessary cause;
(N) Searchlights;
(O) Any signs which imitate or resemble official traffic or government signs or signals;
(P) Any sign which displays cartoons, pictures, photographs, cutouts or figures, unless they are part of a registered trademark or corporate identity and are approved by the City Manager; and
(Q) Any sign not in conformance with the Building Code.
(1985 Code, § 159.12) (Ord. 93-08, passed 3-1-1993; Ord. 96-24, passed - -1996) Penalty, see § 159.99
§ 159.13 MATERIALS REQUIRED
Except for certain temporary signs as permitted herein, all signs shall be made of durable material and be structurally sound. The supporting members shall be free of exposed unsightly bracing, guy wires, cables and the like. The supports shall appear to be an architectural and integral part of the building where a sign is attached or mounted to a building. The structural design and construction materials of all signs shall be reviewed by the City Manager prior to issuance of a building permit. Only signs determined to be structurally safe and in conformance with this chapter shall be issued a permit by the City Manager.
(1985 Code, § 159.13) (Ord. 93-08, passed 3-1-1993) Penalty, see § 159.99
§ 159.14 ILLUMINATION
No sign shall be illuminated, except in accordance with the following restrictions.
(A) No sign shall contain any moving, flashing or animated lights, except such portions of a sign as consist solely of indicators of time, day, date and temperature in Fahrenheit and/or Celsius.
(B) Lighting external to the sign shall consist of not more than two colors, including white. No external red or green lights shall be used if, in the opinion of the City Manager, such colors would create a driving hazard. No lighting shall be of such brightness or direction so as to cause glare that may be hazardous to pedestrians or auto drivers.
(C) Illumination shall be so arranged as to reflect light away from residential premises and in such a manner so as not to cast glare.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 159:
Signs
179
7722743.2
(D) The provisions of this section shall apply not only to exterior signs, but also the interior signs which are designed or placed to show through windows or doors of buildings.
(1985 Code, § 159.14) (Ord. 93-08, passed 3-1-1993) Penalty, see § 159.99
§ 159.15 PERMANENT FREESTANDING SIGNS; HEIGHT AND AREA LIMITATIONS
(A) Height. Except for commercial corridor signs, it shall be unlawful to erect any permanent freestanding sign whose total height is greater than eight feet above the level of the street upon which the sign displays its message or above the adjoining ground level, if such ground level is above the street level. Copy area shall not exceed 50% of background area.
(B) Space Between Sign and Ground. Except for commercial corridor signs, permanent freestanding signs mounted near the ground shall have an open space of not less than two feet between the base line of said sign and ground level. This open space may be filled with a platform, plantings or decorative lattice work which does not close off more than one-half of any square foot of such open spaces. No ground sign shall be nearer than two feet to any other sign, building or structure.
(C) Setback Line. No permanent freestanding sign shall have any portion nearer the street than the building or setback line established by law.
(D) Premises to be Kept Free of Weeds, and the Like. All freestanding signs and the premises surrounding the same shall be maintained by the owner or permittee thereof in a clean, sanitary and inoffensive condition, and free and clear of all obnoxious substances, rubbish and weeds.
(E) Area. The total area of one side of any freestanding sign shall not exceed 50 square feet. This includes the total of all sign facings of different businesses displayed on one side of a single freestanding sign.
(1985 Code, § 159.15) (Ord. 93-08, passed 3-1-1993) Penalty, see § 159.99
§ 159.16 COMMERCIAL CORRIDOR SIGNS
(A) As used within this chapter a COMMERCIAL CORRIDOR SIGN means a freestanding sign designed to primarily display its commercial message to vehicular traffic traveling on a state or federal roadway with a minimum of four lanes. In addition, such sign shall be erected in an area adjacent to such a roadway and be located on property located in an “O,” “A” or “B” Business District and which has frontage along such roadway.
(B) All freestanding signs which are located or intended to be located in a manner and location defined in division (A) above shall be regulated as follows.
(1) Its total height shall not exceed 20 feet above the level of street upon which it intends to display its message, or above the ground on which it is located if such ground is higher than the street level. Copy area shall not exceed 50% of background area.
(2) No portion of the sign facing shall be less than seven feet above ground level or street level, whichever requires the greater clearance from the ground.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 159:
Signs
180
7722743.2
(3) No portion of this freestanding sign shall be closer than five feet to the right-of-way.
(4) The premises in the vicinity of any such sign must be maintained in a clean, sanitary and orderly manner and shall be kept clear of all noxious substances, rubbish and weeds.
(5) One sign facing may be displayed on each side of a sign for each business located on the premises, but in no event may the total area of one side of sign or multiple signs be greater than 150 square feet.
(C) If a lot or business center has frontage and vehicle access on a corner lot or through lot, and one roadway requires the erection of a commercial corridor sign and the secondary roadway does not, a secondary freestanding sign may be erected in accordance with the provisions of § 159.09(A). (1985 Code, § 159.16) (Ord. 93-08, passed 3-1-1993) Penalty, see § 159.99
§ 159.17 WALL AND WINDOW SIGNS; LIMITATION OF PLACEMENT AND AREA
(A) Subject to the other provisions and limitations of this chapter, wall and window signs or any combination thereof may be displayed in any commercial, retail or industrial district up to a total area which does not exceed 25% of the area of a building wall. This area limitation shall apply to both temporary and permanent signs, whether displayed on a wall or a window, or combinations thereof. However, placards, paintings and other non-illuminated sign may be affixed on the interior of a window, without obtaining a permit, provided that the total area of all signs displayed on the wall and window do not exceed 25% of the wall area and no sign is in violation of § 159.12.
(B) No wall sign shall cover wholly or partially any wall opening, nor project beyond the ends or top of the wall to which it is attached. The copy area of a wall sign without a background area (individual letters or numerals) shall not exceed 10% of the area of the building wall. On a wall sign with a background area, the copy area shall not exceed 50% of the background area and the background area shall be limited to 18% of the area of the building wall upon which it is mounted, and the total sign area shall be limited to 25% of the area of the building wall to which it is mounted. Maximum height of a wall sign shall not exceed 12 feet above ground level.
(C) No wall sign shall be permitted to extend beyond the building line, nor extend into the established right-of-way of any street, sidewalk, alley or other public thoroughfare more than eight inches.
(D) No wall sign shall be permitted except on the front of the building and on any other side or rear of the building where on premise parking is provided, and to facilitate identification for secondary entrance. Before erection of a wall sign, the approval of the ARO is required.
(E) All signs shall be subject to the permit regulations set forth in this chapter and be required to be maintained in good condition.
(1985 Code, § 159.17) (Ord. 93-08, passed 3-1-1993; Ord. 96-24, passed - -1996) Penalty, see § 159.99
§ 159.18 MULTIPLE SIGN COPY AREA
Multiple sign copy area shall not exceed 60% of the background area.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 159:
Signs
181
7722743.2
(1985 Code, § 159.18) (Ord. 93-08, passed 3-1-1993) Penalty, see § 159.99
§ 159.19 TEMPORARY SIGNS
(A) General. Temporary signs shall include any sign, banner, pennant, valance or advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wall board or other light materials, with or without frames, intended to be displayed for a short period of time only. Temporary signs may only display one of the following messages:
(1) Political Messages. These involve signs with a message endorsing candidates for public office (local, state or federal), endorsement of political issues (whether on a ballot or not) and such other messages as set forth a statement regarding a public issue;
(2) Real Estate Message. These are signs with a message that real estate is “For Sale,” “For Lease” or “For Rent.” Information pertaining to realtor, that the property is for sale by owner, phone numbers, “Sold,” “Sale Pending” and open houses may also be included as part of the message;
(3) Garage Sale Sign. A sign displaying a message that personal household possessions are for sale. The only message on such a sign shall be either the words “garage sale” or “yard sale,” the hours of such sale, and the address or direction to such sale;
(4) Commercial Message. Any display of words, logos, symbols, pictures or combination thereof which is capable and which is intended to call attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment;
(5) Charitable Message. These include announcements of charitable events, fund raising efforts and similar announcements;
(6) Personal Messages. These include such messages as birth announcements (“It’s a Girl”), “Welcome Home” and similar messages of a noncommercial nature incidental to residential use of property; and
(7) Project Message. Notice regarding a construction or a renovation project in progress on the premises.
(B) Materials and Area Limitations. No temporary sign of combustible material shall exceed ten feet in one of its dimensions or 50 square feet in area. Temporary signs in excess of 50 square feet shall not be permitted unless sufficient information is provided with the application that will allow the City Manager to determine that the proposed materials and anchoring of the sign will protect the health, safety and welfare.
(C) Weight Limitations. Every temporary sign weighing in excess of 50 pounds including supporting structure, must be approved by the City Manager as conforming to the safety requirements of the Building Code.
(D) Projection From Wall and Over Public Property. No temporary sign shall be placed on, extend over or into any street, alley, sidewalk or other thoroughfare, nor shall it project a distance greater than four inches from the wall upon which it is erected, nor be placed or project over any wall opening.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 159:
Signs
182
7722743.2
(E) Obstruction to Doors, Windows and Fire Escapes. No temporary sign shall be erected so as to prevent free ingress to or egress from any door, window or fire escape, nor shall such sign be attached to any standpipe or fire escape.
(F) Commercial Signs in Office, Retail and Industrial Districts.
(1) Frequency of Permits. Each separate business on a lot or in a business center located in an office, retail or industrial district may display a temporary sign with a commercial message no more than once every 90 days for no more than 30 consecutive days.
(2) Projects Lasting Longer Than 90 Days. Project signs which concern a construction or renovation project intending to last more than 90 days must so indicate on the permit application. The City Manager shall consult with ARO and Building Inspector regarding suitable materials, anchoring, size and aesthetic factors appropriate for the duration of display and location of the project sign. A permit shall be issued only if the proposed sign is in conformity with conditions imposed by the City Manager regarding materials, anchoring, size and aesthetic factors.
(3) Advertising Permitted. The advertisement contained on any temporary sign shall pertain only to the business, industry or pursuit conducted on or within the premises on which the sign is erected or maintained. This provision shall not apply to signs of a civic, political or religious nature.
(4) Real Estate, Political and Charitable Message Signs. In addition to the foregoing, real estate, political and charitable message signs may be displayed in office, retail or industrial district, subject to the same restrictions as such signs in residential districts.
(5) Real Estate Message Signs. Real estate message signs, as described in division (A)(2) above may be displayed in office, retail and industrial districts. These signs shall not exceed 25 square feet per sign face.
(1985 Code, § 159.19) (Ord. 93-08, passed 3-1-1993; Ord. 96-24, passed - -1996) Penalty, see § 159.99
§ 159.20 TEMPORARY SIGNS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Temporary signs may be placed on private property in residential districts subject to the following limitations and restrictions.
(A) No temporary sign shall be larger than six square feet in area except as provided in division (G)(4) below.
(B) No part of any temporary sign shall be higher than four feet above grade except as provided in division (G)(4) below.
(C) No more than one temporary sign per lot may be displayed at any one time, except for the following:
(1) One temporary sign for each street on which a lot fronts shall be permitted. Thus corner lots and through lots may have more than one sign displayed; and
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 159:
Signs
183
7722743.2
(2) One single or double sided political sign per individual candidate and individual issue shall be permitted, except as to corner lots or through lots on which there may be placed one such sign facing or adjacent to each street abutting said lot.
(D) No temporary sign shall be displayed for more than 30 days, except signs advertising real estate for sale or lease which has not been sold or leased and except for political signs relating to an issue or candidate in an election. Such political signs may be displayed only during a time period for 60 days prior to the election. Upon application, the City Manager shall issue a permit if it is determined that the sign is in conformity with all provisions of § 159.21. The cost of the permit shall be $5 for all signs except political, personal message, institutional and civic signs and signs advertising charitable events in which case the permit fee shall be waived. All such permits shall state the beginning and ending date during which the sign may be displayed.
(E) No temporary sign shall continue to be displayed if it becomes torn, so worn as its message is not legible from the adjoining public way or wholly or partially separated from its supporting frame or stakes. Such unsightly temporary signs shall be removed, replaced or repaired without undue delay.
(F) No person shall place any sign on real property of another without the owner or occupant’s consent.
(G) Each temporary sign which displays a message concerning or related to an event shall be removed no later than five days, or such lesser period if specified below, after the event has occurred and the message, therefore, no longer serves its intended purpose. These event oriented signs shall include but not be limited to the following examples:
(1) Signs endorsing a candidate or issue for a particular election. Signs must be removed no later than five days after the election;
(2) Signs offering real estate for sale or lease. Signs must be removed within five days after the property is no longer being offered for sale or lease. Signs marked “Sold” may not be displayed for more than five days;
(3) Signs advertising garage or yard sales must be removed within 24 hours after the sale is completed; and
(4) Signs which announce charitable, institutional or civic events such as church bazaars, charitable fund raising events and similar announcements shall not exceed 50 square feet in area nor be more than eight feet high and must be removed within 24 hours of the conclusion of the event.
(H) The temporary signs permitted and described in this section may be placed in any yard of a lot in a manner that the copy (message) on the sign is discernable from any adjoining public right-of-way provided it does not obscure or obstruct the visual line of sight of pedestrians or motorists in a manner that creates a safety hazard. No sign shall be placed in any location where it may interfere with or be confused with any traffic-control device. If safety considerations thereby prevent a sign from being placed in a location that allows its message to be seen from a street, then the property owner or occupant may apply for a permit from the City Manager to erect a larger or higher temporary sign that is of sufficient size to be legible from the adjoining street. The City Manager shall visit the site and shall issue such a permit if the proposed larger or higher sign is otherwise
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 159:
Signs
184
7722743.2
permitted by this section and it is not larger or higher than is necessary to allow the message to be seen from an adjoining right-of-way.
(I) Only temporary signs displaying the following types of copy shall be permitted in residential districts:
(1) Political signs, either endorsing a candidate, an issue or other similar noncommercial message;
(2) Real estate signs indicating that the property on which the sign is displayed is for sale or for rent. Open house and directional signs may only be erected 72 hours prior to the scheduled real estate open house and must be removed by 9:00 p.m. the day of the open house. No more than two directional signs per each real estate open house are permitted;
(3) Yard sale, garage sale or similar signs; provided, however, that such signs may only be displayed during a time period four days prior to such sale;
(4) Signs which announce charitable or civic events;
(5) Personal message signs; and
(6) Project signs.
(J) Temporary signs in residential districts shall not be illuminated by any devices specifically installed for that purpose. Incidental illumination from porch lights and other pre-existing illumination incidental to the residential use of the property is permitted.
(1985 Code, § 159.20) (Ord. 93-08, passed 3-1-1993; Ord. 96-24, passed - -1996) Penalty, see § 159.99
§ 159.21 NONCONFORMING EXISTING SIGNS
Every sign or other advertising structure lawfully in existence when this chapter becomes a law, shall not be expanded, altered, replaced or moved unless it is brought into compliance with the requirements of this chapter. This section shall not prevent repairing or restoring to a safe condition any part of the structural supports of any sign, or the maintenance operations performed thereon. Any sign or any substantial part thereof now existing, and which for any reason or purpose is taken down or removed, except for repair to an extent less than one-half of its replacement value, shall not be re-erected, reconstructed, rebuilt or relocated, unless it shall be made to comply with this chapter.
(1985 Code, § 159.21) (Ord. 93-08, passed 3-1-1993) Penalty, see § 159.99
§ 159.22 MAINTENANCE
All signs shall be maintained in good condition.
(1985 Code, § 159.22) (Ord. 93-08, passed 3-1-1993)
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 159:
Signs
185
7722743.2
§ 159.23 VARIANCES
(A) The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the authority, by a majority vote of the members appointed to hear appeals from the decisions of the City Manager or ARO and to grant relief from those decisions.
(B) A sign not constructed or erected in conformity with this chapter may be permitted by the Board of Zoning Appeals when the use of such proposed sign will not be detrimental to public health, safety and general welfare or when a substantial hardship or injustice will prevail in refusing to issue a permit for use of such a proposed sign. The owner shall submit detailed drawings of the proposed sign and its locations to the Board of Zoning Appeals for its review prior to rendering a decision on the issuance of a building permit. The Board of Zoning Appeals may request the Architectural Review Officer to evaluate the drawings and other available material and report his or her findings to the Board. Any variance should be in accordance with the general intent of this chapter.
(1985 Code, § 159.23) (Ord. 93-08, passed 3-1-1993)
§ 159.24 PERMIT APPLICATION PROCEDURE
(A) Purpose. The intent of this permit procedure is to provide a mechanism for informing persons about the regulation of signs, keeping the administrative time and expense reasonably equivalent to type of sign proposed and providing a method of establishing responsibility for maintaining and removing signs in a timely manner.
(B) City Manager’s Duty. The City Manager shall be responsible for the development of all applications for sign permits which are consistent with the requirements and purposes of this chapter. Permanent signs. Applications for a permit required by this chapter for a permanent sign shall set forth all information required of any building permit. It may also include drawings of sign and supporting structure, proposed location on plat, all dimensional measurements, calculations of total area and copy area, and relative location to other signs. The application may require information and/or calculations concerning wind bearing loading capacity and other information relating to its suitability and safety as a permanent sign. Permit fees shall be in accordance with the building permit schedule. One application and permit shall be required for each such sign.
(C) Political and Charitable Event Signs. One application shall be required to obtain a permit for each type of sign to be displayed in the community. The permit, once issued, shall be valid for signs erected on multiple sites throughout the city which promotes a candidate, slate of candidates, political issue or charitable event. The application shall require a minimum of information about the sign and applicant, except it shall provide the name, address and phone number of the person responsible for the maintenance and removal of such signs. The application and permit shall summarize appropriate provisions of this Sign Code, such as area limitation, number of signs per lot and restrictions on placement of signs. A fee of $5 shall be charged, whether a single or multiple signs are displayed.
(D) Real Estate Sign. A one-time permit shall be required for display of all real estate signs by each real estate broker or individual property owner. Concurrent with the application, a standard real estate sign used by broker or property owner shall be presented for inspection by the City Manager or his or her designee. Such sign shall be inspected to determine whether the size, frame and anchoring
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 159:
Signs
186
7722743.2
system is in conformity with this chapter and suitable for repeated displays without undue weathering. If so, a permit shall be issued which shall allow display of these types of signs on each parcel of real estate the broker or property owner has held for sale or lease throughout the city. However, if any such signs are displayed in violation of this chapter, such permit may be revoked and new application required. As long as signs of a broker remain substantially the same, no new permit shall be required. All such signs, however, must be maintained in good repair.
(E) Project Signs Shall Require a Permit. If the project sign is intended or is likely to be displayed for more than 90 days, it shall be deemed a permanent sign for purposes of the permit process, but such sign must be removed upon completion of the project. If the project sign is likely to be displayed for less than 90 days, the application and permit process shall be similar to a political sign but shall be valid for only a single site. The application fee shall be $10.
(1985 Code, § 159.24) (Ord. 93-08, passed 3-1-1993)
§ 159.25 NUISANCE
Any sign erected or maintained in a manner inconsistent with this chapter, including the failure to obtain a permit required by this chapter, is hereby deemed a nuisance. Any such nuisance shall be subject to all remedies of law, including removal thereof, in addition to any penalties or violations set forth in § 159.99.
(1985 Code, § 159.25) (Ord. 93-08, passed 3-1-1993) Penalty, see § 159.99
§ 159.26 FIRST AMENDMENT PROTECTION
(A) Purpose. It has never been the intent of the city to infringe on the rights of property owners and occupiers to display messages protected by the First Amendment. Therefore, this section is adopted in order to clarify the existing regulations and to remove any doubt that it is the public’s right to receive and display First Amendment protected messages, including but not limited to religious, political, economic, social and philosophical messages. It is the further purpose to reaffirm that an expedient appeal process exists that addresses these First Amendment concerns.
(B) Definition. For the purpose of this Chapter 159, FREE SPEECH MESSAGE shall mean any message that is not intended to convey a commercial message. Free speech messages include but are not limited to religious, political, economic, social and philosophical messages. COMMERCIAL MESSAGE means any message intended to call attention to a business or promote the sale of any goods or services.
(C) Conflict With Existing Provisions. In furtherance of the purpose of this Chapter 159, if there is any conflict between the provisions of this section, with any other section of the Zoning Code, including those provisions regulating signs, and such conflict could be construed to infringe on free speech messages, the provisions of this section shall control.
(D) First Amendment Safeguards. In order to safeguard the protections offered by the First Amendment, the following provisions shall apply.
(1) Every parcel in all zoning districts shall be permitted to display one two-sided or one one-sided sign containing any free speech message. Each side of the sign shall not exceed six square feet in area. Such sign shall not require a building or zoning certificate. However,
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 159:
Signs
187
7722743.2
such sign must be kept in good and safe condition. In no event shall such sign be erected in the right-of-way.
(2) At any time that the County Board of Elections has identified a candidate or issue that will be placed on the ballot at the next general or special election, one additional sign may be erected for each candidate or issue that the occupant wishes to support or oppose. Such political signs shall still be subject to the dimensional regulations set forth in division (D)(1) of this section. No such sign may be erected in the right-of-way. All such signs, except for one sign as permitted by division (D)(1) above, shall be removed from display not later than the first Friday immediately following the election.
(3) If the sign permitted in division (D)(1) or (D)(2) above is not maintained in good and safe condition, notice shall be sent to the property owner by regular mail. The property owner shall have seven days from the date of mailing indicated on the notice to restore or replace the sign to a good and safe condition. If the sign is not restored to good and safe condition within seven days, and the owner or occupant of the property has not filed an appeal from the notice, then the owner and/or occupant shall be in violation of this section and guilty of a minor misdemeanor. Each day that the sign remains in violation of the notice to remove is a separate violation. No additional notices shall be required after the first has been sent.
(4) Every parcel that is permitted to display a sign containing a commercial message or other permitted message pursuant to the Zoning Code shall be permitted to display a free speech message in lieu of the permitted commercial or other permitted message. However, this provision shall not apply to existing signs displaying a message necessary for public safety, such as message directing vehicular or pedestrian flow, parking restriction signs or fire lane signs. Such sign shall still be subject to the dimensional regulations imposed on each zoning district, including but not limited to size, height, area and setback. This sign shall be permitted in addition to the free speech message permitted by division (D)(1) of this section.
(E) Signs Not a Principal Use. Signs shall be considered an accessory use and regulated as an accessory use pursuant to underlying zoning district regulations. However, a sign authorized by divisions (D)(1) and (D)(2) of this section shall be permitted to be displayed by the owner on undeveloped lots.
(F) Appeal Process for Sign Application Denials. In order to confirm a property owner’s ability to exercise his or her First Amendment rights without undue delay, a special process shall be instituted for the appeal of the denial of a zoning certificate or building permit for any sign (if a building or zoning certificate is required) or for the appeal of an order to remove a sign displayed that is purported to be displayed in accordance with division (D)(1) or (D)(2) of this section. To the extent that the appeal process of this section conflicts with other provisions of the Zoning Code, the appeal process of this division (F) shall control.
(1) It shall be the duty of the City Manager or his or her designee to either approve or deny applications for zoning certificates or building permits for signs within seven business days of the date of application. The ARO shall be consulted and shall provide a written recommendation within this period. If a recommendation against approving the sign is made by the ARO, the matter shall be presented to the Planning Commission for consideration. Any application that is returned because it is incomplete shall be deemed a denial. Any
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 159:
Signs
188
7722743.2
aggrieved applicant shall have the right to appeal the denial of a zoning certificate or building permit for a sign. Such appeal shall be heard by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(2) Any such appeal must be taken within ten days after the decision of the City Manager or his or her designee by filing a notice of appeal, stating the grounds for such appeal, with the City Manager and the Board of Zoning Appeals. The City Manager shall cause the transmittal to the Board of Zoning Appeals of all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
(3) The Board of Zoning Appeals shall fix a time for the hearing of the appeal not sooner than 15 days and not later than 30 days from the filing of the notice of appeal. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall give at least ten days’ notice of such public hearing by posting the time and place of the hearing on the official website of the municipality and in the lobby of the municipal building. The Board shall, in addition, give written notice of the hearing to all interested parties, deposited in the mail ten days in advance of such hearing. The appealing party has the right to waive any and all of the time restrictions imposed on the Board of Zoning Appeals. However, absent such waiver, failure of the Board to act within these time limitations shall be deemed an approval of the application for the zoning certificate or building permit.
(4) The Board shall render a written decision on the appeal not later than 14 days after the date of the public hearing.
(1985 Code, § 159.26) (Ord. 05-10, passed 5-23-2005) Penalty, see § 159.99
§ 159.99 PENALTY
(A) Any person who erects, renovates or otherwise changes any sign, and any person who causes or permits any of the foregoing without obtaining a sign permit required by this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a minor misdemeanor. Each and every day that violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(B) Any person who owns or occupies real property or otherwise has control over said real property, and who fails to repair, renovate, paint or remove a permanent sign within 15 days after receiving notice and an order from the City Manager pursuant to this chapter, shall be deemed guilty of a minor misdemeanor. Each and every day that violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. Temporary signs shall be removed immediately upon order of the City Manager. Any person who fails to remove a temporary sign shall be deemed guilty of a minor misdemeanor for each and every day the violation continues. However, if an administrative appeal of the City Manager’s order is filed within the 15 days, no criminal charges shall be filed while the appeal is pending.
(1985 Code, § 159.99) (Ord. 93-08, passed 3-1-1993)
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 160:
Flood Hazard Reduction
189
7722743.2
CHAPTER 160: FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
General Provisions
160.001 Statement of purpose
160.002 Methods of reducing flood loss
160.003 Lands to which these regulations apply
160.004 Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard
160.005 Abrogation and greater restriction
160.006 Interpretation
160.007 Warning and disclaimer of liability
160.008 Severability
160.009 Definitions
Administration
160.020 Designation of City Manager as Floodplain Administrator
160.021 Duties and responsibilities of the City Manager
160.022 Floodplain development permits
160.023 Application required
160.024 Review and approval of a floodplain development permit application
160.025 Inspections
160.026 Post-construction certifications required
160.027 Revoking a floodplain development permit
160.028 Exemption from filing a development permit
160.029 Map maintenance activities
160.030 Data use and flood map interpretation
160.031 Substantial damage determinations
Use and Development Standards for Flood Hazard Reduction
160.045 Applicability
160.046 Use regulations
160.047 Water and wastewater systems
160.048 Subdivisions and large developments
160.049 Residential structures
160.050 Nonresidential structures
160.051 Accessory structures
160.052 Recreational vehicles
160.053 Above-ground gas or liquid storage tanks
160.054 Assurance of flood-carrying capacity
Appeals and Variances
160.065 Appeals Board established
160.066 Powers and duties
160.067 Appeals
160.068 Variances
160.069 Procedure at hearings
160.070 Appeal to the court
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 160:
Flood Hazard Reduction
190
7722743.2
Enforcement
160.085 Compliance required
160.086 Notice of violation
160.099 Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 160.001 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE
It is the purpose of these regulations to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to:
(A) Protect human life and health;
(B) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(C) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
(D) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(E) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;
(F) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the proper use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to protect property and minimize future flood blight areas;
(G) Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions;
(H) Minimize the impact of development on adjacent properties within and near flood-prone areas;
(I) Ensure that the flood storage and conveyance functions of the floodplain are maintained;
(J) Minimize the impact of development on the natural, beneficial values of the floodplain;
(K) Prevent floodplain uses that are either hazardous or environmentally incompatible; and
(L) Meet community participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program.
(1985 Code, § 160.01) (Ord. 04-14, passed 5-10-2004)
§ 160.002 METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSS
In order to accomplish its purposes, these regulations include methods and provisions for:
(A) Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water hazards, or which result in damaging increases in flood heights or velocities;
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 160:
Flood Hazard Reduction
191
7722743.2
(B) Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
(C) Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters;
(D) Controlling filling, grading, dredging, excavating and other development which may increase flood damage; and
(E) Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas.
(1985 Code, § 160.02) (Ord. 04-14, passed 5-10-2004)
§ 160.003 LANDS TO WHICH THESE REGULATIONS APPLY
These regulations shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city as identified in § 160.004, including any additional areas of special flood hazard annexed by the city.
(1985 Code, § 160.03) (Ord. 04-14, passed 5-10-2004)
§ 160.004 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD
For the purposes of these regulations, the following studies and/or maps are adopted:
(A) Flood Insurance Study for Hamilton County, Ohio and incorporated areas dated May 17, 2004. Flood Insurance Rate Map for Hamilton County, Ohio and incorporated areas dated May 17, 2004; and
(B) Any hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis authored by a registered professional engineer in the state which has been approved by the city as required by § 160.048. Any revisions to the aforementioned maps and/or studies are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of these regulations. Such maps and/or studies are on file at the Madeira Municipal Building, 7141 Miami Avenue, Madeira, Ohio.
(1985 Code, § 160.04) (Ord. 04-14, passed 5-10-2004)
§ 160.005 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTION
These regulations are not intended to repeal any existing ordinances, except the pre-existing Chapter 160, including subdivision regulations, Zoning or Building Codes. In the event of a conflict between these regulations and any other ordinance, the more restrictive shall be followed. These regulations shall not impair any deed restriction, covenant or easement, but the land subject to such interests shall also be governed by the regulations.
(1985 Code, § 160.05) (Ord. 04-14, passed 5-10-2004)
§ 160.006 INTERPRETATION
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 160:
Flood Hazard Reduction
192
7722743.2
In the interpretation and application of these regulations, all provisions shall be:
(A) Considered as minimum requirements;
(B) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(C) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. Where a provision of these regulations may be in conflict with a state or federal law, such state or federal law shall take precedence over these regulations.
(1985 Code, § 160.06) (Ord. 04-14, passed 5-10-2004)
§ 160.007 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY
The degree of flood protection required by these regulations is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes. These regulations do not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. These regulations shall not create liability on the part of the city or any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency for any flood damage that results from reliance on these regulations or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. (1985
(1985 Code, § 160.07) (Ord. 04-14, passed 5-10-2004)
§ 160.008 SEVERABILITY
Should any section or provision of these regulations be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the regulations as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
(1985 Code, § 160.08) (Ord. 04-14, passed 5-10-2004)
§ 160.009 DEFINITIONS.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in these regulations shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give these regulations the most reasonable application.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE
Any permanent structure which: (i) is subordinate to and serves a principal building; (ii) is subordinate in area and extent to the principal structure served; (iii) contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of the occupants, business or industry of the principal structure served; and (iv) is located on the same lot as the principal structure, except as otherwise expressly authorized by the provisions of this Zoning Code. Accessory buildings and structures include, but are not limited to, the following: detached garages, carports, gazebos, pergolas and sheds.
APPEAL
A request for review of the Floodplain Administrator’s interpretation of any provision of these regulations or a request for a variance.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 160:
Flood Hazard Reduction
193
7722743.2
BASE FLOOD
The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The BASE FLOOD may also be referred to as the 1% CHANCE ANNUAL FLOOD or 100-YEAR FLOOD.
BASE (100-YEAR) FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE1)
The water surface elevation of the base flood in relation to a specified datum, usually the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 or the North American Vertical Datum of 1988, and usually expressed in feet mean sea level (MSL). In Zone AO areas, the BASE FLOOD ELEVATION is the natural grade elevation plus the depth number (from one to three feet).
BASEMENT
Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
DEVELOPMENT
Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
ENCLOSURE BELOW THE LOWEST FLOOR.
See LOWEST FLOOR.
EXECUTIVE ORDER 11988 (FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT)
Requires that no federally- assisted activities be conducted in or have the potential to affect identified special flood hazard areas, unless there is no practicable alternative.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA)
The agency with the overall responsibility for administering the National Flood Insurance Program.
FILL
A deposit of earth material placed by artificial means.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM)
Usually the initial map, produced by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, or United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, for a community depicting approximate special flood hazard areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM)
An official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development has delineated the areas of special flood hazard.
FLOOD INSURANCE RISK ZONES
Zone designations on FHBMs and FIRMs that indicate the magnitude of the flood hazard in specific areas of a community. Following are the zone definitions.
(1) ZONE A. Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year flood; base flood elevations are not determined.
(2) ZONE A1-30 AND ZONE AE. Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year flood; base flood elevations are determined.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 160:
Flood Hazard Reduction
194
7722743.2
(3) ZONE AO. Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year flood; with flood depths of one to three feet (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain); average depths are determined.
(4) ZONE AH. Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year flood; flood depths of one to three feet (usually areas of ponding); base flood elevations are determined.
(5) ZONE A99. Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year flood to be protected from the 100-year flood by a federal flood protection system under construction; no base flood elevations are determined.
(6) ZONE B AND ZONE X (SHADED). Areas of 500-year flood; areas subject to the 100-year flood with average depths of less than one foot or with contributing drainage area less than one square mile; and areas protected by levees from the base flood.
(7) ZONE C AND ZONE X (UNSHADED). Areas determined to be outside the 500-year floodplain.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS)
The official report in which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development has provided flood profiles, floodway boundaries (sometimes shown on flood boundary and floodway maps), and the water surface elevations of the base flood.
FLOOD OR FLOODING
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE)
The base flood elevation plus two feet of freeboard. In areas where no base flood elevations exist from any authoritative source, the flood protection elevation can be historical flood elevations, or base flood elevations determined and/or approved by the Floodplain Administrator.
FLOODWAY
The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that have been reserved in order to pass the base flood discharge. A FLOODWAY is typically determined through a hydraulic and hydrologic engineering analysis such that the cumulative increase in the water surface elevation of the base flood discharge is no more than a designated height. In no case shall the designated height be more than one-half foot at any point within the community. The FLOODWAY is an extremely hazardous area, and is usually characterized by any of the following: moderate to high velocity flood waters, high potential for debris and projectile impacts and moderate to high erosion forces.
FREEBOARD
A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for the purposes of floodplain management. FREEBOARD tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, obstructed bridge openings, debris and ice jams, and the hydrologic effect of urbanization in a watershed.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 160:
Flood Hazard Reduction
195
7722743.2
HISTORIC STRUCTURE
Any structure that is:
(1) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the United States Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listings on the National Register;
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; or
(3) Individually listed on the state’s inventory of historic places maintained by the Ohio Historic Preservation Office.
HYDROLOGIC AND HYDRAULIC ENGINEERING ANALYSIS
An analysis performed by a professional engineer, registered in the state, in accordance with standard engineering practices as accepted by FEMA, used to determine flood elevations and/or floodway boundaries.
LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC)
An official FEMA determination, by letter, to amend or revise effective flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary and floodway maps and flood insurance studies. LOMCs are broken down into the following categories.
(1) CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR). A formal review and comment by FEMA as to whether a proposed project complies with the minimum National Flood Insurance Program floodplain management criteria. A CLOMR does not amend or revise effective flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary and floodway maps, or flood insurance studies.
(2) LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). A revision based on technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective flood insurance rate map and establishes that a specific property is not located in a special flood hazard area.
(3) LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). A revision based on technical data that, usually due to human-made changes, shows changes to flood zones, flood elevations, floodplain and floodway delineations and planimetric features. One common type of LOMR, an LOMR-F, is a determination concerning whether a structure or parcel has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and is, therefore, excluded from the special flood hazard area.
LOWEST FLOOR
The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) of a structure. This definition excludes an “enclosure below the lowest floor” which is an unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, provided that such enclosure is built in accordance with the applicable design requirements specified in these regulations for enclosures below the lowest floor.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 160:
Flood Hazard Reduction
196
7722743.2
MANUFACTURED HOME
A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a recreational vehicle. For the purposes of these regulations, a MANUFACTURED HOME includes manufactured homes and mobile homes as defined in R.C. Chapter 3733.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK
As specified in the O.A.C. § 3701-27-01, a MANUFACTURED HOME PARK means any tract of land upon which three or more manufactured homes, used for habitation are parked, either free of charge or for revenue purposes, and includes any roadway, building, structure, vehicle or enclosure used or intended for use as part of the facilities of the park. A tract of land that is subdivided and the individual lots are not for rent or rented, but are for sale or sold for the purpose of installation of manufactured homes on the lots, is not a MANUFACTURED HOME PARK, even though three or more manufactured homes are parked thereon, if the roadways are dedicated to the local government authority.
NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP)
The NFIP is a federal program enabling property owners in participating communities to purchase insurance protection against losses from flooding. This insurance is designed to provide an insurance alternative to disaster assistance to meet the escalating costs of repairing damage to buildings and their contents caused by floods. Participation in the NFIP is based on an agreement between local communities and the federal government that states if a community will adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations to reduce future flood risks to all development in special flood hazard areas, the federal government will make flood insurance available within the community as a financial protection against flood loss.
NEW CONSTRUCTION
Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the initial effective date of the city flood insurance rate map, effective November 15, 1979 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
PERSON
Includes any individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association or any other entity, including state and local governments and agencies. An AGENCY is further defined in R.C. § 111.15 as any governmental entity of the state and includes, but is not limited to, any board, department, division, commission, bureau, society, council, institution, state college or university, community college district, technical college district or state community college. AGENCY does not include the general assembly, the controlling board, the Adjutant General’s department or any court.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE
A vehicle which is:
(1) Built on a single chassis;
(2) Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
(3) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
(4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 160:
Flood Hazard Reduction
197
7722743.2
REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ARCHITECT
A person registered to engage in the practice of architecture under the provisions of R.C. §§ 4703.01 to 4703.19.
REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER
A person registered as a professional engineer under R.C. Chapter 4733.
REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL SURVEYOR
A person registered as a professional surveyor under R.C. Chapter 4733.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA
Also known as AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD, it is the land in the floodplain subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS are designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency on flood insurance rate maps, flood insurance studies, flood boundary and floodway maps and flood hazard boundary maps as Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-30 and A99. SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS may also refer to areas that are flood-prone and designated from other federal state or local sources of data, including but not limited to historical flood information reflecting high water marks, previous flood inundation areas, and flood prone soils associated with a watercourse.
START OF CONSTRUCTION
The date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The ACTUAL START means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of a building.
STRUCTURE
A walled and roofed building, manufactured home or gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above-ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE
Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT
Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include:
(1) Any improvement to a structure which is considered new construction;
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 160:
Flood Hazard Reduction
198
7722743.2
(2) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified prior to the application for a development permit by the local Code Enforcement Official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
(3) Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure.
VARIANCE
A grant of relief from the standards of these regulations consistent with the variance conditions herein.
VIOLATION
The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with these regulations.
(1985 Code, § 160.09) (Ord. 04-14, passed 5-10-2004)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 160.020 DESIGNATION OF CITY MANAGER AS FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR
The City Manager, or his or her designee, is hereby appointed to administer and implement these regulations as the Floodplain Administrator.
(1985 Code, § 160.10) (Ord. 04-14, passed 5-10-2004)
§ 160.021 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE CITY MANAGER
The duties and responsibilities of the City Manager shall include but are not limited to:
(A) Evaluate applications for permits to develop in special flood hazard areas;
(B) Interpret floodplain boundaries and provide flood hazard and flood protection elevation information;
(C) Issue permits to develop in special flood hazard areas when the provisions of these regulations have been met, or refuse to issue the same in the event of noncompliance;
(D) Inspect buildings and lands to determine whether any violations of these regulations have been committed;
(E) Make and permanently keep all records for public inspection necessary for the administration of these regulations, including flood insurance rate maps, letters of map amendment and revision, records of issuance and denial of permits to develop in special flood hazard areas, determinations of whether development is in or out of special flood hazard areas for the purpose of issuing floodplain development permits, elevation certificates, variances and records of enforcement actions taken for violations of these regulations;
(F) Enforce the provisions of these regulations;
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 160:
Flood Hazard Reduction
199
7722743.2
(G) Provide information, testimony or other evidence as needed during variance hearings;
(H) Coordinate map maintenance activities and FEMA follow-up; and
(I) Conduct substantial damage determinations to determine whether existing structures, damaged from any source and in special flood hazard areas identified by FEMA, must meet the development standards of these regulations.
(1985 Code, § 160.11) (Ord. 04-14, passed 5-10-2004)
§ 160.022 FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMITS
It shall be unlawful for any person to begin construction or other development activity, including but not limited to filling, grading, construction, alteration, remodeling or expanding any structure or alteration of any watercourse wholly within, partially within or in contact with any identified special flood hazard area, as established in § 160.004, until a floodplain development permit is obtained from the City Manager. Such floodplain development permit shall show that the proposed development activity is in conformity with the provisions of these regulations. No such permit shall be issued by the City Manager until the requirements of these regulations have been met.
(1985 Code, § 160.12) (Ord. 04-14, passed 5-10-2004) Penalty, see § 160.999
§ 160.023 APPLICATION REQUIRED
(A) An application for a floodplain development permit shall be required for all development activities located wholly within, partially within or in contact with an identified special flood hazard area. Such application shall be made by the owner of the property or his or her authorized agent, herein referred to as the applicant, prior to the actual commencement of such construction on a form furnished for that purpose. Where it is unclear whether a development site is in a special flood hazard area, the City Manager may require an application for a floodplain development permit to determine the development’s location.
(B) Such applications shall include but not be limited to:
(1) Site plans drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and topography of the area in question, the location of existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities and the location of the foregoing;
(2) Elevation of the existing, natural ground where structures are proposed;
(3) Elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures;
(4) Such other material and information as may be requested by the City Manager to determine conformance with and provide enforcement of these regulations; and
(5) Technical analyses conducted by the appropriate design professional registered in the state and submitted with an application for a floodplain development permit when applicable:
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 160:
Flood Hazard Reduction
200
7722743.2
(a) Flood-proofing certification for nonresidential flood-proofed structure as required in § 160.050;
(b) Certification that fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a structure not meeting the design requirements of § 160.049(E) are designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces;
(c) Description of any watercourse alteration or relocation that the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be diminished, and maintenance assurances as required in § 160.054(C);
(d) A hydrologic and hydraulic analysis demonstrating that the cumulative effect of proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one-half foot in special flood hazard areas where the Federal Emergency Management Agency has provided base flood elevations but no floodway as required by § 160.054(B);
(e) A hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis showing impact of any development on flood heights in an identified floodway as required by § 160.054(A); and
(f) Generation of base flood elevation(s) for subdivision and large-scale developments as required by § 160.048.
(1985 Code, § 160.13) (Ord. 04-14, passed 5-10-2004)
§ 160.024 REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF A FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT APPLICATION
(A) Review.
(1) After receipt of a complete application, the City Manager shall review the application to ensure that the standards of these regulations have been met. No floodplain development permit application shall be reviewed until all information required in § 160.023 has been received by the City Manager.
(2) The City Manager shall review all floodplain development permit applications to assure that all necessary permits have been received from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required. The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining such permits as required including permits issued by the United States Army Corps of Engineers under § 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 403, and § 404 of the Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1344 and 1341 and the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency under § 401 of the Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1344 and 1341t.
(B) Approval. Within 30 days after the receipt of a complete application, the City Manager shall either approve or disapprove the application. If an application is approved, a floodplain development permit shall be issued. All floodplain development permits shall be conditional upon the commencement of work within one year. A floodplain development permit shall expire one year
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 160:
Flood Hazard Reduction
201
7722743.2
after issuance unless the permitted activity has been substantially begun and is thereafter pursued to completion. (1985 Code, § 160.14) (Ord. 04-14, passed 5-10-2004)
§ 160.025 INSPECTIONS
The City Manager or designee shall make periodic inspections at appropriate times throughout the period of construction in order to monitor compliance with permit conditions.
(1985 Code, § 160.15) (Ord. 04-14, passed 5-10-2004)
§ 160.026 POST-CONSTRUCTION CERTIFICATIONS REQUIRED
The following as-built certifications are required after a floodplain development permit has been issued:
(A) For new or substantially improved residential structures, or nonresidential structures that have been elevated, the applicant shall have a Federal Emergency Management Agency elevation certificate completed by a registered surveyor to record as-built elevation data. For elevated structures in Zone A and Zone AO areas without a base flood elevation, the elevation certificate may be completed by the property owner or owner’s representative; and
(B) For all development activities subject to the standards of § 160.029(A), a letter of map revision.
(1985 Code, § 160.16) (Ord. 04-14, passed 5-10-2004)
§ 160.027 REVOKING A FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT
A floodplain development permit shall be revocable, if among other things, the actual development activity does not conform to the terms of the application and permit granted thereon. In the event of the revocation of a permit, an appeal may be taken to the Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with § 160.067 of these regulations.
(1985 Code, § 160.17) (Ord. 04-14, passed 5-10-2004)
§ 160.028 EXEMPTION FROM FILING A DEVELOPMENT PERMIT
(A) An application for a floodplain development permit shall not be required for:
(1) Maintenance work such as roofing, painting and basement sealing, or for small nonstructural development activities (except for filling and grading) valued at less than $5,000;Development activities in an existing or proposed manufactured home park that are under the authority of the Ohio Department of Health and subject to the flood damage reduction provisions of the O.A.C. Chapter 3701;
(2) Major utility facilities permitted by the Ohio Power Siting Board under R.C. Chapter 4906;
(3) Hazardous waste disposal facilities permitted by the Hazardous Waste Siting Board under R.C. Chapter 3734; and
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 160:
Flood Hazard Reduction
202
7722743.2
(4) Development activities undertaken by a federal agency and which are subject to Federal Executive Order 11988-Floodplain Management.
(B) Any proposed action exempt from filing for a floodplain development permit is also exempt from the standards of these regulations.
(1985 Code, § 160.18) (Ord. 04-14, passed 5-10-2004)
§ 160.029 MAP MAINTENANCE ACTIVITIES
To meet National Flood Insurance Program minimum requirements to have flood data reviewed and approved by FEMA, and to ensure that the city’s flood maps, studies and other data identified in § 160.004 accurately represent flooding conditions so appropriate floodplain management criteria are based on current data, the following map maintenance activities are identified.
(A) Requirement To Submit New Technical Data.
(1) For all development proposals that impact floodway delineations or base flood elevations, the community shall ensure that technical data reflecting such changes be submitted to FEMA within six months of the date such information becomes available. These development proposals include:
(a) Floodway encroachments that increase or decrease base flood elevations or alter floodway boundaries;
(b) Fill sites to be used for the placement of proposed structures where the applicant desires to remove the site from the special flood hazard area;
(c) Alteration of watercourses that result in a relocation or elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of culverts; and
(d) Subdivision or large-scale development proposals requiring the establishment of base flood elevations in accordance with § 160.048.
(2) It is the responsibility of the applicant to have technical data, required in accordance with division (A) of this section, prepared in a format required for a conditional letter of map revision or letter
(3) of map revision, and submitted to FEMA. Submittal and processing fees for these map revisions shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
(a) The City Manager shall require a conditional letter of map revision prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit for:
(b) Proposed floodway encroachments that increase the base flood elevation; and
(4) Proposed development which increases the base flood elevation by more than one-half foot in areas where FEMA has provided base flood elevations but no floodway.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 160:
Flood Hazard Reduction
203
7722743.2
(B) Floodplain development permits issued by the City Manager shall be conditioned upon the applicant obtaining a letter of map revision from FEMA for any development proposal subject to division (A)(1) of this section.
(C) Right To Submit New Technical Data. The City Manager may request changes to any of the information shown on an effective map that does not impact floodplain or floodway delineations or base flood elevations, such as labeling or planimetric details. Such a submission shall include appropriate supporting documentation made in writing by the City Manager and may be submitted at any time.
(D) Annexation/Detachment. Upon occurrence, the City Manager shall notify FEMA in writing whenever the boundaries of the city have been modified by annexation or the community has assumed authority over an area, or no longer has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for a particular area. In order that the city’s flood insurance rate map accurately represent the city’s boundaries, the City Manager shall include within such notification a copy of a map of the city suitable for reproduction, clearly showing the new corporate limits or the new area for which the city has assumed or relinquished floodplain management regulatory authority.
(1985 Code, § 160.19) (Ord. 04-14, passed 5-10-2004)
§ 160.030 DATA USE AND FLOOD MAP INTERPRETATION
The following guidelines shall apply to the use and interpretation of maps and other data showing areas of special flood hazard.
(A) In areas where FEMA has not identified special flood hazard areas, or in FEMA-identified special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation and floodway data have not been identified, the City Manager shall review and reasonably utilize any other flood hazard data available from a federal, state or other source.
(B) Base flood elevations and floodway boundaries produced on FEMA flood maps and studies shall take precedence over base flood elevations and floodway boundaries by any other source that reflect a reduced floodway width and/or lower base flood elevations. Other sources of data, showing increased base flood elevations and/or larger floodway areas than are shown on FEMA flood maps and studies shall be reasonably used by the City Manager.
(C) When preliminary flood insurance rate maps and/or flood insurance study have been provided by FEMA:
(1) Upon the issuance of a letter of final determination by the FEMA, the preliminary flood hazard data shall be used and replace all previously existing flood hazard data provided from FEMA for the purposes of administering these regulations; and
(2) Prior to the issuance of a letter of final determination by FEMA, the use of preliminary flood hazard data shall only be required where no base flood elevations and/or floodway areas exist, or where the preliminary base flood elevations or floodway area exceed the base flood elevations and/or floodway widths in existing flood hazard data provided from FEMA. Such preliminary data may be subject to change and/or appeal to FEMA.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 160:
Flood Hazard Reduction
204
7722743.2
(D) The City Manager shall make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location of the flood boundaries and areas of special flood hazard. A person contesting the determination of the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in § 160.067.
(E) Where a map boundary showing an area of special flood hazard and field elevations disagree, the base flood elevations or flood protection elevations (as found on an elevation profile, floodway data table, established high water marks and the like) shall prevail.
(1985 Code, § 160.20) (Ord. 04-14, passed 5-10-2004)
§ 160.031 SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE DETERMINATIONS
(A) Damages to structures may result from a variety of causes including flood, tornado, wind, heavy snow, fire and the like. After such a damage event, the City Manager shall:
(1) Determine whether damaged structures are located in special flood hazard areas;
(2) Conduct substantial damage determinations for damaged structures located in special flood hazard areas; and
(3) Make reasonable attempt to notify owners of substantially damaged structures of the need to obtain a floodplain development permit prior to repair, rehabilitation or reconstruction.
(B) Additionally, the City Manager may implement other measures to assist with the substantial damage determination and subsequent repair process. These measures include issuing press releases, public service announcements and other public information materials related to the floodplain development permits and repair of damaged structures; coordinating with other federal, state and local agencies to assist with substantial damage determinations; providing owners of damaged structures materials and other information related to the proper repair of damaged structures in special flood hazard areas; and assist owners of substantially damaged structures with increased cost of compliance insurance claims.
(1985 Code, § 160.21) (Ord. 04-14, passed 5-10-2004)
USE AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 160.045 APPLICABILITY
The following use and development standards apply to development wholly within, partially within, or in contact with any special flood hazard area as established in §§ 160.004 or 160.030(A).
(1985 Code, § 160.22) (Ord. 04-14, passed 5-10-2004)
§ 160.046 USE REGULATIONS
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 160:
Flood Hazard Reduction
205
7722743.2
(A) Permitted Uses. All uses not otherwise prohibited in this section or any other applicable land use regulations adopted by the city are allowed, provided they meet the provisions of these regulations.
(B) Prohibited Uses.
(1) Private water supply systems in all special flood hazard areas identified by FEMA, permitted under R.C. Chapter 3701; and
(2) Infectious waste treatment facilities in all special flood hazard areas, permitted under R.C. Chapter 3734.
(1985 Code, § 160.23) (Ord. 04-14, passed 5-10-2004) Penalty, see § 160.999
§ 160.047 WATER AND WASTEWATER SYSTEMS
The following standards apply to all water supply, sanitary sewerage and waste disposal systems not otherwise regulated by the Ohio Revised Code:
(A) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems;
(B) New and replacement sanitary sewerage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and
(C) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to or contamination from them during flooding.
(1985 Code, § 160.24) (Ord. 04-14, passed 5-10-2004) Penalty, see § 160.999
§ 160.048 SUBDIVISIONS AND LARGE DEVELOPMENTS
(A) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and are subject to all applicable standards in these regulations;
(B) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage;
(C) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage;
(D) In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data are not available, the applicant shall provide a hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis that generates base flood elevations for all subdivision proposals and other proposed developments containing at least 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less; and
(E) The applicant shall meet the requirement to submit technical data to FEMA in § 160.029(A)(1)(d) when a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis is completed that generates base flood elevations as required by this section.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 160:
Flood Hazard Reduction
206
7722743.2
(1985 Code, § 160.25) (Ord. 04-14, passed 5-10-2004) Penalty, see § 160.999
§ 160.049 RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES
(A) New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. Where a structure, including its foundation members, is elevated on fill to or above the base flood elevation, these requirements for anchoring and for construction materials resistant to flood damage, as set forth in division (B) of this section, are satisfied.
(B) New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with methods and materials resistant to flood damage.
(C) New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or elevated so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
(D) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure, including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the flood protection elevation.
(E) New construction and substantial improvements, including manufactured homes, that do not have basements and that are elevated to the flood protection elevation using pilings, columns, posts or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to allow unimpeded movement of flood waters may have an enclosure below the lowest floor, provided the enclosure meets the following standards:
(1) Be used only for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage; and
(2) Be designed and certified by a registered professional engineer or architect to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodgates; or
(3) Have a minimum of two openings on different walls having a total net area not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area, and the bottom of all such openings being no higher than one foot above grade. The openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodgates.
(F) Manufactured homes shall be affixed to a permanent foundation and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. Methods of anchoring may include but are not limited to use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.
(G) Repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure and is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure, shall be exempt from the development standards of this section.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 160:
Flood Hazard Reduction
207
7722743.2
(1985 Code, § 160.26) (Ord. 04-14, passed 5-10-2004) Penalty, see § 160.999
§ 160.050 NONRESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES
(A) New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structures shall meet the requirements of §§ 160.048(A) through (C) and (E).
(B) New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the level of the flood protection elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall meet all of the following standards:
(1) Be dry flood-proofed so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water to the level of the flood protection elevation;
(2) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
(3) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, through the use of a Federal Emergency Management Flood-proofing Certificate, that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2) of this section.
(1985 Code, § 160.27) (Ord. 04-14, passed 5-10-2004) Penalty, see § 160.999
§ 160.051 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
Relief to the elevation or dry flood-proofing standards may be granted for accessory structures containing no more than 600 square feet. Such structures must meet the following standards:
(A) They shall not be used for human habitation;
(B) They shall be constructed of flood resistant materials;
(C) They shall be constructed and placed on the lot to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of flood waters;
(D) They shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation;
(E) Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated or flood-proofed to or above the level of the flood protection elevation; and
(F) They shall meet the opening requirements of § 160.049(E)(3).
(1985 Code, § 160.28) (Ord. 04-14, passed 5-10-2004) Penalty, see § 160.999
§ 160.052 RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Recreational vehicles must meet at least one of the following standards:
(A) They shall not be located on sites in special flood hazard areas for more than 180 days;
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 160:
Flood Hazard Reduction
208
7722743.2
(B) They must be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(C) They must meet all standards of § 160.049.
(1985 Code, § 160.29) (Ord. 04-14, passed 5-10-2004) Penalty, see § 160.999
§ 160.053 ABOVE-GROUND GAS OR LIQUID STORAGE TANKS
All above-ground gas or liquid storage tanks shall be anchored to prevent flotation or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads.
(1985 Code, § 160.30) (Ord. 04-14, passed 5-10-2004) Penalty, see § 160.999
§ 160.054 ASSURANCE OF FLOOD-CARRYING CAPACITY
Pursuant to the purpose and methods of reducing flood damage stated in these regulations, the following additional standards are adopted to assure that the reduction of the flood-carrying capacity of watercourses is minimized.
(A) Development In Floodways.
(1) In floodway areas, development shall cause no increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. Prior to issuance of a floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis, conducted by a registered professional engineer, demonstrating that the proposed development would not result in any increase in the base flood elevation; or
(2) Development in floodway areas causing increases in the base flood elevation may be permitted, provided all of the following are completed by the applicant:
(a) Meet the requirements to submit technical data in § 160.029(A);
(b) An evaluation of alternatives which would not result in increased base flood elevations and an explanation why these alternatives are not feasible;
(c) Certification that no structures are located in areas which would be impacted by the increased base flood elevation;
(d) Documentation of individual legal notices to all impacted property owners within and outside the community, explaining the impact of the proposed action on their property; and
(e) Concurrence of the City Manager and the Chief Executive Officer of any other communities impacted by the proposed actions.
(B) Development In Riverine Areas With Base Flood Elevations But No Floodways.
(1) In riverine special flood hazard areas identified by FEMA where base flood elevation data are provided but no floodways have been designated, the cumulative effect of any proposed
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 160:
Flood Hazard Reduction
209
7722743.2
development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the base flood elevation more than one-half foot at any point. Prior to issuance of a floodplain development permit the applicant must submit a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis, conducted by a registered professional engineer, demonstrating that this standard has been met; or
(2) Development in riverine special flood hazard areas identified by FEMA where base flood elevation data are provided but no floodways have been designated causing more than one-half foot increase in the base flood elevation may be permitted, provided all of the following are completed by the applicant:
(a) An evaluation of alternatives which would result in an increase of one-half foot or less of the base flood elevation and an explanation why these alternatives are not feasible; and
(b) Divisions (A)(2)(a) and (A)(2)(c) through (A)(2)(e) of this section.
(C) Alterations of a Watercourse. For the purpose of these regulations, a watercourse is altered when any change occurs within its banks. The extent of the banks shall be established by a field determination of the “bankfull stage.” The field determination of bankfull stage shall be based on methods presented in Chapter 7 of the USDA Forest Service General Technical Report RM-245, Stream Channel Reference Sites, An Illustrated Guide to Field Technique or other applicable publication available from a federal, state or other authoritative source. For all proposed developments that alter a watercourse, the following standards apply:
(1) The bankfull flood-carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse shall not be diminished. Prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development, and certification by a registered professional engineer that the bankfull flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be diminished;
(2) Adjacent communities, the United States Army Corps of Engineers, and the Ohio Department of Natural Resources, Division of Water, must be notified prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse. Evidence of such notification must be submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency;
(3) The applicant shall be responsible for providing the necessary maintenance for the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity will not be diminished. The City Manager may require the permit holder to enter into an agreement with the city, specifying the maintenance responsibilities. If an agreement is required, it shall be made a condition of the floodplain development permit; and
(4) The applicant shall meet the requirements to submit technical data in § 160.029(A)(1)(c) when an alteration of a watercourse results in the relocation or elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of culverts.
(1985 Code, § 160.31) (Ord. 04-14, passed 5-10-2004) Penalty, see § 160.999
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 160:
Flood Hazard Reduction
210
7722743.2
APPEALS AND VARIANCES
§ 160.065 APPEALS BOARD ESTABLISHED
The Board of Zoning Appeals is hereby established as the Appeals Board for variance applications submitted under these regulations.
(1985 Code, § 160.32) (Ord. 04-14, passed 5-10-2004)
§ 160.066 POWERS AND DUTIES
(A) The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the City Manager in the administration or enforcement of these regulations.
(B) The Board of Zoning Appeals shall authorize variances in accordance with § 160.068 of these regulations.
(1985 Code, § 160.33) (Ord. 04-14, passed 5-10-2004)
§ 160.067 APPEALS
(A) Any person affected by any notice and order, or other official action of the City Manager regarding this Chapter 160, may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the Board of Zoning Appeals, provided that such person shall file, within 21 days of the date of such notice and order, or other official action, a brief statement of the grounds for such hearing or for the mitigation of any item appearing on any order of the City Manager’s decision. Such appeal shall be in writing, signed by the applicant, and be filed with the City Manager. Upon receipt of the appeal, the City Manager shall transmit said notice and all pertinent information on which the City Manager’s decision was made to the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(B) Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the appeal give notice in writing to parties in interest, and decide the appeal within a reasonable time after it is submitted.
(1985 Code, § 160.34) (Ord. 04-14, passed 5-10-2004)
§ 160.068 VARIANCES
(A) General. Any person believing that the use and development standards of these regulations would result in unnecessary hardship may file an application for a variance. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the power to authorize, in specific cases, such variances from the standards of these regulations, not inconsistent with federal regulations, as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions of the lot or parcel, a literal enforcement of the provisions of these regulations would result in unnecessary hardship.
(B) Application For a Variance.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 160:
Flood Hazard Reduction
211
7722743.2
(1) Any owner, or agent thereof, of property for which a variance is sought shall make an application for a variance by filing it with the Floodplain Administrator, who upon receipt of the variance shall transmit it to the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(2) Such application at a minimum shall contain the following information: name, address and telephone number of the applicant; legal description of the property; parcel map; description of the existing use; description of the proposed use; location of the floodplain; description of the variance sought; and reason for the variance request.
(3) All applications for a variance must be accompanied by an application fee of $50 for each variance under request.
(C) Notice For Public Hearing. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall schedule and hold a public hearing within 30 days after the receipt of an application for a variance from the City Manager. Prior to the hearing, a notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be posted on the official website of the municipality and in the lobby of the municipal building. The Board shall, in addition, give notice of any such hearing by letter to property owners where property is located within 200 feet of the subject property and other deemed interested parties by the City Manager, deposited in the mail ten days in advance of such hearing and addressed to their last known residences, in those cases where the proposed change does not directly affect more than 30 such owners.
(D) Public Hearing. At such hearing the applicant shall present such statements and evidence as the Board of Zoning Appeals requires. In considering such variance applications, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall consider and make findings of fact on all evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of these regulations and the following factors:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;
(5) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(6) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;
(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(10) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 160:
Flood Hazard Reduction
212
7722743.2
(11) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges.
(E) Issuance.
(1) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship due to the physical characteristics of the property. Increased cost or inconvenience of meeting the requirements of these regulations does not constitute an exceptional hardship to the applicant;
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights beyond that which is allowed in these regulations; additional threats to public safety; extraordinary public expense, nuisances, fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws;
(d) A determination that the structure or other development is protected by methods to minimize flood damages; and
(e) A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(2) Upon consideration of the above factors and the purposes of these regulations, the Board of Zoning Appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of these regulations.
(F) Other Conditions For Variances.
(1) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
(2) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing divisions (D)(1) through (D)(11) of this section have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(3) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
(1985 Code, § 160.35) (Ord. 04-14, passed 5-10-2004)
§ 160.069 PROCEDURE AT HEARINGS
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 160:
Flood Hazard Reduction
213
7722743.2
(A) All testimony shall be given under oath.
(B) A complete record of the proceedings shall be kept, except for valid executive sessions of the Board of Zoning Appeals, but including all documents presented and a verbatim record of the testimony of all witnesses.
(C) The applicant shall proceed first to present evidence and testimony in support of the appeal or variance.
(D) The City Manager may present evidence or testimony in support or opposition to the appeal or variance.
(E) All witnesses shall be subject to cross-examination by the adverse party or their counsel.
(F) Evidence that is not admitted may be proffered and shall become part of the record for appeal.
(G) The Board of Zoning Appeals shall issue subpoenas upon written request for the attendance of witnesses. A reasonable deposit to cover the cost of issuance and service shall be collected in advance.
(H) The Board of Zoning Appeals shall prepare conclusions of fact supporting its decision. The decision may be announced at the conclusion of the hearing and thereafter issued in writing or the decision may be issued in writing within a reasonable time after the hearing.
(1985 Code, § 160.36) (Ord. 04-14, passed 5-10-2004)
§ 160.070 APPEAL TO THE COURT
Those aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals may appeal such decision to the County Court of Common Pleas, as provided in R.C. Chapter 2506.
(1985 Code, § 160.37) (Ord. 04-14, passed 5-10-2004)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 160.085 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED
(A) No structure or land shall hereafter be located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, repaired, extended, converted, enlarged or altered without full compliance with the terms of these regulations and all other applicable regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of these regulations, unless specifically exempted from filing for a development permit as stated in § 160.028.
(B) Failure to obtain a floodplain development permit shall be a violation of these regulations and shall be punishable in accordance with § 160.999.
(C) Floodplain development permits issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the City Manager authorize only the use, and arrangement, set forth in such approved plans and applications or amendments thereto. Use, arrangement or construction contrary to that authorized shall be deemed a violation of these regulations and punishable in accordance with § 160.999.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 160:
Flood Hazard Reduction
214
7722743.2
(1985 Code, § 160.38) (Ord. 04-14, passed 5-10-2004) Penalty, see § 160.999
§ 160.086 NOTICE OF VIOLATION
(A) Whenever the City Manager determines that there has been a violation of any provision of these regulations, he or she shall give notice of such violation to the person responsible therefor and order compliance with these regulations as hereinafter provided.
(B) Such notice and order shall:
(1) Be put in writing on an appropriate form;
(2) Include a list of violations, referring to the section or sections of these regulations that have been violated, and order remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of these regulations;
(3) Specify a reasonable time for performance;
(4) Advise the owner, operator or occupant of the right to appeal; and
(5) Be served on the owner, occupant or agent in person. However, this notice and order shall be deemed to be properly served upon the owner, occupant or agent if a copy thereof is sent by registered or certified mail to the person’s last known mailing address, residence or place of business, and/or a copy is posted in a conspicuous place in or on the dwelling affected.
(1985 Code, § 160.39) (Ord. 04-14, passed 5-10-2004)
§ 160.087 PENALTY
Violation of the provisions of these regulations or failure to comply with any of its requirements shall be deemed to be a strict liability offense, and shall constitute a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Any person who violates these regulations or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined or imprisoned as provided by the laws of the city. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. The city shall prosecute any violation of these regulations in accordance with the penalties stated herein.
(1985 Code, § 160.99) (Ord. 04-14, passed 5-10-2004)
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 161:
Architectural Review Office
215
7722743.2
CHAPTER 161: ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW OFFICE
161.01 Establishment
161.02 Powers and duties
161.03 Terms and qualifications
161.04 Appeal
161.05 Conflict of interest
161.06 Compensation
161.07 Review procedures of applications
161.08 Standards and criteria
161.09 Variances
§ 161.01 ESTABLISHMENT
There is established an Architectural Review Office (ARO) consisting of one person to be appointed by the City Manager with the approval of Council.
(1985 Code, § 161.01) (Ord. 85-21, passed 9-23-1985)
§ 161.02 POWERS AND DUTIES
The Architectural Review Office shall have the following powers and duties.
(A) The ARO shall review all proposed exterior construction and alteration plans in the city Business Districts “A,” “B,” “O” Manufacturing Districts, any parcels granted a variance for business use in any nonconforming areas utilized for business or manufacturing uses, subdivision development and double letter zoning districts now in effect or hereinafter created. No building permit will be granted by the City Manager without the written approval of the ARO after such review. The ARO shall also review all proposed signs or sign changes in all zoning districts in the city.
(B) The ARO shall assist and advise the Planning Commission on the design, amenities, quality, relationships to natural features, existing buildings and all other aspects of a site development plan being considered by the Planning Commission which relate to the appearance of an entire project, and all of its parts and surroundings. All standards, regulations and criteria contained in the ordinances of the city shall be considered by the ARO in its review.
(1985 Code, § 161.02) (Ord. 85-21, passed 9-23-1985; Ord. 88-58, passed 1-25-1989)
§ 161.03 TERMS AND QUALIFICATIONS
The Architectural Review Officer shall be appointed for a term of two years and shall be a registered architect skilled in the field of aesthetics and design.
(1985 Code, § 161.03) (Ord. 85-21, passed 9-23-1985)
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 161:
Architectural Review Office
216
7722743.2
§ 161.04 APPEAL
A building permit denied based upon input from the Architectural Review Office may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals for an administrative hearing. The decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be final.
(1985 Code, § 161.04) (Ord. 85-21, passed 9-23-1985)
§ 161.05 CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The person appointed to the Architectural Review Office shall not participate in the review of, or give advice upon, any work in which a partner or professional associate or associates has any direct or indirect interest. In the event that such a conflict of interest may arise, or the ARO is unable to participate in the review, a temporary ARO shall be appointed for such work in the same manner as the ARO is appointed.
(1985 Code, § 161.05) (Ord. 85-21, passed 9-23-1985)
§ 161.06 COMPENSATION
Compensation shall be paid the Architectural Review Officer as is established by the City Manager for professional services. With the submission of each application the City Manager shall require a deposit to be made to cover a review expense equal to at least 25% of the fee charged for the applicable building permit.
(1985 Code, § 161.06) (Ord. 85-21, passed 9-23-1985)
§ 161.07 REVIEW PROCEDURES OF APPLICATIONS
(A) A preliminary review may be scheduled with the City Manager and the Architectural Review Office to establish the intent and scope of the proposed application and to review the proposal as evidenced schematically by sketch plans. The City Manager and ARO may furnish the applicant written comments regarding such conference including appropriate recommendations to inform and assist prior to the preparation of the formal plan.
ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW OFFICE
(B) After receipt of a complete submission of an application for a building permit for construction or alteration in the districts designated in § 161.02(A), the City Manager shall refer such submission to the ARO.
(C) Within 30 days following receipt of such submission, the ARO shall advise the City Manager in writing of the approval or disapproval. If disapproved, such writing shall set forth the findings as to the basis for the determination. Such writing shall be open to public inspection.
(1985 Code, § 161.07) (Ord. 85-21, passed 9-23-1985)
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 161:
Architectural Review Office
217
7722743.2
§ 161.08 STANDARDS AND CRITERIA
(A) An application or a building permit shall be reviewed by the Architectural Review Officer who shall consider the following:
(1) Materials. Materials shall be appropriate for the use of building, for weathering and for relationship to other materials including those used on buildings in surrounding areas;
(2) Colors And Textures. Colors and textures shall be appropriate for the size and scale of the building, for weathering and for relationship to the site and surrounding buildings;
(3) Architectural Details And Ornaments. Architectural details and ornaments shall be meaningful to the overall design and appropriate for the size and scale of the building and for weathering;
(4) Mechanical Equipment. Mechanical equipment shall be considered as it affects rooftop appearance, sidewall openings, sound levels, smoke and other nuisance aspects. Also, mechanical equipment shall be considered as it relates to overhead wires, gas and electric meter stations and any other visible appurtenances;
(5) Approaches, Drives and Parking Areas. Approaches, drives and parking areas shall be considered as they affect the appearance from the street and from the site as well. The relationship of paving to the building shall be appropriate considering factors such as safety, drainage and landscaping;
(6) Landscaping. Landscaping shall be appropriate for the size and use of the area, and for its relationship to building, street, parking area, walks, buildings and surrounding areas. An adequate plan for the maintenance of such landscaping shall be submitted;
(7) Lighting. Lighting shall be considered for the appropriateness of nighttime illumination of the grounds, drives, walks, parking areas, the building and its effect upon surrounding areas;
(8) Signs. Signs shall be considered for appropriateness of size, scale, shape, color, content, text and illumination in relation to building site;
(9) Utilities. Adequate utilities, parking, access roads, drainage, landscape planting and other essential facilities and amenities will be provided;
(10) Ingress and Egress. Adequate measures will be taken to provide ingress and egress designed so as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets; and
(11) Service. All service, loading and shipping areas of commercial and industrial buildings shall be screened by fences or walls and located so as not to create pedestrian or traffic congestion.
(B) The application shall otherwise comply with the standards and criteria of all appropriate and applicable ordinances of the city.
(1985 Code, § 161.08) (Ord. 85-21, passed 9-23-1985)
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 161:
Architectural Review Office
218
7722743.2
§ 161.09 VARIANCES
In the event a zoning variance is required by an applicant to comply with the requirements established by the Architectural Review Office, the ARO may recommend to the Board of Zoning Appeals as to the nature and extent of said zoning variance request. The Board of Zoning Appeals may consider the recommendation as constituting a hardship sufficient to comply with the City Charter.
(1985 Code, § 161.09) (Ord. 85-21, passed 9-23-1985)
Cross-reference: Zoning variances based on hardship, see § 151.125
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 162:
Home Sales
219
7722743.2
CHAPTER 162: HOME SALES
162.01 Regulation of Home Sales
162.99 Penalty
§ 162.01 REGULATION OF HOME SALES.
(A) For the purpose of this chapter, the terms HOME SALES shall refer to any garage sale yard sale or any other attempt to sell personal property, for a limited period of time, on a property within a residential zoning district.
(B) No person, firm or corporation shall conduct a home sale within the city in violation of the sections in this chapter.
(C) No home sale shall be permitted for more than two consecutive days.
(D) No resident or property owner may conduct more than two home sales at any residential premises during any calendar year.
(E) Home sales shall be permitted during daylight hours only.
(F) Advertising signs for a home sale shall conform to all applicable provisions of Chapter 159 of this code.
(1985 Code, § 162.01) (Ord. 92-74, passed 11-2-1992) Penalty, see § 162.99
§ 162.99 PENALTY.
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not more than $150 per occurrence for each day said violation continues.
(1985 Code, § 162.99) (Ord. 92-74, passed 11-2-1992; Ord. 04-21, passed 8-23-2004)
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 163:
Central Business District Regulations
220
7722743.2
CHAPTER 163: CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT REGULATIONS
General Provisions
163.01 Boundaries of Madeira Central Business District
163.02 Development and improvement to conform to this chapter and Zoning Code
163.03 Modifications of certain standards permissible
General Development Plan
163.15 General nature, location and objectives
163.16 Description of the district boundaries
163.17 Land use
163.18 Off-street parking
163.19 Historic and architectural themes
163.20 Controls
163.21 Landscape plan required
163.22 Utilities
163.23 Pedestrian circulation
163.24 Lighting
163.25 Signs and outdoor identification structures
163.26 Permitted uses
Editor’s Note:
All exhibits and attachments are on file in the office of the City Manager.
Resolution Reference:
Establishing support for the guidelines and principles set forth in Chapter 163 regarding the Central Business District regulations, see Res. 07-08
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 163.01 BOUNDARIES OF MADEIRA CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
The zoning map is hereby revised by changing the zoning of the property described as shown on Exhibit A as set forth in § 163.02(A)(1) combining area from several district regulations and land usages now prevailing in said territory to a “PDD” Planned Development District to be known as the Madeira Central Business District “CBD.” Said boundary shall govern uses and impact within the district.
Nothing in this chapter shall change the existing zoning in Chapter 150.
(1985 Code, § 163.01) (Ord. 89-63, passed 10-2-1989; Ord. 06-27, passed 10-9-2006)
§ 163.02 DEVELOPMENT AND IMPROVEMENT TO CONFORM TO THIS CHAPTER AND ZONING CODE
(A) Development and improvement within the CBD boundary shall conform to the general zoning plan as required by Chapter 150. Said plan shall consist of §§ 163.15 through 163.26, along with the following, available at the City Manager’s office:
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 163:
Central Business District Regulations
221
7722743.2
(1) The City of Madeira zoning map;
(2) Exhibit B identifying current, actual space and structure uses within the PDD;
(3) Exhibit C identifying proposed land usages and redevelopment of the target areas;
(4) Exhibit D illustrates parking dimensions for the coordinated parking plan; and
(5) Exhibit E identifies proposed improvements on public property including certain improvements on streets, sidewalks, curbs and utilities to be improved at public expense or with public help.
(B) Development and improvement of lands and structures in the CBD shall conform to the general development plan as set forth in this chapter but nothing contained therein shall be construed as relief from requirements of law, not specifically addressed in said plan.
(C) The general development plan set forth in this chapter contemplates public and private improvements to be undertaken in conjunction with zoning use regulations, but any failure of public or private participation in the physical improvements described in the plan shall not be construed as an abridgment of the plan, nor as relief from the zoning and use regulations thereby imposed.
(1985 Code, § 163.02) (Ord. 89-63, passed 10-2-1989; Ord. 06-27, passed 10-9-2006)
Editor’s note: Appendix A which is referenced in § 163.02 of Chapter 163 is located in Volume II of the city code of ordinances.
§ 163.03 MODIFICATIONS OF CERTAIN STANDARDS PERMISSIBLE.
(A) The illustrations which appear on Exhibit E (available at the City Manager’s office) to depict the public and private improvements contemplated hereunder are representative and may be modified to accommodate revisions prompted by final engineering studies, continuing land development in the district and public and private interests as these may arise.
(B) Modifications may be effected in the manner prescribed in § 150.35.
(1985 Code, § 163.03) (Ord. 89-63, passed 10-2-1989; Ord. 06-27, passed 10-9-2006)
GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN
§ 163.15 GENERAL NATURE, LOCATION AND OBJECTIVES
(A) The city business, office and residential use areas include the first village lots and early twentieth century buildings. Some of these buildings have a historical significance as well as being representative of early twentieth century architecture, building materials and construction methods.
(B) These buildings have been modified, updated, maintained and utilized in a constantly changing community. New buildings have been added, and others have been removed to create space for off-street parking. The objective of the city Central Business District plan is to implement this general development plan and program of improvements designed to maintain the economic viability of Old
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 163:
Central Business District Regulations
222
7722743.2
Madeira, to be compatible with the historical early twentieth century theme, and accommodate new development in keeping with this theme.
(C) These objectives are depicted in this general development plan, accompanying controls and guidelines in conformity with six major goals. The goals of development of the city CBD are:
(1) New development shall embody quality architecture, character and detail while, at the same time maintaining sensitivity to the adjacent land use in the city. Redevelopment of existing buildings shall enhance the architecture of the existing structure;
(2) New development shall have a positive effect on the property values and quality of life while providing for vitality and a sense of excitement in the CBD by promoting a pedestrian friendly area with convenient parking and access points that are consistent with safety enhanced traffic flow;
(3) Improve and promote redevelopment and new development opportunities in order to provide additional city revenues and improve the city’s tax base;
(4) Provide for a compatible mix of land use within the CBD triangle by providing mixed land uses which include a residential component and appropriate green space;
(5) The new development of a city center or town square which promotes the city’s identity; and
(6) To promote and protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens, homeowners and visitors to the CBD and the city.
(1985 Code, § 163.10) (Ord. 89-63, passed 10-2-1989; Ord. 06-27, passed 10-9-2006)
§ 163.16 DESCRIPTION OF THE DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
General description of the proposed City Central Business District is as follows as described on the City of Madeira zoning map as set forth in § 163.02(A)(1), combining areas from several district regulations and land usages now prevailing in said territory to a “PDD” Planned Development District to be known as the Madeira Central District “CBD.”
(1985 Code, § 163.11) (Ord. 89-63, passed 10-2-1989; Ord. 06-27, passed 10-9-2006)
§ 163.17 LAND USE
(A) As described in the City of Madeira zoning map, the described City Central Business District has 86 acres in area, there being approximately 192 principle buildings in use ranging from single-family residences, apartment buildings, general offices, medical offices, restaurants, retail stores, drug stores, groceries, bakeries, bookstores, gas station, auto parts and repair, fire station, police station and post office. The foregoing is recited for illustrative purposes only and has no formal bearing upon land use changes or adjustments.
(B) The City Central Business District shall be subdivided into the following corridor developments:
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 163:
Central Business District Regulations
223
7722743.2
(1) Miami Avenue Corridor Development Town Hall Square. This corridor shall be as shown in Exhibit A and shall primarily be for retail, residential and financial uses;
(2) The Point. This corridor shall be as shown in Exhibit A and shall primarily be for residential, office and retail uses;
(3) Euclid Avenue Corridor Development. This corridor shall be as shown in Exhibit A and shall primarily be for single-family residential uses;
(4) Laurel Avenue Corridor Development. This corridor shall be as shown in Exhibit A and shall be primarily for professional, medical or mixed uses which may include residential; and
(5) Camargo Avenue Corridor Development. This corridor shall be as shown on Exhibit A and shall primarily be for light assembly retail uses, automotive uses and mixed uses which may include residential.
(C) Conversion to Pre-Existing Permitted Uses.
(1) Property zoned for particular uses immediately prior to the effective date of the City Central Business District, but not actually employed for such use shall be permitted to convert to such permitted use, but such conversion shall be subject to the regulations set forth herein.
(2) A conversion to the permitted use shall not be deemed a substantial change in this general development plan as set forth in § 150.35.
(D) Change of Use. Any land use changes from the use prevailing immediately prior to the effective date of the City Central Business District, to another zoning classification (i.e., residential to retail) shall be permitted, but any such change shall be deemed a substantial change for purposes of the general zoning plan as set forth in Chapter 150 and shall require the approval of the Planning Commission.
(1985 Code, § 163.12) (Ord. 89-63, passed 10-2-1989; Ord. 06-27, passed 10-9-2006)
§ 163.18 OFF-STREET PARKING
Among these changes and conversions, new construction and/or additions to present structures shall be limited to the ability to provide required on-site off-street parking in accordance with § 150.24. Where such parking is to be provided jointly with two or more adjacent acquired parking areas, and it can be integrated into a general parking lot, then the City Planning Commission may reduce such parking space requirements with the proper recorded cross easements.
(1985 Code, § 163.13) (Ord. 89-63, passed 10-2-1989; Ord. 06-27, passed 10-9-2006)
§ 163.19 HISTORIC AND ARCHITECTURAL THEMES
(A) As shown in the City of Madeira zoning map, the boundaries of this “PDD” District were defined to include historically and architecturally significant structures still standing in the Madeira “CBD” area. These structures, as marked on the accompanying map, provide the basis and architectural theme for the City Planned Development District. Site, size and the scale of the PDD structures, including setbacks, height, roof line, window and doorway dimensions and location, building
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 163:
Central Business District Regulations
224
7722743.2
materials and overall fenestration (windows) and detail, shall provide the basis for the design of new buildings to be developed in this district.
(B) All identified structures are subject to the approval of the Architectural Review Office prior to the issuance of any demolition, remodeling or moving permits by the city. All proposals for remodeling other structures within this district or proposed new structures, shall be reviewed by the Architectural Review Officer on the basis of their conformity with the architectural theme, character and scale established by the identified buildings in Exhibit B.
(1985 Code, § 163.14) (Ord. 89-63, passed 10-2-1989; Ord. 06-27, passed 10-9-2006)
§ 163.20 CONTROLS
The following controls shall prevail throughout the Madeira Central Business District regarding all proposals for remodeling and new construction.
(A) Building Height. The minimum building height shall be 25 feet zero inches and the maximum 45
feet zero inches in height to the highest point of the roof from street grade (please see how height is measured in § 150.29 and Figure 1 below).
(B) Setbacks.
(1) Front Yard. The front yard setback shall be five feet zero inches from the right-of-way (ROW) line. Each lot shall have a minimum of 70% of the linear length of the lot frontage devoted to a building.
(2) Rear Yard. The rear yard setback shall be five feet zero inches. If the rear yard line abuts a single-family residential zone that is adjacent to the Central Business District (CBD), the rear yard setback will be increased to ten feet zero inches and landscaping shall be required to screen the parking areas and the lower level of the building from the residential properties. The Architectural Review Officer shall approve all landscape screening plans prior to the issuance of any development permits (Please refer to Figure 2 for illustrative purposes).
(C) Side Yard Requirements. Where not indicated by this general development plan, side yard requirements shall not be specified, and shall be determined by the Architectural Review Office
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 163:
Central Business District Regulations
225
7722743.2
based upon the proposed building site elements of landscaping, topography, parking areas, neighboring uses and existing side yards (Please refer to Figure 3 for illustrative purposes).
(D) Building Materials.
(1) Acceptable exterior building material and colors shall be limited to those listed below:
(a) Materials. Horizontal wood siding, brick masonry and roofing made from sheet metal with raised seams, slate (real or fake), and asphalt or fiberglass shingles; and
(b) Colors. Dark reds, browns, tans, buff, burnt orange coffee, blues, greens, dark grays, warm grays, charcoal and putty as part of the approved color palette on file with the city.
(2) The Architectural Review Office shall have final approval of all exterior buildings and trim materials, finish methods and colors consistent with the above guidelines.
(1985 Code, § 163.15) (Ord. 89-63, passed 10-2-1989; Ord. 06-27, passed 10-9-2006)
§ 163.21 LANDSCAPE PLAN REQUIRED
(A) All remodeling and new development proposals shall include a detailed landscape plan. The landscape plan shall show the total site to be developed including landscape treatment of the structures and parking areas and screen planting along adjacent property lines. Said landscape plan specifications shall include the listing of all plant materials by the botanical and common name, their size and type of planter or container. Said landscape plan specifications shall include other landscape features (such as patio and walkway paving, statues, water features, freestanding lights, fencing and the like).
(B) The overall landscape plan shall be a selection and arrangement of plant materials and other landscape features as approved by the Architectural Review Officer (ARO) and consistent with an overall plant list on file with the city.
(1985 Code, § 163.16) (Ord. 89-63, passed 10-2-1989; Ord. 06-27, passed 10-9-2006)
§ 163.22 UTILITIES
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 163:
Central Business District Regulations
226
7722743.2
All above-ground utilities including poles, transformers, riser poles and meter locations, and building attachments (HVAC units, exhaust vents and the like) shall be approved by the Architectural Review Officer during the building permit review approval process.
(1985 Code, § 163.17) (Ord. 89-63, passed 10-2-1989; Ord. 06-27, passed 10-9-2006)
§ 163.23 PEDESTRIAN CIRCULATION
(A) Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be provided along the entire width of the property along all street rights-of-way and shall conform to the city’s beautification improvements plan.
(B) Beautification Improvements. The property owner or developer shall be required to install capital improvements along the public street that conform to the city’s beautification plan. These items
include pavers, sidewalks and street trees with a decorative tree grate, benches, street lighting and planters consistent with the illustrations below and in scale with the city’s existing beautification improvements plan. (Please see pictures below).
(C) Areas Excluded From Improvements. Sidewalks or beautification improvements shall not be required on the south side of Camargo Road from the railroad tracks to the north corporation line.
(1985 Code, § 163.18) (Ord. 89-63, passed 10-2-1989; Ord. 06-27, passed 10-9-2006)
§ 163.24 LIGHTING
(A) Light level from the interior or exterior building illumination sources or signage shall not exceed three footcandles as measured with a light meter, at grade, at a distance of three feet from the building face.
(B) Lighting of parking areas in excess of five cars shall have an average illumination of one and one-half footcandles. Lighting fixtures in parking areas with an overall height of 12 feet or more, shall be of similar design to those used on the public Miami Avenue areas.
(C) A combination of ornamental (generally 12 feet or less) and high mass fixtures may be used to achieve the required illumination level subject to the approval of the Architectural Review Office.
(1985 Code, § 163.19) (Ord. 89-63, passed 10-2-1989; Ord. 06-27, passed 10-9-2006)
§ 163.25 SIGNS AND OUTDOOR IDENTIFICATION STRUCTURES
Signs and outdoor identifications, where permitted in accordance with Chapter 159 shall be further subjected to the following limitations.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 163:
Central Business District Regulations
227
7722743.2
(A) A wall sign attached parallel to a building cannot be any higher than 12 feet zero inches in height from the sidewalk.
(B) The entire sign should be affixed to one continuous flat, vertical opaque surface. The sign shall not be attached to a roof, chimney, smoke stacks or stair towers.
(C) A projecting sign and/or awning attached perpendicular to a building is permitted and must meet the following conditions:
(1) Projecting signs and/or awnings cannot project any more than three feet zero inches from the building surface;
(2) Projecting signs and/or awnings cannot be any lower than nine feet zero inches or higher than 12 feet zero inches in height from the sidewalk;
(3) Projecting signs cannot exceed six square feet in size;
(4) One projecting sign is permitted per tenant with a cap of two signs per building if there is
more than one tenant;
(5) Projecting signs can only be perpendicular to the street ROW; and
(6) Projecting signs must be hung from a black metal scroll bracket as shown in Figure 4.
(1985 Code, § 163.20) (Ord. 89-63, passed 10-2-1989; Ord. 06-27, passed 10-9-2006)
Figure 4
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 163:
Central Business District Regulations
228
7722743.2
§ 163.26 PERMITTED USES
In order to enhance the opportunity for human interaction throughout the business district and provide alternative housing for those who desire something other than a single-family dwelling, the following uses shall be permitted in the Central Business District:
(A) Office uses as outlined and permitted in the Business “O” District;
(B) Retail uses as outlined and permitted in the Business “A” District; and
(C) Residential uses which are an integral part of the building. Such units shall only be permitted on a second or third floor. The density of which shall not exceed 12 units per acre. The minimum square footage shall be 1,200 square feet of floor area per unit.
(1985 Code, § 163.21) (Ord. 06-27, passed 10-9-2006)
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 164:
Location of Sexually Oriented Businesses Regulated
229
CHAPTER 164: LOCATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES REGULATED
164.01 Purpose
164.02 Definitions
164.03 Establishment and classification of regulated businesses
164.04 Location of sexually oriented business
164.05 Nonconforming uses
164.06 Permit required
164.07 Application investigation process
164.08 Issuance of permit
164.09 Annual permit fee
164.10 Inspection
164.11 Expiration of permit
164.12 Suspension of permit
164.13 Revocation of permit
164.14 Judicial review of permit denial, suspension or revocation
164.15 Transfer of permit
164.16 Sexually oriented business employee license
164.17 Operation of sexually oriented business
164.18 Minors prohibited
164.19 Advertising and lighting regulations
164.20 On-premises advertising sign
164.21 Hours of operation
164.22 Nudity prohibited
164.23 Criminal penalties for the operation of a sexually oriented business without a valid permit
164.24 Exemptions
164.25 Immunity from prosecution
164.26 Severability
164.99 Penalty
Cross-reference: Illegal operation and activity of sexually oriented businesses, see §133.19
§ 164.01 PURPOSE
(A) The purpose of this chapter is to regulate sexually oriented businesses through the application of uniform zoning requirements to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the city and establish reasonable and uniform regulations for the operation of sexually oriented businesses with the goal of reducing or eliminating the adverse secondary effects associated with sexually oriented businesses. It is not the intent of this chapter to limit or restrict the content of communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials.
(B) Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market.
Code, § 164.01) (Ord. 96-12, passed 3-11-1996)
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 164:
Location of Sexually Oriented Businesses Regulated
230
§ 164.02 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
EMPLOYEE
A person who works or performs in and/or for a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the operator of said business.
ESCORT
A person who, for any form of consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide or date for another person, and who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person or to engage in any specified sexual activity as defined herein.
ESTABLISHMENT
Includes any of the following:
(1) The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business;
(2) The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any of the sexually oriented businesses defined in this chapter;
(3) The addition of any of the sexually oriented businesses defined in this chapter to any other existing sexually oriented business; or
(4) The relocation of any such sexually oriented business.
LICENSED MASSAGE THERAPIST
A person who engages in the practice of therapeutic massage, who has completed a course of study from a state accredited school, and who is licensed by the state pursuant to R.C. § 4731.15.
NUDITY OR STATE OF NUDITY
(1) The appearance of human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals or the areola or nipple of the female breast; or
(2) A state of dress which fails to opaquely and fully cover a human buttocks, anus, male or female genitals, pubic region or areola or nipple of the female breast.
OPERATOR
Includes the owner, permit holder, custodian, manager, operator or person in charge of any permitted or licensed premises.
PERMITTED OR LICENSED PREMISES
Any premises that requires a license and/or permit and that is classified as a sexually oriented business.
PERMITTEE AND/OR LICENSEE
A person in whose name a permit and/or license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a permit and/or license.
PERSON
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 164:
Location of Sexually Oriented Businesses Regulated
231
An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association or other legal entity.
PROTECTED USES
Those uses listed below and defined as follows.
(1) Public Building. Any building owned, leased or held by the United States, the state, the county, the city, any special district, school district or any other agency or political subdivision of the state or the United States, which building is used for governmental purposes.
(2) Public Park or Recreation Area. Public land which has been designated for park or recreational activities, including but not limited to a park, playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, open space, wilderness areas or similar public land within the city which is under the control, operation or management of the city park and recreation authorities.
(3) Religious Institution. Any church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities.
(4) Residential District or Use. A single-family, duplex, townhouse, multiple family or mobile park or subdivision and campground as defined in the Zoning Code.
(5) School. Any public or private educational facility, including but not limited to child daycare facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, primary schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior colleges and universities. SCHOOL includes the school grounds, but does not include any facilities used primarily for another purpose and only incidentally as a SCHOOL.
PUBLIC USE
Any use that is open to the public, regardless of whether a fee is charged for admission.
SEMI-NUDE
A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region and areolae of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Those businesses defined as follows:
(1) Adult Bookstore, Adult Novelty Store or Adult Video Store. A commercial establishment which has as a significant or substantial portion of its stock-in-trade or derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues or devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business or advertising to the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of any one or more of the following:
(a) Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, computer generated images, slides or other visual representations which are characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas;” and/or
(b) Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for sadomasochistic use or abuse.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 164:
Location of Sexually Oriented Businesses Regulated
232
(2) Adult Cabaret. A nightclub, bar, restaurant, “bottle club” or similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served, which regularly features:
(a) Persons who appear nude, semi-nude or in a state of nudity;
(b) Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of “specified anatomical areas” or by “specified sexual activities;” or
(c) Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, computer generated images or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
(3) Adult Motel. A motel, hotel or similar commercial establishment which offers public accommodations, for any form of consideration, which provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” and which advertises the availability of this sexually oriented type of material by means of permitted signage visible from the public right-of-way, or by means of any permitted off-premises advertising, including but not limited to newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio or television.
(4) Adult Motion Picture Theater. A commercial establishment where films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” are regularly shown for any form of consideration.
(5) Adult Theater. A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial establishment which, for any form of consideration, regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by exposure of “specified anatomical areas” or by “specified sexual activities.”
(6) Escort Agency. A person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts, as defined herein, as one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.
(7) Massage Parlor. Any place where, for any form of consideration or gratuity, massage, alcohol rub, administration of fomentations, electric or magnetic treatments, or any other treatment manipulation of the human body which occurs as a part of or in connection with “specified sexual activities” or where any person providing such treatment, manipulation or service related thereto, exposes his or her “specified anatomical areas.” The definition of sexually oriented businesses shall not include the practice of massage in any licensed hospital, nor by a licensed hospital, nor by a licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor or osteopath, nor by any nurse or technician working under the supervision of a licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor or osteopath, nor by trainers for any amateur, semiprofessional or professional athlete or athletic team or school athletic program, nor by a licensed massage therapist.
(8) Nude Model Studio. Any place where a person, who regularly appears in a state of nudity or displays “specified anatomical areas” is provided for money or any form of consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 164:
Location of Sexually Oriented Businesses Regulated
233
(9) Sexual Encounter Establishment. A business or commercial establishment, that as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration, a place where two or more persons may congregate, associate or consort for the purpose of “specified sexual activities” or the exposure of “specified anatomical areas” or activities when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nudity. The definition of SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS shall not include establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist, a licensed massage therapist, or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS
As used in this chapter means and includes any of the following:
(1) Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areolae; or
(2) Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES
As used in this chapter means and includes any of the following:
(1) The fondling or other intentional touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts;
(2) Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy;
(3) Masturbation, actual or simulated;
(4) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or
(5) Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in divisions (1) through (4) of this definition.
SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTS
Sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape, gross sexual imposition and other crimes connected with sexually oriented businesses, including but not limited to distribution of obscenity or other material harmful to minors, pandering, prostitution or tax violations in connection with a sexually oriented business.
SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS
Increase in the floor areas occupied by the business by more than 15%, as the floor areas exist on March 1, 1996.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS INCLUDES ANY OF THE FOLLOWING:
(1) The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
(2) The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 164:
Location of Sexually Oriented Businesses Regulated
234
(3) The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal devise which transfers ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of a person possessing the ownership or control.
(1985 Code, § 164.02) (Ord. 96-12, passed 3-11-1996)
§ 164.03 ESTABLISHMENT AND CLASSIFICATION OF REGULATED BUSINESSES
(A) Sexually oriented businesses shall be permitted in a single commercial zone and shall be subject to the restrictions of this chapter. Specifically, sexually oriented businesses shall only be allowed in the Business “A” District that lies on the north side of Madeira between Galbraith and Hosbrook Roads and which abuts Montgomery Road as identified on Exhibit A, attached to Ordinance 96-12, passed March 11, 1996, and is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of these regulations as if set out in full. Sexually oriented businesses are prohibited in all other districts.
(B) Sexually oriented businesses, as defined in § 164.02, are classified as follows:
(1) Adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store;
(2) Adult cabaret;
(3) Adult motel;
(4) Adult motion picture theater;
(5) Adult theater;
(6) Massage parlor;
(7) Sexual encounter establishment;
(8) Escort agency; or
(9) Nude model studio.
(1985 Code, § 164.03) (Ord. 96-12, passed 3-11-1996)
§ 164.04 LOCATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS
(A) Sexually oriented businesses may locate anywhere within the commercial zone identified in § 164.03, provided that:
(1) There is an intervening visual barrier on the property between the sexually oriented business and any protected use. Such barrier shall be either an intervening building, fence, mound or other visual buffer, or combination thereof, of sufficient height and density to provide a visual barrier between the sexually oriented business and any adjacent protected use; and
(2) No two sexually oriented businesses are located on the same lot or adjacent lots.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 164:
Location of Sexually Oriented Businesses Regulated
235
(B) The adequacy of any proposed intervening visual barrier required in division (A)(1) above shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission at a public hearing, which shall provide notice of such a hearing by posting the time and place thereof on the official website of the municipality and in the lobby of the municipal building at least ten days in advance of such hearing. The Planning Commission shall also give written notice to interested parties. Upon application for approval of the intervening visual barrier, the Planning Commission shall consider, at a minimum, the following factors:
(1) Distance that the sexually oriented business is located from the property line and occupied structures in the protected use;
(2) Aesthetics;
(3) Cost of barrier;
(4) Line of sight; and
(5) Ability and responsibility to maintain barrier.
(C) In no event shall the proposed intervening visual barrier be required to exceed ten feet in height from ground level of the property at time of installation on which the proposed sexually oriented business is located, although the intervening visual barrier may in fact exceed ten feet.
(1985 Code, § 164.04) (Ord. 96-12, passed 3-11-1996)
§ 164.05 NONCONFORMING USES
(A) Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating at the time of the enactment of this chapter that is in violation of §§ 164.03 and 164.04 shall be deemed a nonconforming use. A nonconforming use may continue for one year, and may be extended by the Planning Commission upon a showing of extreme financial hardship, unless voluntarily discontinued for a period of 30 days or more. Such nonconforming uses may not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered unless to a conforming use.
(B) A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered nonconforming by the subsequent location of a protected use within 500 feet of the sexually oriented business. This division does not apply to a business whose permit and/or license has expired or been revoked.
(C) Any establishment subject to the provisions of this chapter shall apply for a permit as provided under § 164.06 within 30 days of the effective date of this chapter.
(1985 Code, § 164.05) (Ord. 96-12, passed 3-11-1996)
§ 164.06 PERMIT REQUIRED
(A) No sexually oriented business shall be permitted to operate without a valid sexually oriented business permit issued by the city. Operation of such a business without a permit is a misdemeanor.
(B) The City Manager, or his or her designee, is responsible for granting, denying, revoking, renewing, suspending and canceling permits for proposed or existing sexually oriented businesses. To be
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 164:
Location of Sexually Oriented Businesses Regulated
236
approved, applications must comply with all locational and zoning requirements of this chapter and the Zoning and Building Codes of the city.
(C) Applications must be made on a form provided by the city. Applicants must provide an original and two copies of a sworn application which must contain the following information and documents:
(1) If the applicant is:
(a) An individual: the individual’s legal name, aliases and proof of age over 18;
(b) A partnership: the complete name, all partners names and a copy of any partnership agreement; and
(c) A corporation: its complete name; date of incorporation; names of all officers, directors and principal stockholders, name and address of its registered agent and evidence of good standing under state law.
(2) The name of the sexually oriented business if different from the applicant’s and any required registration documents;
(3) Whether the applicant or any individual listed in division (C)(1) of this section has been convicted of a specified criminal act as defined under § 164.02 within either two years for misdemeanor offenses, or five years for felony offenses or two or more misdemeanor offenses, immediately preceding the application date, and, if so, the act involved and the date and place of the conviction;
(4) Whether the applicant or other listed individuals has had a sexually oriented business permit revoked, suspended or denied and the name of the business, the city or county of occurrence and the date on which the permit was suspended, revoked or denied;
(5) Whether the applicant or other listed individuals hold any other sexually oriented business permits and the names and locations of all other such businesses;
(6) The proposed location of the business, including a legal description of the property, street address and telephone number;
(7) The location and description of any intervening uses;
(8) The applicant’s business and residential addresses and telephone numbers;
(9) The applicant’s driver’s license number, Social Security number and tax identification number;
(10) A sketch or diagram showing the configuration and total floor space of the premises. The sketch need not be professional, but must be drawn to scale and accurate to plus or minus six inches;
(11) A current certificate and straight line drawing prepared within 30 days prior to application by a registered land surveyor depicting property lines and structures and the property lines of any existing protected use within 500 feet of the proposed business. A protected use is established if it is in existence at the time the application is submitted;
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 164:
Location of Sexually Oriented Businesses Regulated
237
(12) A sketch or drawing showing the location and dimensions of any existing or proposed visual barriers between the proposed business and any protected use. The sketch need not be professional, but must be drawn to scale and accurate to plus or minus six inches; and
(13) The application must be signed by the individual applicant, and each person who has at least a 10% interest in the business. If a corporation is the applicant, then each person owning at least 10% of the corporation must sign the application.
(D) Applicants are under a continuing duty to promptly update their application information. Failure to do so within 30 days of the date of a change in application information shall be grounds for permit suspension.
(E) If the City Manager or his or her designee learns that an applicant improperly completed the permit application, the City Manager or his or her designee shall promptly notify the applicant and allow ten days for correction.
(F) A $150 non-refundable application fee is due at the time the applicant files an application under this section.
(G) Prior to obtaining a permit to operate a sexually oriented business, the applicant shall obtain a certification that the proposed location complies with the locational requirements of the chapter.
(H) The possession of other types of state or city permits and/or licenses, including a liquor license, does not exempt an applicant from the requirement of obtaining a sexually oriented business permit.
(I) By filing an application under this section, the applicant shall be deemed to have consented to the provisions of this chapter and to the investigation of the application by the City Manager and his or her designees.
(J) The applicant is required to provide the city with the names of all employees required to be licensed under § 164.16 of this chapter. This obligation continues even after a permit is granted or renewed.
(K) A sexually oriented business permit may be renewed annually upon written application, subject to the payment of a $30 renewal fee, and a finding that the permit holder is still in conformance with the permit requirements. This fee is in addition to the payment of an annual permit fee required under § 164.09.
(1985 Code, § 164.06) (Ord. 96-12, passed 3-11-1996)
§ 164.07 APPLICATION INVESTIGATION PROCESS
Upon receipt of an application, the City Manager or his or her designee shall send photocopies of the application to all city agencies responsible for the enforcement of Health, Fire, Building and Zoning Codes and laws. Each agency shall investigate the application for compliance with its respective Code and approve or disapprove the application within 20 days of the receipt of the application by the city. An agency shall disapprove an application if it finds that the business would be in violation of any provision of any statute, code, ordinance, regulation or other law in effect in the city and the reason(s) for disapproval must be stated.
(1985 Code, § 164.07) (Ord. 96-12, passed 3-11-1996)
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 164:
Location of Sexually Oriented Businesses Regulated
238
§ 164.08 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT
(A) Time. An application shall be granted or denied within 30 days from the date of its proper filing.
(B) Grant Of Application For Permit.
(1) An application shall be granted unless one of the criteria of division (C) of this section is met.
(2) The permit shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted and the address of the sexually oriented business and the permit expiration date. The permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so it can be read at any time.
(C) Denial of Application For Permit.
(1) An application may be denied for any of the following reasons:
(a) An applicant is under 18 years of age;
(b) An applicant or an applicant’s spouse is overdue on the payment of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed by the city in relation to a sexually oriented business;
(c) An applicant is residing with a person whose permit to operate a sexually oriented business has been denied or revoked within the preceding 12 months;
(d) An applicant has failed to provide information as requested in the application or has supplied false information;
(e) The premises to be used are not in compliance with City Health, Fire and/or Building Codes as determined by the city agency responsible for determining such compliance;
(f) The $150 application fee has not been paid;
(g) The proposed business does not comply with §§ 164.03 and 164.04;
(h) To grant the application would violate a statute, ordinance or court order;
(i) The applicant has a permit under this chapter which has been suspended or revoked;
(j) The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act within the time limitation of § 164.06(C)(3); and/or
(k) An applicant knowingly has in his or her employ an employee who does not have a valid license as required in § 164.16.
(2) Applicants shall be promptly notified of an application denial and the reasons for denial.
(1985 Code, § 164.08) (Ord. 96-12, passed 3-11-1996)
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 164:
Location of Sexually Oriented Businesses Regulated
239
§ 164.09 ANNUAL PERMIT FEE
The annual fee for a sexually oriented business permit is $850.
(1985 Code, § 164.09) (Ord. 96-12, passed 3-11-1996)
§ 164.10 INSPECTION
Representatives of the city enforcement agencies, County Health Department and the Fire Department shall be permitted to inspect a sexually oriented business to determine compliance with their respective departments, at any time it is occupied or open for business. The failure to allow inspection is unlawful and is a misdemeanor.
(1985 Code, § 164.10) (Ord. 96-12, passed 3-11-1996) Penalty, see § 164.99
§ 164.11 EXPIRATION OF PERMIT
Each permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed by making an application under § 164.06(K) at least 30 days before the expiration date. If a renewal is denied, a new permit shall not be issued for one year from the date of denial. If the basis for denial has been corrected and at least 90 days have elapsed from the date the denial became final, a new permit may be granted.
(1985 Code, § 164.11) (Ord. 96-12, passed 3-11-1996)
§ 164.12 SUSPENSION OF PERMIT
A permit to operate a sexually oriented business may be suspended until the violation causing the suspension has been corrected, provided that the period is not to exceed 30 days, if a permittee or an employee of a permittee:
(A) Violates or is not in compliance with this chapter;
(B) Works at the sexually oriented business while under the influence of alcohol;
(C) Refuses to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business in accord with this chapter;
(D) Knowingly permits gambling on the premises of the sexually oriented business;
(E) Fails to correct a violation of a Building, Fire, Health or Zoning Code within seven days of notification of such violation;
(F) Transfers the sexually oriented business permit to another in violation of this chapter; or
(G) Knowingly employs a person without a valid license as required in § 164.16 of this chapter.
(1985 Code, § 164.12) (Ord. 96-12, passed 3-11-1996)
§ 164.13 REVOCATION OF PERMIT
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 164:
Location of Sexually Oriented Businesses Regulated
240
(A) A permit to operate a sexually oriented business shall be revoked upon a determination that either a permit is to be suspended for a second time within a 12-month period or that a permittee or employee of a permittee:
(1) Gave false or misleading information on the permit application which enhanced the permittee’s opportunity to obtain a permit;
(2) Knowingly allowed the possession, sale or use of a controlled substance on the premises;
(3) Knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises;
(4) Knowingly operated the business while under permit suspension;
(5) Has been convicted of a “specified criminal act” for which the time period required in § 164.06(C)(3) has not elapsed;
(6) Committed a specified criminal act on the permitted premises on one or more occasions within a 12-month period while employed by the permit holder;
(7) Has been convicted of tax violations for taxes or fees related to a sexually oriented business;
(8) Allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sexual conduct or any other specified sexual activities to occur in or on the permitted premises; or
(9) Operated more than one sexually oriented business under a single roof.
(B) A permit shall be revoked for one year and a permittee shall not receive any other permits for any other sexually oriented businesses during the one-year revocation period. If the basis for revocation is corrected, the applicant may be granted a new permit if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective.
(1985 Code, § 164.13) (Ord. 96-12, passed 3-11-1996)
§ 164.14 JUDICIAL REVIEW OF PERMIT DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION
An applicant or permittee may seek review of a denial of an application, denial of a renewal of an application, suspension or revocation of a permit through the Board of Zoning Appeals or special review board if one is established. If the denial, suspension or revocation is affirmed on review, the applicant or permittee may seek review of the administration decision in the County Court of Common Pleas.
(1985 Code, § 164.14) (Ord. 96-12, passed 3-11-1996)
§ 164.15 TRANSFER OF PERMIT
(A) A permittee shall not operate a sexually oriented business at any place other than the address designated in the application for permit.
(B) A permittee shall not transfer a permit to another person unless that person:
(1) Obtains an amendment to the permit upon the satisfactory completion of an application; and
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 164:
Location of Sexually Oriented Businesses Regulated
241
(2) Pays a transfer fee of 20% of the annual permit fee.
(C) A permit may not be transferred when the permittee has been notified that suspension or revocation proceedings have been or will be brought against the permittee.
(D) A permit shall not be transferred to another location.
(E) Any transfer attempted in violation of this section is void and will revoke the permit.
(1985 Code, § 164.15) (Ord. 96-12, passed 3-11-1996) Penalty, see § 164.99
§ 164.16 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE LICENSE
(A) All employees of a sexually oriented business who engage in the services rendered by a nude model studio, escort or escort agency, sexual encounter establishment, massage parlor as defined under this chapter, or a live performer or entertainer are required to obtain a sexually oriented business employee license. Each applicant shall pay a permit fee of $25 to cover reasonable administration costs.
(B) On a form provided by the city the applicant shall provide his or her:
(1) Name, including any “stage” names or aliases;
(2) Age, birth date and birthplace;
(3) Current resident and business addresses and phone numbers;
(4) Height, weight, hair and eye color;
(5) State driver’s license or identification number and Social Security number;
(6) Proof of minimum age of 18;
(7) A color photograph and fingerprints on a form provided by the City Police Department;
(8) A statement detailing the license or permit history of the applicant for the previous five years including information as to whether a permit had ever been denied, revoked or suspended, the reason for such action, the date of such action and the jurisdiction in which such action occurred; and
(9) Information as to whether the applicant has been convicted of a “specified criminal act” as defined in § 164.02 and the date, place, jurisdiction and nature of such conviction.
(C) The application review shall be completed within ten days of filing. The employee license shall be issued unless the city finds that:
(1) The applicant knowingly made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact;
(2) The applicant is under 18 years of age;
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 164:
Location of Sexually Oriented Businesses Regulated
242
(3) The applicant has been convicted of a “specified criminal act” within the time periods prohibited by § 164.06(C)(3);
(4) The license is to be used in a business prohibited by this chapter or other local or state law; or
(5) The applicant has had an employee license revoked within two years of the date of the current application.
(D) An employee license may be renewed annually upon written application subject to the payment of a $10 renewal fee and a finding that the applicant is still in conformance with the application requirements.
(1985 Code, § 164.16) (Ord. 96-12, passed 3-11-1996) Penalty, see § 164.99
§ 164.17 OPERATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS
A person commits a misdemeanor if he or she operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business:
(A) In any manner except as provided under this chapter;
(B) Within proximity of any protected use without an intervening use and/or visual buffer;
(C) In the same building as an existing sexually oriented business, or causes the substantial enlargement of any sexually oriented business without obtaining an additional permit; or
(D) Without a valid permit as required under § 164.06 of this chapter.
(1985 Code, § 164.17) (Ord. 96-12, passed 3-11-1996) Penalty, see § 164.99
§ 164.18 MINORS PROHIBITED
A person commits a misdemeanor if he or she operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business and knowingly or with reasonable cause to know, permits, suffers or allows:
(A) A person under 18 years of age to be admitted, remain or purchase goods or services at the business premises without the specific consent of a parent or guardian; or
(B) A person under 18 years of age to be employed at the premises.
(1985 Code, § 164.18) (Ord. 96-12, passed 3-11-1996) Penalty, see § 164.99
§ 164.19 ADVERTISING AND LIGHTING REGULATIONS
(A) A person commits a misdemeanor if he or she operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business and:
(1) Advertises the presentation of any activity prohibited by this chapter or other local or state regulation;
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 164:
Location of Sexually Oriented Businesses Regulated
243
(2) Displays or exhibits the materials and performances in advertising which is visible outside the premises except for advertising showing the existence or location of a sexually oriented business; and/or
(3) Fails to illuminate the premises entries and off-street parking areas from dusk until closing with a lighting system which provides a minimum maintained horizontal illumination of one footcandle or light on the parking surface and walkways.
(B) Nothing in this section relieves the permittee from compliance with any other provision of the codified ordinances of the city.
(1985 Code, § 164.19) (Ord. 96-12, passed 3-11-1996) Penalty, see § 164.99
§ 164.20 ON-PREMISES ADVERTISING SIGN
On-premises advertising signs shall be permitted as allowed under § 159.09 of the codified ordinances of the city for districts zoned for business uses.
(1985 Code, § 164.20) (Ord. 96-12, passed 3-11-1996) Penalty, see § 164.99
§ 164.21 HOURS OF OPERATION
A person commits a misdemeanor if he or she operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business and allows the business to remain open, or to permit any employee to engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service or solicit a service between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. of any particular day. Any employee who engages in the above activity also commits a misdemeanor.
(1985 Code, § 164.21) (Ord. 96-12, passed 3-11-1996) Penalty, see § 164.99
§ 164.22 NUDITY PROHIBITED
Public nudity, as defined under § 164.02 of this chapter and R.C. § 2907.01(H) is prohibited in sexually oriented businesses. Any sexually oriented business which is found in violation of this section shall have its permit suspended pursuant to the provisions of § 164.12.
(1985 Code, § 164.22) (Ord. 96-12, passed 3-11-1996) Penalty, see § 164.99
§ 164.23 CRIMINAL PENALTIES FOR THE OPERATION OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS WITHOUT A VALID PERMIT
In addition to the criminal penalties found in other sections of this chapter, it shall be unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if he or she operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business and knows or should know that the business does not have a sexually oriented business permit or has a permit which has expired or which has been suspended or revoked.
(1985 Code, § 164.23) (Ord. 96-12, passed 3-11-1996) Penalty, see § 164.99
§ 164.24 EXEMPTIONS
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 164:
Location of Sexually Oriented Businesses Regulated
244
(A) It is a defense to prosecution for violation of this chapter that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
(1) By a college, junior college or university supported in whole or in part by taxation;
(2) By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferrable to a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
(3) In a structure:
(a) Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing;
(b) Where, in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and
(c) Where no more than one nude model is permitted at a time.
(4) It is a defense to prosecution for violation of this chapter that an employee of a sexually oriented business exposed any specified anatomical area during the bona fide use of a restroom or dressing room accessible only to employees.
(1985 Code, § 164.24) (Ord. 96-12, passed 3-11-1996)
§ 164.25 IMMUNITY FROM PROSECUTION
The city, the Police Department and all other city officers, agents and employees, charged with enforcement of state and local laws and codes shall be immune from prosecution, civil or criminal, for reasonable, good faith trespass upon a sexually oriented business while acting within the scope of authority conferred by this chapter.
(1985 Code, § 164.26) (Ord. 96-12, passed 3-11-1996)
§ 164.26 SEVERABILITY
If any section, division or clause of this chapter shall be deemed to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, the validity of the remaining sections, divisions and clauses shall not be affected thereby.
(1985 Code, § 164.27) (Ord. 96-12, passed 3-11-1996)
§ 164.99 PENALTY
(A) In addition to any applicable penalties under state or county law, any person convicted of a criminal offense under this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and be punished by a fine not to exceed $500 or by imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or both. Each violation or noncompliance shall be considered as a separate offense as will each day of continued violation or noncompliance.
(B) The city may take any such lawful action to prevent or remedy any violation or noncompliance, including but not limited to an equitable action for injunctive relief or an action at law for damages.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 164:
Location of Sexually Oriented Businesses Regulated
245
(1985 Code, § 164.25) (Ord. 96-12, passed 3-11-1996)
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 165:
Schedule of Fees For Land Usage Applications and
Appeals
246
7722743.2
CHAPTER 165: SCHEDULE OF FEES FOR LAND USAGE APPLICATIONS AND APPEALS
165.01 Schedule of fees established
165.02 Payment of fees
165.03 Fees for zoning applications and appeals
165.04 Sign variances
165.05 Conditional use hearings
165.06 Building Code appeals
§ 165.01 SCHEDULE OF FEES ESTABLISHED
(A) There is hereby established as set forth below a schedule of fees for land usage applications and appeals.
(B) This schedule shall be applicable to those applications and appeals indicated herein.
(C) If there is a conflict between the fee schedule set forth in this chapter and a fee established elsewhere, the fee set forth in this chapter shall be used.
(D) However, if a fee is established elsewhere and no fee is set forth in this chapter, then that fee shall be required to be paid.
(E) If there is a question concerning which fee is applicable, the City Manager shall review the matter and make a determination as to the applicable fee.
(F) The City Manager’s decision shall be final.
(1985 Code, § 165.01) (Ord. 96-05, passed 2-26-1996; Ord. 04-01, passed 1-12-2004; Ord. 04-05, passed 2-9-2004)
§ 165.02 PAYMENT OF FEES
(A) No application or appeal shall be considered filed until the proper payment of fees has been received.
(B) If any check is returned unpaid for any reason the application or appeal shall be considered withdrawn and the person filing the application or appeal shall be notified without delay.
(C) No further consideration shall be given to the application or appeal unless payment is submitted in a form satisfactory to the City Manager, who may require that the payment be made in cash.
(1985 Code, § 165.02) (Ord. 96-05, passed 2-26-1996; Ord. 04-01, passed 1-12-2004; Ord. 04-05, passed 2-9-2004)
§ 165.03 FEES FOR ZONING APPLICATIONS AND APPEALS
The fees for certain applications and appeals pertaining to zoning matters are as follows.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 165:
Schedule of Fees For Land Usage Applications and
Appeals
247
7722743.2
(A) Variance relating to property used for residential purposes. Any application or appeal for variance relating to property used for residential purposes which is submitted pursuant to either §§ 150.26 or 150.35 of the Zoning Code shall be the following:
(1) Variance for improvements on any buildings or structures. A flat fee of $50 per application, plus a flat fee of $1.50 per each $1,000 of valuation of the improvement; and
(2) Variance for lot split and panhandle lots. A flat fee of $100 per application.
(B) Variance relating to property used for commercial purposes. Any application or appeal for variance relating to property used for commercial purposes which is submitted pursuant to either §§ 150.26 or 150.35 of the Zoning Code shall be a flat fee of $150 per application, plus a flat fee of $1.50 per each $1,000 of valuation of the improvement.
(C) Lot Splits. All applications for lot splits that consist of less than five lots (minor subdivisions) shall be charged a flat fee of $50 per application and $50 per lot in excess of two lots.
(1985 Code, § 165.03) (Ord. 96-05, passed 2-26-1996; Ord. 04-01, passed 1-12-2004; Ord. 04-05, passed 2-9-2004)
§ 165.04 SIGN VARIANCES
All applications or appeals for a variance from the Sign Code pursuant to § 159.23 shall be $50 per application.
(1985 Code, § 165.04) (Ord. 96-05, passed 2-26-1996; Ord. 04-01, passed 1-12-2004; Ord. 04-05, passed 2-9-2004)
§ 165.05 CONDITIONAL USE HEARINGS
Any application (which may or may not include an appeal) for conditional use hearings relating to property used for purposes which is submitted pursuant to § 150.13 shall be a flat fee of $150 per application, plus a flat fee of $1.50 per each $1,000 of valuation of the improvement.
(1985 Code, § 165.05) (Ord. 04-01, passed 1-12-2004; Ord. 04-05, passed 2-9-2004)
§ 165.06 BUILDING CODE APPEALS
Any application for a Building Code appeal which is submitted pursuant to Chapter 152, Building Codes and Regulations, shall be a flat fee of $50 per application.
(1985 Code, § 165.06) (Ord. 04-01, passed 1-12-2004; Ord. 04-05, passed 2-9-2004)
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 166:
Main Street Core District Zoning Regulations
248
7722743.2
CHAPTER 166: MAIN STREET CORE DISTRICT ZONING REGULATIONS
General Provisions
166.01 Zoning district boundaries
166.02 Standard applicability
166.03 Purpose
166.04 Review procedures
166.05 Zoning permit required
166.06 Application process
166.07 Definitions
Uses
166.20 Purpose
166.21 Permitted uses
166.22 Conditional uses
Architectural Standards
166.35 Purpose
166.36 Architectural styles
166.37 Building scale and massing
166.38 Roof forms
166.39 Entries and store front facades
166.40 Fenestration (windows and doors)
166.41 Exterior finish materials and colors
166.42 Awnings or fabric canopies
166.43 Mechanical equipment
Site Standards
166.55 Purpose
166.56 Setbacks and build-to lines
166.57 Frontage
166.58 Large building exception
166.59 Corner lots and sight triangles
166.60 Parking
166.61 Vehicular access
166.62 Landscaping and screening
166.63 Lighting
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 166:
Main Street Core District Zoning Regulations
249
7722743.2
MAIN STREET CORE DISTRICT – OFFICIAL ZONING MAP 2/14/11
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 166.01 ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
The Main Street Core District is shown on the official zoning map.
(Ord. 10-23, passed 2-14-2011)
§ 166.02 STANDARD APPLICABILITY
All properties in the Main Street Core District (“the District”) on the official zoning map of the city shall be subject to the regulations of this chapter. Where the standards in this chapter are in conflict with other sections of the code, the standards in this Chapter 166 shall apply.
(Ord. 10-23, passed 2-14-2011)
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 166:
Main Street Core District Zoning Regulations
250
7722743.2
§ 166.03 PURPOSE
(A) The District will maintain a “small town” character and provide an aesthetically cohesive and pedestrian friendly environment. It will be the commercial and cultural heart of the city and will be considered a destination spot for residents and visitors, where a mix of businesses can thrive.
(B) The regulations will guide development and redevelopment and provide the basis for consistency and objective decision making for Planning Commission and staff when evaluating proposed development. The regulations will also protect neighboring residential areas adjacent to the Main Street Core so that these areas can maintain their character. To achieve the purpose, measures will be taken to:
(1) Create a cohesive street view by setting buildings consistently close to the street and without major gaps;
(2) De-emphasize the impact of surface parking by locating on-site parking to the side or rear of buildings and by screening from Miami Avenue;
(3) Create visual interest with real and not faux, well-articulated facades, including fenestration and floor demarcation;
(4) Reflect human scale through small and medium sized elements;
(5) Provide aesthetically pleasing lot-to-building proportions by addressing lot coverage and floor area ratios and minimum building frontage requirements for lots and blocks;
(6) Create a visually attractive color scheme with a palette of building materials and finishes including traditional and modern high-quality sustainable materials;
(7) Create pedestrian friendly and attractive signage; and
(8) Support private development improvements with high quality streetscaping, including landscaping where appropriate, outdoor dining, pedestrian scale furniture and lighting.
(Ord. 10-23, passed 2-14-2011)
§ 166.04 REVIEW PROCEDURES
The Main Street Core District regulations are intended to provide guidance to property owners and city officials in the general aesthetic and functional improvement of the city’s Central Business District. These regulations are intended to promote community investment while not posing a financial burden on property owners or the city. The following review procedure is established to identify the extent to which a project must comply with the Main Street Core District regulations.
(Ord. 10-23, passed 2-14-2011)
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 166:
Main Street Core District Zoning Regulations
251
7722743.2
§ 166.05 ZONING PERMIT REQUIRED
The City Manager or his or her designee has sole discretion to require that a zoning permit be obtained before conducting any exterior work.
(Ord. 10-23, passed 2-14-2011)
§ 166.06 APPLICATION PROCESS
(A) Any modification, alteration or enhancement of a site or structure exterior within the District shall require a zoning and building permit.
(B) Projects identified by the City Manager or his or her designee as “essentially minor” shall be granted a zoning and building permit with administrative approval.
(C) The applicant for any project not identified as “essentially minor” by the City manager or his or her designee shall submit the application to the Planning Commission for review and approval.
(D) All applications submitted under the provisions of this Chapter shall be reviewed in accordance with the following procedure:
(1) Stage 1: Initial Application. The purpose of Stage 1 is for the City Manager or his or her designee to determine whether proposed construction (including renovation, repair, maintenance or other similar activities) shall be reviewed administratively as an “essentially minor” application or by Planning Commission. A pre-application meeting is recommended with the City Manager or his or her designee to determine the submission requirements.
(a) The City Manager or his or her designee shall review the proposed construction and may consult with the Architectural Review Officer (ARO) or the Chair of the Planning Commission before he or she makes the decision whether the proposed construction is essentially minor.
(b) Construction shall be deemed (designated) essentially minor if it, when completed, will have primarily preserved the use, function, form, scale and accessory uses that existed prior to the construction.
(c) Construction deemed essentially minor shall be granted an essentially minor certificate, and applicants shall submit application for a building permit under administrative review. All other projects shall require Planning Commission review and approval prior to the issuance of a building permit.
(d) Stage 1A: Determination of Modification Type. The following factors shall be weighed and considered in determining whether the construction is essentially minor.
(i) Will the proposed construction significantly alter the exterior appearance of the existing building or site design in one or more of the following ways?
a. Height;
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 166:
Main Street Core District Zoning Regulations
252
7722743.2
b. Setbacks;
c. Footprint;
d. Entrance;
e. Fenestration;
f. Envelope (volume);
g. Exterior materials or colors; and
h. Landscaping or parking.
(ii) Will the construction essentially preserve the form and use of the existing building and site?
(iii) Is the estimated cost of the construction to the exterior of the building and site sufficient to justify that the modifications be compatible with the aesthetic vision of the Main Street Core District regulations?
(e) Stage 1B: Determination of Modification Magnitude.
(i) For the City Manager or his or her designee to determine that a project is essentially minor, management must find that:
a. The construction will not increase the dimensions of a building or structure by more than 10% of the square footage of the existing building or structure, exclusive of the alteration or expansion;
b. The project will not involve additional land other than the lot of record;
c. The cost of the exterior renovation of the structure does not exceed 25% of the assessed value of the building or structure to be altered, prior to the renovations; and
d. The alterations do not require dimensional variances from the regulations of this chapter.
(ii) If the City Manager or his or her designee determines that the construction is essentially minor, he or she shall so certify in writing. A file containing the certification, copies of the proposed construction and staff comments and recommendations shall be assembled and retained for not less than five years after completion of the proposed construction.
(iii) For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be presumed that any additional construction proposed within five years of an essentially minor certification will not qualify as essentially minor. The intent of this presumption is to
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 166:
Main Street Core District Zoning Regulations
253
7722743.2
prevent or discourage circumvention of ultimate design guidelines of this chapter through the cumulative effect of multiple minor improvements.
(f) Stage 1C: Administrative Review Application. Once a project has been certified essentially minor, the applicant may apply for a zoning and building permit without requesting approval of the Planning Commission. However, the application shall be reviewed for specific compliance with applicable sections of the Main Street Core District regulations and deemed in compliance by the City Manager or his or her designee, prior to the issuance of a building permit.
(2) Stage 2: Planning Commission Review Application. In the event the City Manager or his or her designee does not find an application to be essentially minor or in conformance with the standards of this Chapter 166, the City Manager or his or her designee shall make the determination that the application must be reviewed and approved by Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall review the application for appropriateness and equivalency to the intent and purpose of this chapter. The Planning Commission may grant an equivalency or modification of a requirement if it makes a finding that the effect of the proposed submission is consistent with the intent and purpose of this chapter. The equivalency finding shall be part of the official record of approval and issuance of the certificate of appropriateness and the zoning permit.
(a) Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the Planning Commission must approve proposed construction or modification of buildings within the Main Street Core District that has not been certified as essentially minor by the City Manager or his or her designee. Implicit in such an application is that an essentially minor certification has not been issued. Application to and review by the Planning Commission shall be evaluated in the same manner whether or not an essentially minor certification has been sought (and denied).
(b) As they are form based, the regulations for the Main Street Core District include both dimensional and flexible aesthetic standards. Review for substantial or equivalent compliance with both types of standards shall be required for zoning approval and issuance of a building permit.
(3) Stage 3: Dimensional Review.
(a) Upon receipt of an application for proposed construction within the Main Street Core District, the City Manager or his or her designee shall review and determine dimensional compliance with these standards. This shall include identification of any proposed reconstruction of existing buildings that are dimensionally nonconforming. Variances that are identified shall be set forth in a report to Planning Commission and the Board of Zoning Appeals. The notice and process of review shall be the same as required for other dimensional variances.
(b) The Board of Zoning Appeals shall weigh and consider the “Duncan” factors for each dimensional variance identified.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 166:
Main Street Core District Zoning Regulations
254
7722743.2
(4) Stage 4: Design Review of Aesthetic Standards.
(a) The Planning Commission shall serve as a Design Review Board and evaluate the proposal for reasonable compliance with the overall aesthetic guidelines.
(b) The standard of compliance is intended to be “reasonable” rather than “strict” to allow for design review that is flexible for both the applicant and city to achieve a product that is appropriate for the district.
(c) The standard of compliance with the aesthetic guidelines should be the determination of the Planning Commission stating that the proposed construction achieves a significant compatibility with the aesthetic guidelines set forth in the Main Street Core District regulations.
(d) The Planning Commission should find that the proposed construction avoids a direct conflict with the overall images, impressions and net impact of buildings and accessory structures, including parking, landscaping and lighting described in the Main Street Core District regulations.
(e) The Planning Commission shall refrain from imposing additional aesthetic requirements if the proposed construction does substantially resemble the examples set forth in the Main Street Core District regulations. Aesthetic guidelines are inherently subjective and, therefore, the Planning Commission shall endeavor to adhere to the guidelines as they are substantially expressed in these regulations.
(f) It is recognized that it is unlikely and unreasonable to require a building to comply with all examples in the regulations because the regulations anticipate variation in final appearances (eclectic) from building to building.
(g) The Planning Commission shall make findings that the application:
(i) Conforms in all pertinent respects to the requirements contained in this chapter;
(ii) Adequate provision is made for safe and efficient pedestrian and vehicular circulation within the site and to adjacent property;
(iii) The development has adequate public services and open spaces;
(iv) The development provides adequate lighting for safe and convenient use of the streets, walkways, driveways and parking areas without unnecessarily spilling or emitting light into adjacent properties; and
(v) The landscape plan will enhance the principal building and site and maintain existing trees where appropriate; buffer adjacent incompatible uses; break up large expanses of pavement with natural material; and provide appropriate plant materials for the buildings, site and climate.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 166:
Main Street Core District Zoning Regulations
255
7722743.2
(h) The approval by Planning Commission shall not be construed to imply compliance with all other local, state and federal laws and regulations.
(i) An affirmative vote of approval of the majority of the Planning Commission members may determine whether the proposed construction complies with the aesthetic guidelines of the district or has been found to be equivalent by Planning Commission.
(5) Submission Requirements. The following materials should be submitted with each application.
(a) Initial Application. Applicants shall provide the following information and materials:
(i) A conceptual site plan at a minimum scale of one inch equals 50 feet showing the size and location of all existing and proposed structures, indicating dimensions and square footage. The site plan shall also show the location of access and drive aisles, and the number of parking spaces;
(ii) Photographs or illustrations showing all four elevations of existing and proposed buildings;
(iii) A hard cost estimate for the new construction or alterations; and
(iv) An external finish building materials and colors list, with samples or examples.
(b) Final Application.
(i) All applications for Planning Commission or administrative review for zoning approval or building permits shall include:
a. A land survey;
b. A site plan depicting the exact dimensions of the site and all buildings, structures and parking areas;
c. A landscaping plan showing the location and type of all proposed landscape areas, plantings and screening/buffering;
d. A signage plan showing the location, size and type of all signs, illustrations or elevations showing the proposed appearance of all signs;
e. A lighting plan showing the location, type, height and intensity and photometric of all lighting;
f. Building plans showing general dimensions, materials and uses;
g. Exterior building elevations showing the proposed appearance of the building, including a proposed materials list; and
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 166:
Main Street Core District Zoning Regulations
256
7722743.2
h. Any other information deemed necessary by the City Manager or his or her designee, Architectural Review Officer or Planning Commission to determine compliance with this chapter.
(ii) In the case of a project with an essentially minor certificate, the City Manager or his or her designee may waive any of the above submission requirements that he or she deems unnecessary for the comprehensive review of the proposed project.
(6) Contingent-Approval Permitted. In circumstances where an applicant needs a variance from the requirements of this Code, the Planning Commission may provide contingent-approval of a Final Application. Such contingent-approval shall mean their approval of the Final Application is subject to the applicant obtaining any required variance(s) from the Board of Zoning Appeals. If the Planning Commission provides contingent-approval of a Final Application and the Board of Zoning Appeals subsequently denies the applicant’s requested variance(s), said denial shall constitute a rejection of the Final Application.
(7) Appeals. Pursuant to this section, if the Planning Commission, City Manager, or ARO deny an applicant’s request for approval of an application or an amendment to a previously-approved application, such applicant may appeal the decision denying their request to the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(a) Timing of Appeal. The applicant appealing the decision must provide notice of his or her intent to appeal such decision to the Planning Commission, City Manager, or ARO and the Board of Zoning Appeals within thirty (30) days of the Planning Commission’s provision of written notification of its denial to the applicant.
(b) Hearing on Appeal. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hold a public hearing evaluating the appeal based upon the standards of review applied by the Planning Commission, City Manager, or ARO to the initial application, within sixty (60) days of receiving applicant’s notice of appeal.
(Ord. 10-23, passed 2-14-2011)
§ 166.07 DEFINITIONS.
(A) Purpose. For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms are defined as follows. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future; words in the singular number include the plural; words in the plural include the singular; the word “structure” includes buildings; the word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely directive; the word “should” is directive; the word “may” is permissive; and the word “lot” includes plot, parcel or site.
(B) Definitions. Other words and terms shall have the following respective meanings.
ACCESSORY USE
A use of land, or building or portion thereof customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or building and located on the same lot with the principal use.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 166:
Main Street Core District Zoning Regulations
257
7722743.2
ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW OFFICER
The professional architect responsible for the review and approval of architectural elements of submitted permit applications, appointed by the City Manager and approved by City Council. See Chapter 161.
ARTICULATION
To divide a building’s facade into distinct and significant parts.
AWNING
A non-load bearing roof-like cover of canvas, similar fabric or standing seam metal roof over a frame, designed and intended for protection from the weather or as a decorative embellishment, which projects from a wall or roof of a structure over a window, walk or door, and is supported entirely by attachment to a building wall. (See Figure 1.)
Figure 1: Building shows articulation, awning and belt courses
BELT COURSE
A slight recess or projection of masonry or similar material running horizontally through a facade. See also STRING COURSE.
BRICK VENEER
An exterior cladding of traditional brick materials of less than one inch in thickness, applied to an underlying structural support wall such as one of concrete masonry units using a mortar or float technique, which results in the appearance of a traditional brick finish.
BUILDING HEIGHT
The height of a building when measured from the finished grade at the center point of the front facade to the average point between the eaves and peak or ridge of the roofline on pitched roof structures and finished grade to the top of the exterior wall or parapet on flat roofed structures. (See Figure 3.)
BUILD-TO-LINE
A line established in the interior of the lot parallel to the property line or right-of-way line which defines the plane to which a building shall be set. The effect is buildings consistently placed along the frontage of a street or block to create a consistent street wall.
Finished
Grade
Finished
Grade
Top of
Parapet
Figure 3: This illustration shows the appropriate way to measure building height for both pitched and flat roofed structures
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 166:
Main Street Core District Zoning Regulations
258
7722743.2
BULKHEAD
(1) The part of the facade that forms a base for one or more windows on the ground floor.
(2) Typically found in traditional storefronts.
(3) See Figure 2.
CANTILEVER
A structural horizontal projection of an upper portion of a building, which has no visible exterior vertical supports and is supported only by the wall from which it emerges.
CANOPY
A freestanding structure consisting of vertical supports and an overhead support system clad in fabric or metal roofing to provide partial protection from the elements.
CITY MANAGER
The official administrative professional responsible for the daily management of the city’s functions.
CITY MANAGER’S DESIGNEE
(1) Any person employed by the City Manager to perform a task related to the review of permit applications to the city.
(2) This may include an Assistant to the City Manager, a Planner, Zoning Administrator, engineer, architect or any other professional to assist the City Manager in the assessment of applications.
CLERESTORY
An upper story row of windows, or windows so placed. Often applied when there is not an actual interior corresponding floor. (See Figure 4.)
Figure 2: A bulkhead is located under the windows
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 166:
Main Street Core District Zoning Regulations
259
7722743.2
CEMENT VENEER
(1) A veneer of cement or fired clay made to create a brick or synthetic stone finished surface.
(2) Veneers can be applied to an exterior surface with an adhesive and thereby produce the effect of a stone or masonry wall without being structural.
CORNICE
Dimensional detail consisting of trims, panels, brackets and corbels projecting at the uppermost or crowning
portion of a wall or facade. Also known as a crown molding. (See Figure 5.)
ECLECTIC ARCHITECTURE
A building style or the style of a collection of buildings, which draws from a variety of recognized architectural styles, periods, or sources without being a true facsimile of any one specific genre. It may also mean a district, which does not have one consistently applied architectural style, but exhibits a mix of styles.
FACADE
The exterior face or wall of a building. The FACADES may be referred to as either a primary or a secondary facade. A PRIMARY FACADE is visible from an adjacent roadway and can be considered the
front of the structure. Buildings on a corner lot may have more than one primary facade. A SECONDARY FACADE refers to a side or rear exterior wall, which is not visible from an adjacent roadway.
FENESTRATION
Window and other openings in a building’s facade.
GLAZING
Fitted or covered with glass.
Figure 4: The upper row of windows on this single story building represents a clerestory
Figure 5: Cornice at the top line of a building facade
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 166:
Main Street Core District Zoning Regulations
260
7722743.2
KICK PLATE
A hard plate or veneer fitted to the lower portions of a building, including the lower rail of a door, bulkhead or risers of a step to prevent damage from moderate impact. Also referred to as a TOE KICK.
MIXED-USE
A building with multiple stories where the ground floor is occupied by a business user (retail, service, office) and the upper stories are occupied by either a different business user or residential units.
PARAPET
A facade extension above the true or finished roof line of a building. (See Figure 6)
QUOINING
Dressed stones or bricks at the corners of buildings, laid so that their faces are alternately large and small. Originally used to add strength to the masonry wall, they are now used for more decorative purposes.
SIGHT TRIANGLE
A triangular-shaped proportion of land established at street intersections in which nothing is erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to limit or obstruct the sight distance of motorists entering or leaving the intersection.
SHARED ACCESS
A single vehicular access point or driveway shared by two or more properties on adjoining lots. A SHARED ACCESS POINT may cross a side lot line. SHARED ACCESS POINTS require access easements.
SHARED PARKING
Joint utilization of a parking area or parking spaces for more than one use. SHARED PARKING involves parking spaces that are used at different times by different users. A special agreement is required to ensure access of businesses to off-site parking.
STRING COURSE
The same as a belt course.
TRANSOM
A window or glazed component set above other windows or openings, traditionally set close to the ceiling to promote ventilation. A component of traditional storefronts.
TRIM
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 166:
Main Street Core District Zoning Regulations
261
7722743.2
Linear elements applied to or structurally integrated into the facade of a building, which delineates, adds emphasis to an architectural element or covers a transition or joining of materials to present a more finished appearance.
WATER TABLE
A horizontal projecting string course, molding or ledge placed to divert rainwater from a building’s foundation. In traditional buildings, this element is often placed at or above the sill between the foundation and the base of the structural wall.
(Ord. 10-23, passed 2-14-2011)
USES
§ 166.20 PURPOSE
The primary purpose of the District is to provide a central destination for retail, commercial, office and residential uses in a main street style, pedestrian friendly district and to promote development opportunities for those uses within the city.
(Ord. 10-23, passed 2-14-2011)
§ 166.21 PERMITTED USES
Permitted uses are:
(A) Offices for professional use such as accountants, attorneys, counseling, consulting, doctors, architects, dentists, engineers, opticians, real estate, insurance and manufacturers’ representatives;
(B) Commercial uses, including retail, restaurants, bars, banks, media studios and dry cleaners (where dry cleaning is not done on site) and bakeries employing less than six bakers;
(C) Libraries, museums and theaters; and
(D) Daycares, preschools, nursery schools and childcare businesses.
(Ord. 10-23, passed 2-14-2011)
§ 166.22 CONDITIONAL USES
Conditional uses are:
(A) Any use with a building footprint over 15,000 square feet shall require a lot size of one acre or larger and shall meet the setback and lot standards of § 166.56. Maximum square footage shall be 45,000 square feet;
(B) Manufacturing uses provided they are accessory to a primary permitted use (such as manufacture and sale of dental accessories for and to a patient). As an accessory use, the manufacturing activities may not exceed the total floor area allowed by the Ohio Building Code for an accessory use;
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 166:
Main Street Core District Zoning Regulations
262
7722743.2
(C) Residential units provided they are located on second or third stories of mixed-use buildings and do not exceed 12 units per acre or more than six units per structure. The minimum square footage for a single bedroom unit shall be 900 square feet and 700 for a studio;
(D) Public or commercial parking lots or structures provided they are screened from view of residential properties and are designed to be well integrated into the architecture of the District;
(E) Outdoor dining per § 150.16; and
(F) Outdoor sales may be permitted for temporary periods seasonally or on a daily basis with displays. Daily set up and indoor storage may be required. Permanent outdoor sales areas shall be integrated into the building and may include tables under awnings for the display of produce or goods. (Ord. 10-23, passed 2-14-2011)
ARCHITECTURAL STANDARDS
§ 166.35 PURPOSE
The purpose of these standards is to promote the design and construction of buildings that support and enhance the eclectic character associated with the city, through building scale and mass, entries and storefronts, fenestration, exterior materials and architectural details.
(Ord. 10-23, passed 2-14-2011)
§ 166.36 ARCHITECTURAL STYLES
Although the district is to remain eclectic and no specific architectural style is required for new buildings in the District, a preference for traditional styles is indicated. Overly modern design is felt to be out of context with the small town character of the city. Architectural styles, which should be referenced as appropriate, are illustrated in Figure 7 through Figure 13.
(A) English Colonial, Georgian or Federal.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 166:
Main Street Core District Zoning Regulations
263
7722743.2
(B) Neo-Eclectic Commercial.
Figure 7: A modern interpretation of an early English
colonial appropriate in the city
Figure 8: This building employs federal styling and details
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 166:
Main Street Core District Zoning Regulations
264
7722743.2
(C) Colonial and Tudor Revival.
Figure 11: Example employing Tudor revival
Figure 9: Neo-mansard post-196's commercial
Figure 10: Commercial style consisting of base, shaft and
cap with cornice and fenestration
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 166:
Main Street Core District Zoning Regulations
265
7722743.2
(Ord. 10-23, passed 2-14-2011)
§ 166.37 BUILDING SCALE AND MASSING
(A) (1) The relationship of a building’s height to its apparent width and its horizontal and vertical
articulation are major contributing factors to the overall character of the Main Street Core
District.
(2) Buildings within the Main Street Core District should respect the architectural character of
surrounding buildings.
(B) The following standards shall apply to all buildings in the Main Street Core District.
(1) Building Height.
(a) All buildings in the district shall not exceed three stories in height or 45 feet.
(b) See Figure 3.
(2) Horizontal Articulation.
(a) Horizontally long buildings shall be visually broken up through the use of recesses or
setback variations, architectural detailing, various roof heights and application of
Figure 13: Example of Craftsman style
Figure 12: Example employing colonial revival styling similar to
a “Cape Cod” style
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 166:
Main Street Core District Zoning Regulations
266
7722743.2
compatible building materials to cause the facade to appear as a series of
proportionally correct masses.
(b) See Figure 14.
(c) Placement of the common horizontal elements (e.g., cornice line and window height,
width and spacing) on new or infill structures shall be influenced by neighboring
structures.
(3) Vertical Articulation. The articulation of a base, middle and top of the building shall be
required.
(a) A recognizable base may consist of, but not be limited to, thicker walls, ledges or
sills, integrally-textured material such as stone or masonry, integrally-colored and
patterned materials such as smooth-finished stone or tiles, lighter or darker colored
material from the body of the building, mullions or panels. The use of bulkheads and
water table trims are strongly encouraged.
(b) The middle or body of the building will constitute the majority of the facade area and
may consist of, but is not limited to the primary exterior finish material, fenestration
and belt or soldier courses.
(c) A recognizable top may consist of, but is not limited to, dimensional cornice
treatments; variation in masonry patterns or materials or differently colored materials;
Figure 14: These three elevations illustrate proper and improper articulation and
proportions for buildings in the District
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 166:
Main Street Core District Zoning Regulations
267
7722743.2
Figure 16: This strip center with parapets and faux windows was designed to
appear to have two stories. In the Main Street Core District, this is inappropriate.
The windows and styling would only be appropriate if the upper portions are true
usable floors
visible roof forms, including gables, sloping roof with overhangs and brackets,
stepped parapets, chimney projections, cupolas and dormers; or aligned openings and
articulations.
(d) Tall single story buildings should be articulated and include fenestration and detailing
that is consistent with the horizontal and vertical proportions of the building. (See
Figure 15.)
(e) Single story buildings over 15 feet in height may be vertically articulated to present
the appearance of a clerestory. (See Figure 17.)
(f) Multi-story buildings are encouraged.
(g) Faux articulation of upper stories shall be prohibited. (See Figure 16.)
Figure 15: This building shows how a tall single story building can be well
articulated through the use of tall windows. This approach is preferred over the
use of a faux upper story
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 166:
Main Street Core District Zoning Regulations
268
7722743.2
(Ord. 10-23, passed 2-14-2011)
§ 166.38 ROOF FORMS
(A) Roof forms shall be consistent with the architectural style and proportions of the building.
(B) Pitched roofs and shed roofs shall be permitted in the District. (See Figure 18 for examples of
pitched roof forms.)
(C) (1) Flat roofs with dimensional cornices or modest parapets are permitted.
(2) Facade extensions or parapets may be used on flat roofed structures to create variation and
screen rooftop equipment. The following standards shall apply to faced extensions or
parapets:
Figure 17: Image shows the use of clerestory windows
Figure 18: Illustration shows various “pitched” roof forms
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 166:
Main Street Core District Zoning Regulations
269
7722743.2
(a) Facade extensions and/or parapets shall be included in the measurement of total
building height and exterior wall height and shall not be more than one-fourth of the
total building height;
(b) Facade extensions and/or parapets shall be applied in a consistent manner to all
visible facades of a structure to create a consistent and intentional screen for rooftop
equipment without the appearance of a veneer or a flat wall extended beyond the roof
form when viewed in profile. (See Figure 19.); and
(c) Exceptions may be made for rear facades that are not visible from public spaces or
residential areas.
(D) When a shed roof is used as the primary or sole roof form, it shall slope away from the property’s
frontage. Shed roofs as a primary roof form are discouraged on buildings located on corner lots.
(E) Mansard roofs shall be reserved for use on buildings of at least two stories in height. Gambrel roofs
shall be prohibited.
(F) Full projection or cantilevering of the upper portions of a flat roofed structure shall be prohibited.
(Ord. 10-23, passed 2-14-2011)
§ 166.39 ENTRIES AND STORE FRONT FACADES
(A) Storefronts are the parts of the building that face the street and connect with the sidewalk and are
typically on the first floor.
(B) Storefronts are an integral part of the District and should primarily be transparent, with a pedestrian
orientation and appropriately oriented entry facades.
Figure 19: The parapet used in this image is too high and flat and
would not be permitted in the District
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 166:
Main Street Core District Zoning Regulations
270
7722743.2
(1) The main or “customer” entrance to a building shall be emphasized to delineate a clear point
of arrival or entry.
(2) The main entry shall be located along the front or public right-of-way; additional entrances
may be located in the side or rear of the building to allow for service access or additional
customer entries.
(3) On corner lots, the building’s primary entrance may be angled to present access to both
frontages.
(4) Entries should typically be recessed and/or sheltered by a covered arcade structure, canopy or
awning.
(5) Entry ways are encouraged to incorporate elements of traditional storefront design, including
recessed panels or area for signboards, cornices, transom, piers, display windows, bulkheads
or recessed or covered central entrance areas.
(Ord. 10-23, passed 2-14-2011)
§ 166.40 FENESTRATION (WINDOWS AND DOORS)
(A) Windows and doors shall be proportional to the building facade in which they are installed.
Vertically proportioned windows which relate to human scale are preferred, but horizontally
proportioned windows may be used for display purposes on lower floors. On upper floors, windows
shall be divided into vertically proportioned components using mullions and muttons. (See Figure
21.)
Figure 20: Anatomy of a traditional storefront
Figure 21: This illustrates how the character and appearance of a building is impacted by
the scale of the window openings. Traditional proportions are preferred in the District.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 166:
Main Street Core District Zoning Regulations
271
7722743.2
(B) On the front facade, similar sized windows shall be placed in a regular pattern with the same top and
bottom alignment.
(C) Window openings shall indicate floor levels and shall not occur between floors.
(D) A bulkhead constructed of brick, stone, wood, fiber cement siding or metal panels shall be required
at a minimum height of 18 inches from grade.
(E) Transparent windows or doors shall occupy a minimum of 50% of the area of a primary facade
between two and ten feet from the grade at the sidewalk. (See Figure 22 for method to calculate
area.)
(F) Opaque glazing or mirrored glazing shall be prohibited.
(Ord. 10-23, passed 2-14-2011)
§ 166.41 EXTERIOR FINISH MATERIALS AND COLORS
(A) These standards are intended to achieve unity of design through compatible materials and colors.
The purpose of the following standards is to promote high quality, sustainable materials that will
contribute to a consistent character while allowing for variation.
(B) Buildings shall be finished with high-quality, low maintenance, durable, sustainable and attractive
natural or manufactured materials.
(C) Material requirements may vary on the primary facades or facades parallel to public rights-of-way
and the secondary or screened facades.
(1) Materials. Exterior finish materials shall be permitted as applicable. Material requirements
may vary from the primary or visible facades to the secondary or screened facades. Other
new materials meeting the purpose of these standards may be approved by the Planning
Commission or Architectural Review Officer on a case-by-case basis as a primary or accent
building material. Permitted and prohibited materials for the primary and secondary facade
are listed in Table I.
(a) Permitted Primary Materials.
Figure 22: Window or door openings are calculated from the area of the primary
facade between two and ten feet from grade. The dashed rectangle shows this
area. The grey rectangles represent 50% of this area
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 166:
Main Street Core District Zoning Regulations
272
7722743.2
(i) The primary material must make up at least 50% of the exterior covering on
the primary facades of a building.
(ii) The total area covered by permitted primary materials shall be calculated from
the area of the visible plane measuring the area from grade to upper building
limits, exclusive of the area occupied by visible roof surfaces. (See Figure 23
for example of material coverage calculations.)
(iii) Permitted and prohibited materials shall be as defined in Table I.
(b) Accents and Detailing.
(i) Accent materials shall be applied to a maximum of 25% of the facade surface.
(ii) Detailing, trim, windows, doors and glazing may constitute the remaining area
of the facade not occupied by the primary or accent material.
(iii) All accents and details shall be permitted and prohibited as defined in Table I.
This building façade represents a total of 1,557 square feet excluding the roof area, but including the gable.
The percentages of the total façade area are:
5% = 78 square feet
10% = 156 square feet
15% = 234 square feet
25% = 390 square feet
The grey shaded areas represent the area covered with an “accent material”
Figure 23: This figure illustrates how to calculate the percentage of the
facade dedicated to an accent material. Accent materials shall be applied to no
more than 25% of the facade surfaces
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 166:
Main Street Core District Zoning Regulations
273
7722743.2
TABLE I: PERMITTED AND PROHIBITED MATERIALS Materials Primary Façade Secondary Facade
Aluminum siding
X
X
Asphalt or fiberglass shingles
R
R
Brick
P, A, T
P, A, T
Brick veneers
A, T
P, A, T
Cast or wrought metal
A, T
A, T
Cast stone
P, A, T
P, A, T
Concrete Masonry Unit (cinder block)
X
P, A
Cut or rusticated stone
P, A, T
P, A, T
Decorative concrete masonry units
A
P, A
Fiber cement (clapboard, shingles, scallops, trims, stones or bricks)
P, A, T
P, A, T
Glazed brick or glass tiles
A, T
A, T
Metal trims or flashings (aluminum, steel, copper, brass, iron)
A, T
A, T
Natural stone
P, A, T
P, A, T
PVC (poly vinyl carbonate)
A, T
A, T
Reflective materials (mirrored glass, chrome)
X
X
Slate (real or faux)
R
R
Standing seam metal (aluminum, copper steel)
R
R
Stucco (traditionally applied)
P, A
P, A
Terra-cotta
A, T
A, T
Tilt-up architectural concrete
A
A
Vinyl siding
X
X
Wood (clapboard, shingles, scallops, trims)
P, A, T
P, A, T
Notes:
P = Permitted material
A = Accent material
T = Trim material
R = Visible roofing
X = Prohibited
(c) Conditional or New Materials. Modern manufactured materials that create the appearance of permitted materials such as fiber cement products, architectural panels or cast stone may be considered appropriate. Other materials not listed as prohibited may be considered by the Planning Commission on a case-by-case basis as a primary or accent building material.
(d) Prohibited Materials. Exterior covering materials that are prohibited include vinyl, aluminum or steel siding, corrugated steel and highly reflective materials such as mirrored glass or chrome, or fully glazed facades.
(2) Colors.
(a) Permitted. The preferred base colors used on new or rehabilitated buildings should be the natural color of the material in the case of brick or stone. In the case of painted or other synthetic materials of a neutral muted palette, deep saturated hues or muted pastels and whites should be used. Brighter more vivid colors should be reserved for
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 166:
Main Street Core District Zoning Regulations
274
7722743.2
accents. A more scientific explanation of color principles, including hue, saturation
and value can be found at:
http://www.ncsu.edu/scivis/lessons/colormodels/color_ models2.html
(b) Prohibited. No fluorescent, neon, day-glow or reflective colors shall be used.
(3) Combinations of Materials and Colors. Each building facade shall be limited to a
combination of one primary material and two accent materials; additional materials may be
used for trims based on the material most appropriate for the trim’s location and purpose.
When surfaces are painted, colored, or otherwise do not correspond to the material, each
building facade shall be limited to a combination of no more than four coordinated or
complementary color schemes.
(4) Transitions of Materials.
(a) Transition from one material to another on the same facade shall be completed either
with appropriate trim or as an accent with variations such as quoining or reveals based
on material thickness.
(b) Transition in materials from one facade to another shall be made at an inside corner or
extended a minimum of five feet onto the secondary facade.
(Ord. 10-23, passed 2-14-2011)
§ 166.42 AWNINGS OR FABRIC CANOPIES
(A) The use of awnings or fabric canopies on buildings in the District can soften and add vibrancy to the
pedestrian environment along the sidewalks and enhance the entrance while offering protection from
the elements.
(B) The purpose of the following standards is to coordinate the appearance and application of awnings
and canopies with the general character of the District and provide guidance for the appropriate
materials.
(1) Awnings or fabric canopies shall be made of canvas or other durable non-glossy outdoor
grade fabric in permitted colors listed in § 166.41(C)(2). Awning color should be
Figure 24: Appropriate transition of materials
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 166:
Main Street Core District Zoning Regulations
275
7722743.2
coordinated with the color scheme of the building. In general, solid color awnings should be used on buildings with intricate and abundant architectural detailing, while striped awnings might be utilized on simpler buildings to introduce color and vitality.
(2) Awnings should be designed to fit the storefront opening and emphasize the building’s proportions.
(3) Where possible, awnings should be aligned with others on the block, particularly the bottom edge.
(4) Awnings may extend over the public sidewalk, but must provide unobstructed vertical clearance to at least eight feet from grade.
(5) Awnings may not extend beyond the curb or obstruct the view at intersections.
(6) Awnings should be mounted at the top edge to align with the top of the transoms when present.
(7) No signage shall be applied to the body (or sloped portion) of the awning; the valence may be used for simple signage such as the name or address of the business located in the subject building.
(8) Backlit awnings or canopies are prohibited.
(9) Metal awnings shall be prohibited.
(10) All canvas or fabric awnings shall be installed and maintained in a manner consistent with good maintenance of the structure. If awning coverings deteriorate and are not replaced within six weeks of notification for maintenance from the city, they shall be removed.
(Ord. 10-23, passed 2-14-2011)
§ 166.43 MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT
(A) Rooftop Equipment. Roof-mounted mechanical or utility equipment shall be screened from streets and adjacent residential properties. The method of screening should be architecturally integrated with the structure in terms of materials, color, shape and size. Equipment should be screened by solid building elements (e.g., parapet wall, cupola, chimneys or other elements), instead of after-the-fact, add-on screening such as wood or metal slats, whenever possible.
(B) Utility Housing.
(1) Utility housing shall be installed on the side or rear of structures whenever possible.
(2) All utility housings, junctions and other exterior duct work or conduits attached to a structure shall be painted or permanently colored to match the basic building material color on which they are located to reduce the impact of its appearance unless it can successfully be integrated with other trim or detailing in a manner that enhances the architectural style of the structure.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 166:
Main Street Core District Zoning Regulations
276
7722743.2
(Ord. 10-23, passed 2-14-2011)
SITE STANDARDS
§ 166.55 PURPOSE
Buildings shall be consistently placed to establish a street wall, sustain small front yards as a unique attribute
of the city and provide a pedestrian friendly walkable environment. The purpose of the following site
standards is to provide guidance for the lot dimensions, layout and placement of site features in a manner
that is consistent with this vision.
(Ord. 10-23, passed 2-14-2011)
§ 166.56 SETBACKS AND BUILD-TO LINES
(A) Setbacks and build-to lines are established to provide adequate access to various parts of individual
properties, to provide adequate space for ingress and egress, and to establish a consistent street wall
within the District.
TABLE II: SETBACKS AND BUILD-TO LINES
Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard
Building (15,000 sq. ft. or
less)
A build-to line shall be
established five ft. from and
parallel to the front yard lot
line
Minimum 0 ft. from side lot
line; or minimum 10 ft. from
residential zone
Minimum 5 ft. from rear lot
line; or minimum 10 ft. from a
single-family residential zone
Parking Prohibited in front yard Minimum 2 ft. from any side
lot line
Minimum 2 ft. from any rear
lot line
(B) The Planning Commission may waive setback requirements for partial modifications to existing
structures.
(Ord. 10-23, passed 2-14-2011)
§ 166.57 FRONTAGE
Figure 25: This image shows how utilities have been
painted to match the main building.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 166:
Main Street Core District Zoning Regulations
277
7722743.2
(A) Seventy percent of the frontage of all lots along Miami Avenue, Laurel Avenue or Camargo Road shall be occupied by a building facade or a decorative solid wall or opaque hedge a minimum of three feet in height set to the sidewalk or set-to-line.
(B) The city may allow up to 50% of a building’s front facade surface to be set back further than five feet to create facade articulation or provide a plaza or another useful outdoor pedestrian space along the frontage.
(Ord. 10-23, passed 2-14-2011)
§ 166.58 LARGE BUILDING EXCEPTION
Buildings with a footprint in excess of 15,000 square feet may be permitted in the District provided that the site and building meet the following criteria:
(A) The large building is located on a site in excess of one acre;
(B) The building’s footprint does not exceed 45,000 square feet;
(C) The building is appropriately articulated per the requirements of this chapter;
(D) Adequate parking for the building’s use can be accommodated in whole or in part in on-site structured parking, which is integrated into the development design per §§ 150.24 and 150.25;
(E) Off-street loading areas are provided for the building;
(F) The building and required parking are screened from the public right-of-way by smaller buildings that address the street and meet the maximum five-foot front yard setback;
(G) The loading, parking and trash dumpsters are adequately screened from adjacent residential uses; and
(H) The building meets all other building design standards as specified by this chapter.
(Ord. 10-23, passed 2-14-2011)
§ 166.59 CORNER LOTS AND SIGHT TRIANGLES
(A) Building setbacks on corner lots may be modified to meet County Engineer required visibility at street intersections.
(B) However, angled building corners, which present an entrance to both frontages, are the preferred approach to excessive setbacks for preserving intersection visibility within the Main Street Core District.
(C) In cases where the sidewalks are wide enough to allow for a clear sight triangle, no additional setbacks may be needed.
(Ord. 10-23, passed 2-14-2011)
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 166:
Main Street Core District Zoning Regulations
278
7722743.2
§ 166.60 PARKING
(A) Parking garages and surface parking lots shall be designed in a way to reduce the visual impact from
Miami Avenue, Laurel Avenue or Camargo Road and accommodate parking for local businesses.
(B) These standards shall also promote shared parking to reduce the necessary area needed to
accommodate parking in the District.
(1) Location.
(a) Parking lots shall be located to the side or rear of buildings. (See Figure 26.)
(b) No surface parking shall be permitted between the front of the building and the rightof-
way.
(c) Access drives and pavement for vehicular movement shall be prohibited between the
front of the building and the right-of-way.
(d) Parking structures may be located at the minimum front yard setback but shall
generally meet the architectural standards of this chapter.
(e) Setbacks as established in § 166.56.
(2) Shared Parking Provision. Shared parking is encouraged and permitted if the multiple uses
that the shared parking will benefit can cooperatively establish and operate the facilities. A
portion of the required parking spaces per §§ 150.24 and 150.25 may be located on an
adjacent or nearby property in the District if the parking area complies with the following
standards:
(a) Shared or off-site parking shall not be permitted on a vacant lot in a residential zoning
district unless permitted by the Planning Commission as part of site plan approval;
Figure 26: These diagrams show the preferred lot
configurations for drive, parking and buildings.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 166:
Main Street Core District Zoning Regulations
279
7722743.2
(b) Shared or off-site parking areas shall adhere to the regulations of the same or a more intensive zoning classification than that required for the use served;
(c) In the event that a shared or off-site parking area is not under the same ownership as the principal use served, a written parking agreement shall be required and put on file with the city;
(d) No shared or off-site parking space shall be located more than 600 feet from the primary entrance of the use served, measured along the shortest legal, practical walking route. This route may include crossing a right-of-way, provided it uses a legal crosswalk. This distance may be waived by the Planning Commission; and
(e) The applicant shall have the burden of proof for reduction of the total number of parking spaces and shall document and submit information substantiating their request. Shared or off-site parking may be approved if:
(i) A sufficient number of spaces is provided to meet the highest demand of the participating uses;
(ii) Evidence has been submitted by the parties operating the shared parking facility, to the satisfaction of the city, documenting the nature of uses and the times when the individual uses will operate to demonstrate the lack of potential conflict between them;
(iii) Shared or off-site parking shall not account for more than 75% of the required parking spaces as established in § 150.24;
(iv) The Planning Commission shall review and approve all shared or off-site parking facility plans and may place such conditions upon such plans as it deems necessary to ensure that adequate off-street parking spaces will be provided for all involved uses. Violations of these conditions may nullify the approved shared parking facilities plan and shall be deemed a violation of this chapter; and
(v) Any change in use of the activities served by a shared or off-site parking facility will be deemed an amendment to the shared or off-site parking facility plan and will require Planning Commission review and approval.
(f) Parking Standards.
(i) Minimum number of required parking spaces by use shall be as established in § 150.24.
(ii) Minimum size for a standard perpendicular parking stall shall be 162 square feet with a width of nine feet and a length of 18 feet.
(iii) Designated drive aisles shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 166:
Main Street Core District Zoning Regulations
280
7722743.2
(iv) All parking spaces shall be clearly marked with white pavement markings, and markings shall be maintained.
(Ord. 10-23, passed 2-14-2011)
§ 166.61 VEHICULAR ACCESS
(A) One vehicular access point not to exceed 24 feet in width shall be permitted on each lot of record regardless of total width.
(B) Twelve additional feet of width for vehicular access shall be permitted for each 40 feet of lot frontage in excess of 80 feet on Miami Avenue, Laurel Avenue or Camargo Road.
(C) No drive aisle or curb cut access point shall exceed 24 feet in width.
(D) No more than two access points (a maximum 24 feet in width) or curb cuts shall be permitted for any individual property.
(E) When possible, access to parking or loading areas is encouraged to be provided via an alley or Railroad Avenue because it can improve circulation and reduce the impact of curb cuts on pedestrian movement along public sidewalks.
(Ord. 10-23, passed 2-14-2011)
§ 166.62 LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING
(A) Landscaping should soften the appearance of the built environment, and assist in stormwater runoff by providing pervious surfaces.
(B) Landscaping and screening should be compatible with the character of the District and buffer residential uses from the more intense site activity on commercial properties.
(1) Side and rear yard screening when adjacent to residential use. When parking or loading areas are located adjacent to a residential district property line, an opaque fence or wall or fully opaque hedge of evergreens at least six feet in height and within two years of maturity shall be provided to block headlights from residential uses.
(2) Ground mounted equipment and service structures. All service structures shall be screened from public view and/or adjacent residential areas. For the purposes of this section, SERVICE STRUCTURES shall include but not be limited to loading docks, propane tanks, dumpsters and electrical transformers, utility vaults extending above grade and other equipment or elements providing service to a building or a site.
(a) Structures may be grouped together; however, screening height shall be based upon the tallest of the structures.
(b) A curb is required to protect and contain a trash dumpster or waste collection units.
(c) Screening options are a continuous planting, hedge, fence, wall or earthen mound.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 166:
Main Street Core District Zoning Regulations
281
7722743.2
(d) Screening must enclose any service structure on all sides unless such structure must be frequently moved or accessed, in which case screening on all but one side is required.
(e) Dumpsters shall be screened by a brick or stone wall with wooden doors for access.
(f) The Planning Commission may approve other types of screening materials on a case-by-case basis.
(3) Landscaping Materials and Maintenance. The proposed landscape materials should complement the existing trees on site or on adjacent sites if none exist on site, as well as the development’s general design and architecture. These regulations apply to all landscaping and landscaping materials installed as part of the requirements of these standards.
(a) Types. Plant types shall be approved by staff, the Architectural Review Officer or Planning Commission.
(b) Plants. Plant materials used in conformance with provision of this chapter shall conform to the standards of the American Association of Nurserymen and shall have passed any inspections required under state regulations. Artificial plants are prohibited. All plant materials shall be living and shall meet the following requirements.
(i) Deciduous Trees. Trees which normally shed their leaves in the fall shall have a minimum caliper of two inches, and five feet tall at installation, measured at finished grade, and be species of small, medium or large maturity size in areas where there is not a visibility concern.
a. In areas with visibility concerns, the trees shall be species of medium to large maturity size, which can eventually maintain five feet of branch free trunk with a minimum two inch caliper.
b. Trees of species with roots that are known to cause damage to public roadways or other public works shall not be planted closer than 15 feet to such public works, unless the tree root system is completely contained within a barrier for which the minimum interior containing dimensions shall be five feet square and five feet deep and for which the construction requirements shall be four inches thick, reinforced concrete.
c. Prohibited trees shall include any species prohibited on the city’s official planting species lists.
(ii) Evergreen Trees. Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of five feet high at the time of planting, measured from the top mass of the tree (not the tallest leader). In areas with visibility concerns, the trees shall eventually maintain six feet of branch free trunk.
(c) Maintenance and Installation.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 166:
Main Street Core District Zoning Regulations
282
7722743.2
(i) All landscaping materials shall be installed in a sound, workmanship-like manner and according to accepted, good construction and planting procedures. The owner of the property shall be responsible for the continued proper maintenance of all landscaping materials and shall keep them in a proper, neat and orderly appearance, free from refuse and debris and weeds at all times. All unhealthy or dead plant material shall be replaced within one year or by the next planting period, whichever comes first. Other defective landscape material shall be replaced or repaired within three months of notice from city.
(ii) No required plantings shall be removed by the property owner or agent of the owner unless the planting materials are found to be hazardous, unhealthy or dead by the city or its agents. If any healthy, mature or established plantings as required by this chapter are removed at the discretion of the owner or his or her agent they shall be replaced by the owner with a similar sized planting to those that were removed to maintain a consistent and mature appearance of plantings in that area.
(iii) Hardwood mulch is permitted, but no stone, sand or rubber is permitted.
(d) Preservation of existing landscape materials. Existing landscape material shall be shown on the required landscape plan. Any material in satisfactory condition may be used to satisfy these requirements in whole or in part when, in the opinion of the city’s approval authority, such materials meet the requirements and achieve the objectives of this chapter.
(4) Fencing and Walls. Fences and walls can be used in conjunction with plant material to provide visual breaks between properties, buffer various uses and enhance the character of a development. These standards apply to all fences and walls installed to meet the requirements of this chapter.
(a) Types.
(i) Fencing shall not interfere with sight visibility.
(ii) Privacy fencing or walls (100% opacity from grade to six feet) may be used as a screen between abutting commercial/industrial sites.
(iii) Decorative or privacy fencing may be used as a screen between commercial/ industrial sites and abutting residential sites.
(iv) Fences running parallel to a right-of-way in commercial areas shall be 40% or more transparent such as wrought iron or picket or post and rail type fencing or less than 40 inches in height.
(b) Permitted Materials.
(i) Walls shall be constructed of brick or stone (veneers are permitted) to match or coordinate with the building materials on the primary building.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 166:
Main Street Core District Zoning Regulations
283
7722743.2
(ii) Fencing shall be made from natural materials. Wood fences shall be natural or have a transparent color stain finish. The finished side of the fence shall face the adjacent property or residential area. Post and rail or other partially transparent fencing may be used in conjunction with vegetative landscaping to create definition to the site.
(iii) Landscaping within right-of-way. When landscaping within the city right-of-way is required for the owner/developer to achieve minimum streetscape requirements, an encroachment agreement between the city and landowner/developer shall be executed and recorded requiring the landowner/developer to maintain the landscaping and waiving any city liability.
(Ord. 10-23, passed 2-14-2011)
§ 166.63 LIGHTING
(A) Purpose.
(1) The purpose of the lighting standards is to coordinate and unify the overall lighting appearance of nonresidential developments with regard to aesthetic and technical aspects.
(2) Site lighting components should be visually interesting and serve not only to illuminate the parking and drive areas, but also to enhance the aesthetic appearance of the site.
(3) Fixtures shall be of a design complementary to the intent of the Main Street Core District standards.
(4) Photometrics must be submitted as part of the site plan requirements.
(B) Applicability.
(1) All developments with five or more parking spaces are required to provide exterior lighting for all exterior doorways, pedestrian pathways and vehicular use areas.
(2) All developments with less than five parking spaces shall provide exterior lighting at all exterior doorways.
(3) All light shall be focused and directed so as to not shine directly into adjacent properties.
(C) Illumination.
(1) (a) A minimum average illumination of 0.5 footcandles shall be maintained when measured at grade in all vehicular use areas and pedestrian pathways.
(b) Actual site measurement compliance shall not drop below this minimum.
(2) The illumination ratio (minimum to maximum) shall not exceed ten to one.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 166:
Main Street Core District Zoning Regulations
284
7722743.2
(3) A maximum illumination of zero footcandles shall be maintained at the property line of adjacent properties.
(D) Maximum Height. The height of the light pole installed on a property shall be determined by the size of the building as follows:
(1) Lighting fixtures for sites with buildings smaller than 15,000 square feet shall not exceed the height of the building or 15 feet, including the base, whichever is less; and
(2) Lighting fixtures for sites with buildings 15,000 square feet or larger shall not exceed the height of the building or 25 feet, including base, whichever is less.
(E) Fixture Types. The style of the adjacent development’s light fixtures and luminaries should be taken into consideration on all developments to promote consistency throughout the city.
(1) All pole mounted light fixtures shall be a traditional or historically compatible style using a post type or gooseneck style arm on decorative poles with a decorative base comparable to the fixtures used along Miami Avenue.
(2) Wall pack light fixtures should be compatible with the light pole fixtures and comply with the maximum spill over illumination requirements.
(3) Luminaries shall be either all high-pressure sodium or all metal halide. The design shall be refractive or opaque.
(4) No colored or flashing lights shall be used.
(5) All exterior lighting used to light vehicular areas and pedestrian pathways shall be decorative post with acorn or post and arm construction of cast aluminum, cast iron, or cast steel. If posts are to be directly mounted in parking areas without buffers, cast iron or steel poles shall be used for durability and safety.
(6) Lighted bollards may be used to illuminate pedestrian paths.
(7) Street lights required in the right-of-way to extend streetscape improvements, as part of new development or redevelopment, shall exactly match the post and luminaries (materials and color) in the existing Miami Avenue streetscape.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 166:
Main Street Core District Zoning Regulations
285
7722743.2
Figure 27: Acorn type pole mounted fixture preferred in
District
(F) Shielding.
(1) All outdoor lighting for nonresidential uses shall be located, screened or shielded so adjacent
lots located in residential districts are not directly illuminated.
(2) On lots abutting residentially used or zoned properties, perimeter fixtures must use full cutoff
fixtures, or house-side shielding may be required on the residential property side of the
lighting fixture. This provision applies to both pole and building mounted fixtures.
(Ord. 10-23, passed 2-14-2011)
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 167:
Residential-Scale Business Overlay District
Regulations
286
7722743.2
CHAPTER 167: RESIDENTIAL-SCALE BUSINESS OVERLAY DISTRICT REGULATIONS
General Provisions
167.01 District boundaries
167.02 Standard applicability
167.03 Purpose
167.04 Review procedures
167.05 Zoning permit required
167.06 Application process
167.07 Definitions
Uses
167.20 Purpose
167.21 Permitted/conditional uses
Architectural Standards
167.35 Purpose
167.36 Building scale and massing
167.37 Roof forms
167.38 Entries
167.39 Fenestration (windows and doors)
167.40 Exterior finish materials and colors
167.41 Awnings or fabric canopies
167.42 Mechanical equipment
Site Standards
167.55 Purpose
167.56 Minimum lot size
167.57 Setbacks
167.58 Parking
167.59 Vehicular access
167.60 Landscaping and buffering
167.61 Lighting
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 167.01 DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
The Residential-Scale Business Overlay District is shown on the official zoning map.
(Ord. 11-19, passed 11-28-2011)
§ 167.02 STANDARD APPLICABILITY
(Ord. 11-19, passed 11-28-2011)
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 167:
Residential-Scale Business Overlay District
Regulations
287
7722743.2
All properties in the Residential-Scale Business District (“the District”) in Figure 1 shall be subject to the
regulations of this chapter. Where the standards in this chapter are in conflict with other sections of the
code, the standards in this Chapter 167 shall apply. As an overlay district, the regulations stated in this
chapter shall apply to the properties in addition to the underlying zoning district. Where the standards are in
discrepancy, the more stringent shall apply.
(Ord. 11-19, passed 11-28-2011)
§ 167.03 PURPOSE
(A) The purpose of the Residential-Scale Business District Overlay standards are established in order to
impose a specific design review criteria for both rehabilitation and new construction projects in the
areas contained in the overlay district.
(B) Therefore the purpose of this chapter is to:
(1) Maintain a residential character for a portion of the city’s business district.
(2) Maintain a “small town” character in which a mix of businesses can thrive and be considered
a destination spot to residents of the city;
(3) Protect the character and quality of life for neighboring residential areas;
(4) Guide reuse and adaptation of residential structures and sites as used for business purposes;
(5) Create aesthetically cohesive development in the perimeter transition areas between the Main
Street Core District and adjacent residential districts; and
Figure 1: Residential-Scale Business Overlay District-Official
Zoning Map
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 167:
Residential-Scale Business Overlay District
Regulations
288
7722743.2
(6) Provide the basis for consistency and objective decision making by establishing criteria to be used by the City Manager or his or her designee, the Architectural Review Officer (ARO), and Planning Commission when evaluating proposed development.
(Ord. 11-19, passed 11-28-2011; Ord. 12-12, passed 5-14-2012)
§ 167.04 REVIEW PROCEDURES
The Residential-Scale Business Overlay District regulations are intended to provide guidance to property owners and city officials in the general aesthetic and functional improvement of the city’s Central Business District. These regulations are intended to guide community investment. The following review procedure is established to identify the extent to which a project must comply with the Residential-Scale Business Overlay District regulations.
(Ord. 11-19, passed 11-28-2011)
§ 167.05 ZONING PERMIT REQUIRED
A zoning permit shall be obtained before conducting any exterior work.
(Ord. 11-19, passed 11-28-2011)
§ 167.06 APPLICATION PROCESS
(A) Any modification, alteration or enhancement of a site or structure exterior within the District shall require a zoning permit.
(B) Projects identified by the City Manager or his or her designee as “essentially minor” shall be granted a zoning and building permit with administrative approval, whereas more extensive projects shall be subject to review and approval of the Planning Commission.
(1) Stage 1: Initial Application. The purpose of Stage 1 is for the City Manager or his or her designee to determine whether proposed construction (including renovation, repair, maintenance or other similar activities) shall be reviewed administratively as an “essentially minor” application or by Planning Commission. A pre-application meeting is recommended with the City Manager or his or her designee to determine the submission requirements. See division (B)(5) below.
(a) Review. The City Manager or his or her designee shall review the proposed construction and shall consult with the Architectural Review Officer (ARO) before he or she makes the decision whether the proposed construction is essentially minor.
(b) Essentially Minor Designation. Construction shall be deemed (designated) essentially minor if it, when completed, will have primarily preserved the use, function, form, scale and accessory uses that existed prior to the construction.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 167:
Residential-Scale Business Overlay District
Regulations
289
7722743.2
(c) Stage 1A: Determination of Modification Type. The following factors shall be weighed and considered in determining whether the construction is essentially minor.
(i) Will the proposed construction significantly alter the exterior appearance of the existing building or site design in one or more of the following ways?
a. Height;
b. Setbacks;
c. Footprint;
d. Entrance;
e. Fenestration;
f. Envelope (volume);
g. Exterior materials or colors; and
h. Landscaping or parking.
(ii) Will the construction essentially preserve the form and use of the existing building and site?
(iii) Is the estimated cost of the construction to the exterior of the building and site sufficient to justify that the modifications be compatible with the purpose (§ 167.03) of the Residential-Scale Business Overlay District regulations?
(d) Stage 1B: Determination Of Modification Magnitude.
(i) For the City Manager or his or her designee to determine that a project is essentially minor, management must find that:
a. The construction will not increase the dimensions of a building or structure by more than 10% of the square footage of the existing building or structure, exclusive of the alteration or expansion;
b. The project will not involve additional land other than the lot of record;
c. The cost of the exterior renovation of the structure does not exceed 25% of the assessed value of the building or structure to be altered, prior to the renovations; and
d. The alterations do not require dimensional variances from the regulations of this chapter.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 167:
Residential-Scale Business Overlay District
Regulations
290
7722743.2
(ii) If the City Manager or his or her designee determines that the construction is essentially minor, he or she shall so certify in writing. A file containing the certification, copies of the proposed construction and staff comments and recommendations shall be assembled and retained for not less than five years after completion of the proposed construction.
(iii) For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be presumed that any additional construction proposed within five years of an essentially minor certification will not qualify as essentially minor. The intent of this presumption is to prevent or discourage circumvention of ultimate design guidelines of this chapter through the cumulative effect of multiple minor improvements.
(e) Stage 1C: Administrative Review Application. Once a project has been certified essentially minor, the applicant may apply for a zoning and building permit without requesting approval of the Planning Commission. However, the application shall be reviewed for specific compliance with applicable sections of the Residential-Scale Business Overlay District regulations and deemed in compliance by the City Manager or his or her designee, prior to the issuance of a building permit.
(2) Stage 2: Planning Commission Review Application. In the event the City Manager or his or her designee does not find an application to be essentially minor or in conformance with the standards of Chapter 167, the City Manager or his or her designee shall make the determination that the application must be reviewed and approved by Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall review the application for appropriateness and equivalency to the intent and purpose of this chapter. The Planning Commission may approve an equivalency or modification of a requirement if they make a finding that the effect of the proposed submission is consistent with the intent and purpose of this chapter. The equivalency finding shall be part of the official record of approval and issuance of the certificate of appropriateness and the zoning permit.
(a) Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the Planning Commission must approve proposed construction or modification of buildings within the Residential-Scale Business Overlay District that has not been certified as essentially minor by the City Manager or his or her designee. Implicit in such an application is that an essentially minor certification has not been issued. Application to and review by the Planning Commission shall be evaluated in the same manner whether or not an essentially minor certification has been sought (and denied).
(b) As they are form based, the regulations for the Residential-Scale Business Overlay District include both dimensional aesthetic standards. Review for substantial or equivalent compliance with both types of standards shall be required for zoning approval and issuance of a building permit.
(3) Stage 3: Dimensional Review.
(a) Upon receipt of an application for proposed construction within the Residential-Scale Business Overlay District, the City Manager or his or her designee shall review and
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 167:
Residential-Scale Business Overlay District
Regulations
291
7722743.2
determine dimensional compliance with these standards. This shall include identification of any proposed reconstruction of existing buildings that are dimensionally nonconforming. Variances that are identified shall be set forth in a report to Planning Commission. The notice and process of review shall be the same as required for other dimensional variances.
(b) Planning Commission shall weigh and consider the “Duncan” factors for each dimensional variance identified.
(4) Stage 4: Design Review of Aesthetic Standards.
(a) The ARO shall review and make recommendations to the Planning Commission and evaluate the proposal for reasonable compliance with the overall aesthetic guidelines.
(b) The standard of compliance is intended to be “reasonable” rather than “strict” to allow for design review that is flexible for both the applicant and city to achieve a product that is appropriate for the district.
(c) The standard of compliance with the aesthetic guidelines should be the determination of Planning Commission stating that the proposed construction achieves a significant compatibility with the aesthetic guidelines set forth in the Residential-Scale Business Overlay District regulations.
(d) The Planning Commission should find that the proposed construction avoids a direct conflict with the overall images, impressions and net impact of buildings and accessory structures including parking, landscaping, and lighting described in the Residential-Scale Business Overlay District regulations.
(e) Planning Commission shall refrain from imposing additional aesthetic requirements if the proposed construction does substantially resemble the examples set forth in the Residential-Scale Business Overlay District regulations. Aesthetic guidelines are inherently subjective and, therefore, the Planning Commission shall endeavor to adhere to the guidelines as they are substantially expressed in these regulations.
(f) It is recognized that it is unlikely and unreasonable to require a building to comply with all examples in the regulations because the regulations anticipate variation in final appearances from building to building.
(g) The Planning Commission shall make findings that the application:
(i) Conforms in all pertinent respects to the requirements contained in this chapter;
(ii) Adequate provision is made for safe and efficient pedestrian and vehicular circulation within the site and to adjacent property;
(iii) The development has adequate public services and open spaces;
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 167:
Residential-Scale Business Overlay District
Regulations
292
7722743.2
(iv) The development provides adequate lighting for safe and convenient use of the streets, walkways, driveways and parking areas without unnecessarily spilling or emitting light into adjacent properties; and
(v) The landscape plan will enhance the principal building and site and maintain existing trees where appropriate; buffer adjacent incompatible uses; break up large expanses of pavement with plant material; and provide appropriate plant materials for the buildings, site and climate.
(h) The approval by Planning Commission shall not be construed to imply compliance with all other local, state and federal laws and regulations.
(i) In order to receive Planning Commission approval a majority of Planning Commission members must vote affirmatively that the proposed construction complies with aesthetic guidelines of the district.
(5) Submission Requirements. The following materials should be submitted with each application.
(a) Initial Application. Applicants shall provide the following information and materials:
(i) A conceptual site plan at a minimum scale of one inch equals 50 feet showing the size and location of all existing and proposed structures, indicating dimensions and square footage. The site plan shall also show the location of access and drive aisles, and the number of parking spaces;
(ii) Photographs or illustrations showing all four elevations of existing and proposed buildings;
(iii) An itemized cost estimate for the new construction or alterations; and
(iv) An external finish building materials and colors list, with samples or examples of external finishes.
(b) Final Application.
(i) All applications for Planning Commission or administrative review for zoning approval or building permits shall include:
a. A survey by a registered engineer;
b. A site plan depicting the exact dimensions of the site and all buildings, structures and parking areas;
c. A landscaping plan showing the location and type of all proposed landscape areas, plantings and screening/buffering;
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 167:
Residential-Scale Business Overlay District
Regulations
293
7722743.2
d. A signage plan showing the location, size and type of all signs, illustrations or elevations showing the proposed appearance of all signs;
e. A lighting plan showing the location, type, height and intensity and photometric of all lighting;
f. Building plans showing general dimensions, materials and uses;
g. Exterior building elevations showing the proposed appearance of the building, including a proposed materials and color list and all exterior utility housings, junctions and other exterior duct work or conduits attached to a structure; and
h. Any other information deemed necessary by the City Manager or his or her designee. Architectural Review Officer or Planning Commission to determine compliance with this chapter.
(ii) In the case of a project with an essentially minor certificate, the City Manager or his or her designee may waive any of the above submission requirements that he or she deems unnecessary for the comprehensive review of the proposed project.
(Ord. 11-19, passed 11-28-2011)
§ 167.07 DEFINITIONS
(A) Purpose. For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms are defined as follows. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future; words in the singular number include the plural; words in the plural include the singular; the word “structure” includes buildings; the word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely directive: the word “should” is directive; the word “may” is permissive; and the word “lot” includes plot, parcel or site.
(B) Definitions. Other words and terms shall have the following respective meanings.
ACCENT MATERIAL
Decorative material applied to the facade of a building to add visual interest.
ACCESSORY USE
A use of land, or building or portion thereof customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or building and located on the same lot with the principal use.
ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW OFFICER
The professional architect responsible for the review and approval of architectural elements of submitted permit applications, appointed by the City Manager and approved by City Council. (See Chapter 161.)
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 167:
Residential-Scale Business Overlay District
Regulations
294
7722743.2
ARTICULATION
To divide a building’s facade into distinct and significant parts.
AWNING
A non-load bearing roof-like cover of canvas, similar fabric or standing seam metal roof over a frame,
designed and intended for protection from the weather or as a decorative embellishment, which projects
from a wall or roof of a structure over a window, walk, or door, and is supported entirely by attachment to a
building wall.
BRICK APPLIQUE
An exterior cladding of traditional brick materials of less than one inch in thickness, applied to an
underlying structural support wall such as one of concrete masonry units using a mortar or float technique,
which results in the appearance of a traditional brick finish.
BRICK/BRICK VENEER
A single non-structural external layer of full-width brick, backed by an air space and an inner structural
frame.
BUILDING HEIGHT
The height of a building when measured from the finished grade at the center point of the front facade to the
average point between the eaves and peak or ridge of the roofline on pitched roof structures and finished
grade to the top of the exterior wall or parapet on flat roofed structures. (See Figure 2 below.)
CITY MANAGER
The official administrative professional responsible for the daily management of the City’s functions.
CITY MANAGER’S DESIGNEE
Any person employed by the City Manager to perform a task related to the review of permit applications to
the City. This may include an assistant to the City Manager, a Planner, Zoning Administrator, engineer,
architect or any other professional to assist the City Manager in the assessment of applications.
CORNICE
A dimensional detail consisting of trims, panels, brackets and corbels projecting at the uppermost or
crowning portion of a wall or facade. Also known as a crown molding. (See Figure 3.)
Figure 2: This illustration shows the appropriate way to
measure building height for both pitched and flat roofed
structures
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 167:
Residential-Scale Business Overlay District
Regulations
295
7722743.2
DIVIDED LIGHT WINDOWS
Windows which are traditional in appearance, comprised of several panes of glass separated by wooden or
lead glazing bars or a single pane of glass with decorative glazing bars.
ECLECTIC ARCHITECTURE
A building style or the style of a collection of buildings, which draws from a variety of recognized
architectural styles, periods or sources without being a true facsimile of any one specific genre. It may also
mean a district, which does not have one consistently applied architectural style, but exhibits a mix of styles.
EXTERIOR BUILDING MATERIALS
The exterior weatherproofing cladding or covering of a building, which is applied to an underlying structural
form. The EXTERIOR BUILDING MATERIALS may but do not necessarily provide structural support.
EXTERIOR BUILDING MATERIALS are visible and contribute to the design and character of the
facade and roof forms. (See also SIDING.)
FAÇADE
The exterior face or wall of a building. The FACADES may be referred to as either a primary or a
secondary facade. A PRIMARY FACADE is visible from an adjacent roadway and can be considered the
front of the structure. Buildings on a corner lot may have more than one primary facade. A SECONDARY
FACADE refers to a side or rear exterior wall, which is not visible from an adjacent roadway.
FENESTRATION
Window and other openings in a building’s facade.
GLAZING
Fitted or covered with glass.
PARAPET
A facade extension above the true or finished roof line of a building.
PEDIMENT
A triangular shaped gable or architectural element between a horizontal entablature and a sloping roof or
molding.
PILASTER
Figure 3: Cornice at the top line of a building facade
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 167:
Residential-Scale Business Overlay District
Regulations
296
7722743.2
A slightly-projecting column built into or applied to the face of a wall. Most commonly flattened or
rectangular in form, PILASTERS can also take a half-round form or the shape of any type of column,
including tortile. They occur very commonly in eighteenth and nineteenth century door surrounds.
PORCH
A permanent open structure covered with a roof and permanently affixed to the principal structure with
direct access to or from a building.
PVC (POLYVINYL CHLORIDE)
A vinyl polymer commonly used in pipes, signs, ceiling tiles and wires.
QUOINING
Dressed stones or bricks at the corners of buildings. Originally used to add strength to the masonry wall,
they are now used for more decorative purposes.
ROOF FORM
The shape of the roof, primarily determined by the pitch of the roof. Basic ROOF FORMS are flat, gabled,
hipped, arched and domed. (See Figure 4.)
SHARED ACCESS
(1) A single vehicular access point or driveway shared by two or more properties on adjoining lots.
(2) A SHARED ACCESS POINT may cross a side lot line. SHARED ACCESS POINTS require
access easements.
SHARED PARKING
(1) Joint utilization of a parking area or parking spaces for more than one use.
(2) SHARED PARKING involves parking spaces that are used at different times by different users.
Figure 4: This illustration shows various roof forms
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 167:
Residential-Scale Business Overlay District
Regulations
297
7722743.2
(3) A special agreement is required to ensure access of businesses to off-site parking.
SIDING
An exterior cladding or covering applied to the structural elements of a building to provide weatherproofing, durability and design elements. (See also EXTERIOR BUILDING MATERIALS.)
SIGHT TRIANGLE
A triangular-shaped proportion of land established at street intersections in which nothing is erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to limit or obstruct the sight distance of motorists entering or leaving the intersection.
STOOP OR LANDING
An elevated, open structure that is located at the head of a foot of a staircase, or a platform in a flight of stairs between two stories, constructed of concrete or masonry and abutting the principle structure.
TRIM
Linear elements applied to or structurally integrated into the facade of a building, which delineates, adds emphasis to an architectural element, or covers a transition or joining of materials to present a more finished appearance.
WATER TABLE
(1) A horizontal projecting string course, molding or ledge placed so as to divert rainwater from a building’s foundation.
(2) In traditional buildings, this element is often placed at or directly above the sill between the foundation and the base of the structural wall.
(Ord. 11-19, passed 11-28-2011)
USES
§ 167.20 PURPOSE
(A) The primary purpose of this overlay district is to provide a residential-scale environment for business uses at the perimeter of the city’s Central Business District to transition from the Main Street Core to the adjacent residential areas.
(B) The permitted and conditional uses will be controlled by the underlying zone as stated in § 150.14, Business “A” District Uses, and § 150.15, Business “B” District Uses.
(Ord. 11-19, passed 11-28-2011)
§ 167.21 PERMITTED/CONDITIONAL USES
(A) Business “A” District Uses.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 167:
Residential-Scale Business Overlay District
Regulations
298
7722743.2
(1) Permitted Uses.
(a) Offices for professional use such as accountants, attorneys, counseling, consulting, doctors, architects, dentists, engineers, opticians, real estate, insurance and manufacturers’ representatives;
(b) Commercial uses such as retail, restaurants, bars, banks, media studios, and dry cleaners (where dry cleaning is not done on-site) and bakeries employing less than six bakers;
(c) Libraries, museums, theaters; and
(d) Daycares, preschools, nursery schools and childcare businesses.
(2) Conditional use. Outdoor dining pursuant to § 150.16.
(B) Business “B” District Uses.
(1) Permitted Uses.
(a) All uses permitted in the Business “A” Zoning District;
(b) Products retailed and sold on the premises may be manufactured, finished or assembled on the premises provided that such products are of the type sold primarily to the general or consumer public at retail and in relatively small quantities for sale;
(c) Facilities for boarding only small animals that are not closer than 200 feet to any residence or business district; and
(d) No use that is obnoxious or offensive by reason of the emission of odor, dust, smoke, gas, fumes, water-carried waste, noise or vibration in connection therewith.
(2) Conditional Use. Outdoor dining pursuant to § 150.16.
(Ord. 11-19, passed 11-28-2011; Ord. 12-12, passed 5-14-2012)
ARCHITECTURAL STANDARDS
§ 167.35 PURPOSE
To promote the maintenance, repair and infill of buildings designed and constructed to support and enhance the eclectic residential character traditionally associated with the City Residential-Scale Business Overlay, through building scale and mass, entries, fenestration, exterior materials and architectural details.
(Ord. 11-19, passed 11-28-2011)
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 167:
Residential-Scale Business Overlay District
Regulations
299
7722743.2
§ 167.36 BUILDING SCALE AND MASSING
(A) Purpose. To promote the design and construction of buildings that support the transition from the
most intense development in the Central Business District to the adjacent residential areas. These
standards will support this purpose through building scale and mass, entries roof forms, and
articulation, materials and architectural details which are compatible with a residential-scale and
character. Additionally, these regulations will help guide development and redevelopment when
adjacent to residential areas.
(B) Size and Scale. Buildings in this area should be no larger than 5,000 square feet in size. Buildings
in this area shall have a consistent residential scale and theme that should be carried throughout the
design of the building.
(C) Building Height. Buildings shall not be taller than 45 feet in height. See definitions for method of
measuring building height in § 167.07. Mid-point of gable not to exceed 35 feet.
(D) Horizontal Articulation.
(1) Most of the existing residential structures are less than 35 feet in width and located on smaller
narrow lots. The buildings are oriented with the narrow facade parallel to the street. This
pattern shall be maintained.
(2) When the facade paralleling the street is wider than 30 feet, the facade should be horizontally
broken up with recess or setback variations, architectural detailing, variation in roof height,
application of compatible building materials or application of a porch or dormers.
Figure 5: Example of a larger building along Laurel Avenue with
appropriate articulation. A regular fenestration pattern which reflects the
patterns evident in the existing residential structures can also add horizontal
articulation to a building
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 167:
Residential-Scale Business Overlay District
Regulations
300
7722743.2
(E) Vertical Articulation.
(1) Changes in vertical mass shall be used in an architecturally appropriate way to add interest
and reduce the appearance of building height and bulk.
(2) Buildings shall have a clearly defined base or foundation, and roof edges so that the facade
has a distinct base, middle and top at a scale that relates to the individual person and
maintains the residential character of the district. The use of a combination of the following
architectural elements is encouraged to produce vertical articulation.
(a) The base of a building should include a strong foundation material, entry areas,
stoops, porches and stairs or ramps.
(b) The middle of a building’s facade should include windows, doors, primary building
material, pillars, columns, alcoves, balconies and window boxes, awnings.
(c) The top of a building’s facade should include cornice lines, trim, soldier courses,
overhanging eaves, gables, cupolas, dormers, brackets, corbels, fenestration and other
roof line and gable appropriate elements.
(Ord. 11-19, passed 11-28-2011)
Figure 6: This newer structure incorporates the regular window placement
pattern of a traditional colonial style architecture. This regular pattern is
consistent with the residential character of this area.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 167:
Residential-Scale Business Overlay District
Regulations
301
7722743.2
§ 167.37 ROOF FORMS
(A) Pitched roof forms promote the residential character desired and shall be the preferred roof form for new buildings or portions thereof.
(B) Appropriate pitched roof forms for structures in this district include:
(1) Gables (front or side);
(2) Gabled with gabled or shed dormers;
(3) Compound gabled or double gabled;
(4) Hipped; or
(5) Combinations of any of these forms.
(C) Gambrel, mansard and flat roofs shall be prohibited.
(D) Full shed roofs on the primary structure are prohibited; however, a shed roof may be used in limited application for dormers, portions of roofs or rear portions of roofs. Shed roof forms may also be employed on accessory buildings under 500 square feet.
(Ord. 11-19, passed 11-28-2011)
§ 167.38 ENTRIES
(A) Residential Character. The residential character of the building in this district is supported by the reuse and adaption of residential buildings to accommodate business uses. Much of the residential character is found in the front facades and entries of the buildings.
(B) Standards. The following standards are intended to maintain a residential character to the entrances and front facades.
(1) Front or primary facades of buildings shall be designed to have a residential appearance.
(2) Entrances in existing residential structures converted to business uses should not be altered, enclosed or moved to maintain a residential appearance from the street.
(3) Existing front facades, doors and their surrounds should be repaired and retained, if possible. If an old door or entrance feature has deteriorated beyond repair, the replacement should be substantially similar to the original.
(4) The front entrance normally is the focal point of the facade, and should be emphasized through the use or maintenance of covered stoops or porches.
(5) For business uses, side or secondary entrances may be indicated as the primary customer entrance through signage, architectural treatment, lighting and proximity to parking.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 167:
Residential-Scale Business Overlay District
Regulations
302
7722743.2
(6) Use of fully glazed, metal framed doors as entrances is prohibited.
(C) Infill/New Buildings. New buildings constructed in the District should consider the traditional components of residential architecture in the design of the front facade and entrances.
(D) Conversion. When converting a residential structure to a business use the appearance of existing residential facade and entries shall be maintained on the primary facade. Entries on the side or rear of the structure may be established as the primary entrance from the parking lot.
(Ord. 11-19, passed 11-28-2011)
§ 167.39 FENESTRATION (WINDOWS AND DOORS)
(A) The placement, size and type of windows help define a building’s facade and character.
(B) With the purpose to maintain a residential character the following standards should apply.
(1) Scale and Proportion.
(a) Windows shall not be installed to run from finished floor on the front facade. An 18 inch kneewall constructed of brick, stone, wood or fiber cement siding shall stand between the sill of the window and finished floor.
(b) Windows should be proportional to the overall facade of the building. A window’s proportions should generally be vertical with the height being approximately two times the width of the window; however, bay windows or picture windows may be larger and have more of a horizontal proportion to create variation.
(c) Divided-light windows are preferred.
(d) The scale and design of the window shall support and be compatible with the architectural style of the structure.
(e) Horizontally proportioned windows are encouraged to be divided into vertically proportioned components either through multi-part windows or other divided lights.
(2) Patterns And Rhythms. Generally, window openings or groups of windows within a row of windows should be equidistant from one to another to create a regular pattern.
(a) Windows may be installed in any pattern depending on the architectural layout of the facade.
(b) Upper story windows should reinforce or support the window pattern on the first floor. When two full rows of windows are used on a facade the hypothetical rectangle that encompasses all first story windows and doors must be the same width as that of a rectangle that encompasses all second story windows.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 167:
Residential-Scale Business Overlay District
Regulations
303
7722743.2
(c) All windows within a row shall be aligned at a consistent top line. Variation may be employed for bay windows or other variations that add a focal point to the facade.
(3) Glazing.
(a) Windows and glazing shall not exceed 35% of the total area of the facade. Fully glazed or glass facades shall be prohibited on front facades of buildings.
(b) Fully opaque glazing or mirrored glazing is prohibited on front facades.
(c) Stained, frosted or textured glass may be used in front facades for decoration or privacy.
(Ord. 11-19, passed 11-28-2011)
§ 167.40 EXTERIOR FINISH MATERIALS AND COLORS
(A) Purpose. Exterior finish materials and colors set the character of an individual building and when applied throughout a district can lend cohesiveness and a specific feel to the area. These standards are intended to achieve unity of design through compatible materials and colors. The purpose of the following standards is to promote high quality, sustainable materials that will contribute to a consistent character while allowing for variation. Buildings shall be finished with high-quality, low maintenance, durable, sustainable and attractive natural or manufactured materials. Material requirements may vary on the primary facades or facades parallel to public right-of-ways and the secondary or screened facades.
(B) Materials.
(1) Purpose. Material requirements may vary from the primary or visible facades to the secondary or screened facades. Other new materials meeting the purpose of these standards may be approved by the Planning Commission or Architectural Review Officer on a case-by-case basis as a primary or accent building material. Permitted and prohibited materials for the primary and secondary facade are listed in Table I.
(2) Permitted Primary Materials.
(a) The primary material must make up at least 50% of the exterior covering on the primary facades of a building.
(b) The total area covered by permitted primary materials shall be calculated from the area of the visible plane measuring the area from grade to upper building limits, exclusive of the area occupied by visible roof surfaces.
(3) Accents and Detailing.
(a) Accent materials and colors shall be applied as appropriate to the facade surface.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 167:
Residential-Scale Business Overlay District
Regulations
304
7722743.2
(b) Detailing, trim, windows, doors and glazing may constitute the remaining area of the facade not occupied by the primary or accent material.
(c) All accents and details shall be permitted and prohibited as defined in Table I.
TABLE I: PERMITTED AND PROHIBITED MATERIALS Materials Primary Façade Secondary Facade
Aluminum siding
X
X
Asphalt or fiberglass shingles
R
R
Brick applique
X
X
Brick/brick veneers
P, A, T
P, A, T
Cast or wrought metal
A, T
A, T
Cast stone
P, A, T
P, A, T
Concrete Masonry Unit
X
X
Cut or rusticated stone
P, A, T
P, A, T
EIFS
X
X
Fiber cement (clapboard, shingles, scallops, trims, stones or bricks)
P, A, T
P, A, T
Glazed brick or glass tiles
A, T
A, T
Metal trims or flashings (aluminum, steel, copper, brass, iron)
A, T
A, T
Natural stone
P, A, T
P, A, T
PVC (poly vinyl carbonate)
A, T
A, T
Reflective materials (mirrored glass, chrome)
X
X
Slate (real or faux)
R
R
Standing seam metal (aluminum, copper steel)
R
R
Stucco (traditionally applied)
P, A
P, A
Terra-cotta
A, T, R
A, T, R
Vinyl siding
X
X
Wood (clapboard, shingles, scallops, trims)
P, A, T
P, A, T
Notes:
P = Permitted material
A = Accent material
T = Trim material
R = Visible roofing
X = Prohibited
(4) Conditional or new materials. Modern manufactured materials that create the appearance of permitted materials such as fiber cement products, architectural panels or cast stone may be considered appropriate. Other materials not listed as prohibited may be considered by the Planning Commission on a case-by-case basis as a primary or accent building material.
(5) Prohibited materials. Exterior covering materials that are prohibited include vinyl, aluminum or steel siding, corrugated steel and highly reflective materials such as mirrored glass or chrome, or fully glazed facades.
(C) Colors.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 167:
Residential-Scale Business Overlay District
Regulations
305
7722743.2
(1) Permitted. The preferred base colors used on new or rehabilitated buildings should be the natural color of the material in the case of brick or stone. In the case of painted or other synthetic materials of a neutral muted palette, deep saturated hues or muted pastels and whites should be used. Brighter more vivid colors should be reserved for accents.
(2) Prohibited. No fluorescent, neon, day-glow or reflective colors shall be used.
(D) Combinations of Materials And Colors. Each building facade shall be limited to one primary material. Accent materials; additional materials may be used for trims based on the material most appropriate for the trim’s location and purpose. When surfaces are painted, colored or otherwise do not correspond to the material, each building facade shall be limited to a combination of no more than four coordinated or complementary color schemes.
(E) Transitions of Materials.
(1) Transition from one material to another on the same facade shall be completed either with appropriate trim or as an accent with variations such as quoining or reveals based on material thickness.
(2) Transition in materials from one facade to another shall be made at an inside corner or extended a minimum of five feet onto the secondary facade.
(F) Siding Repairs or Replacement.
(1) Repairs or replacement to exterior building materials or siding should be completed with comparable materials to those being replaced. Replacement materials shall follow the permitted material and color standards.
(2) The following standards shall apply when considering siding replacement on an existing structure.
(a) New or replacement siding shall not be applied over damaged or rotten materials. All deteriorated materials must first be repaired or replaced with similar materials.
(b) New or replacement siding shall match the existing materials in size, profile, scale, finish and articulation.
(3) New siding shall not cause irreversible damage or obscure the architectural features, trim or detail of the building.
(Ord. 11-19, passed 11-28-2011)
§ 167.41 AWNINGS OR FABRIC CANOPIES
Awnings or fabric canopies are prohibited. All overhangs should be constructed of durable roofing materials with adequate architectural supports.
(Ord. 11-19, passed 11-28-2011)
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 167:
Residential-Scale Business Overlay District
Regulations
306
7722743.2
§ 167.42 MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT
(A) Rooftop Equipment. Rooftop equipment is prohibited subject to applicable Federal Communications Commission (FCC) regulations.
(B) Ground Mounted Equipment and Service Structures.
(1) All service structures shall be screened from public view or adjacent residential areas. For the purposes of this section, services structures shall include but not be limited to propane tanks, dumpsters. HVAC equipment, electrical transformers, utility vaults extending above grade and other equipment or elements providing service to a building or a site. Structures may be grouped together; however, screening height shall be based upon the tallest of the structures.
(2) Screening shall consist of the following:
(a) A continuous planting, hedge, fence, wall or earthen mound shall be built to enclose any service structure on all sides unless such structure must be frequently moved or accessed, in which case screening on all but one side is required;
(b) Dumpsters shall be screened by a wood, brick or stone wall and have wood doors; and
(c) The ARO may recommend and the Planning Commission may approve other types of screening materials on a case-by-case basis.
(3) Utility Housing.
(a) Utility housings shall be installed on the side or rear of structures whenever possible.
(b) All utility housings, junctions and other exterior duct work or conduits attached to a structure shall be painted or permanently colored to match the basic building material color on which it is located to reduce the impact of its appearance unless it can successfully be integrated with other trim or detailing in a manner that enhances the architectural style of the structure.
(Ord. 11-19, passed 11-28-2011)
SITE STANDARDS
§ 167.55 PURPOSE
This District should serve as a transition from the more intense land uses of the Main Street Core District to the less intense land uses of the surrounding residential neighborhoods. Although more buildings are used for business purposes than for residential purposes, the residential character of the District should be maintained and a pedestrian friendly walkable environment should be encouraged. The following site standards will provide guidance for the lot dimensions, layout and placement of site features in a manner consistent with this purpose.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 167:
Residential-Scale Business Overlay District
Regulations
307
7722743.2
(Ord. 11-19, passed 11-28-2011)
§ 167.56 MINIMUM LOT SIZE
The minimum lot size shall be regulated by the underlying zoning district regulations.
(Ord. 11-19, passed 11-28-2011)
§ 167.57 SETBACKS
(A) Purpose. Most of the existing structures are setback from the sidewalk and street at least ten feet with most being set considerably further back allowing for medium to large front yards which emphasizes the history of this area as a residential area. As the intent is to maintain an urban form compatible with residential development while allowing for business uses the purpose of the setbacks is to maintain front yards, and clear separations between buildings.
(B) Setbacks. Setbacks are established to provide adequate access to various parts of individual properties, to provide adequate space for ingress and egress, and to maintain a residential character within the District.
TABLE II: SETBACKS Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard
Building
Minimum of 5 ft. from sidewalk edge
5 ft. from any side lot line
5 ft. from rear lot line 10 ft. from a single-family residential zone
Parking
Minimum 5 ft. from sidewalk
5 ft. from any side lot line
5 ft. from any rear lot line
(Ord. 11-19, passed 11-28-2011)
§ 167.58 PARKING
(A) Purpose. Parking for business on adapted residential lots can be a challenge. Surface parking shall be designed in a way to reduce its visual impact, improve accessibility and accommodate parking for local businesses without excessive impact on adjacent residential areas.
(B) Location.
(1) Parking should be located to the side or rear of buildings when it can be effectively screened from adjacent residential uses through the use of walls, fences and/or landscaping.
(2) If a site is too narrow or shallow to effectively provide parking to the side of the building, the required parking spaces can be provided between the street and the building, but the visual impact shall be softened through the use of landscaping. See Table III for buffer yard type.
(C) Parking Standards.
(1) Minimum number of required parking spaces by use shall be as established in § 150.24.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 167:
Residential-Scale Business Overlay District
Regulations
308
7722743.2
(2) Minimum size for a standard perpendicular parking stall shall be 162 square feet with a width of nine feet and a length of 18 feet.
(3) Designated drive aisles shall be 12 feet in width for one-way directional traffic and a minimum of 24 feet for two-way directional traffic.
(4) All parking spaces shall be clearly marked with white pavement markings and markings shall be maintained.
(5) All paved parking areas shall be bordered by a minimum of a four inch curb, or wheel stops.
(D) Shared Parking Provision. Shared parking is encouraged and permitted if the multiple uses that the shared parking will benefit can cooperatively establish and operate the facilities. A portion of the required parking spaces per §§ 150.24 and 150.25 may be located on an adjacent or nearby property in the district if the parking area complies with the following standards.
(1) Required parking spaces reserved for persons with disabilities shall not be located in an off-site parking facility.
(2) Public, shared or off-site parking shall not be permitted on a vacant lot in a residential zoning district unless permitted by the Planning Commission as part of site plan approval.
(3) Shared or off-site parking areas shall adhere to the regulations of the same or a more intensive zoning classification than that required for the use served.
(4) In the event that a shared or off-site parking area is not under the same ownership as the principal use served, a written parking agreement shall be submitted to the city in a recordable format and recorded with the county within 30 days of approval.
(5) No shared or off-site parking space shall be located more than 600 feet from the primary entrance of the use served, measured along the shortest legal, practical walking route. This route may include crossing a right-of way provided it uses a legal crosswalk. This distance may be waived by the Planning Commission.
(6) The applicant shall have the burden of proof for reduction of the total number of parking spaces and shall document and submit information substantiating their request. Shared or off-site parking may be approved if:
(a) A sufficient number of spaces is provided to meet the highest demand of the participating uses;
(b) Evidence has been submitted by the parties operating the shared parking facility, to the satisfaction of the City Manager or his or her designee and development, documenting the nature of uses and the times when the individual uses will operate so as to demonstrate the lack of potential conflict between them;
(c) Shared or off-site parking shall not account for more than 75% of the required parking spaces as established in § 150.24;
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 167:
Residential-Scale Business Overlay District
Regulations
309
7722743.2
(d) The Planning Commission shall review and approve all shared or off-site parking facility plans, and may place such conditions upon such plans as it deems necessary to ensure that adequate off-street parking spaces will be provided for all involved uses. Any violations of these conditions will nullify the approved shared parking facilities plan and shall be deemed a violation of this chapter; and
(e) Any change in use of the activities served by a shared or off-site parking facility will be deemed an amendment to the shared or off-site parking facility plan and will require Planning Commission review and approval.
(Ord. 11-19, passed 11-28-2011) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 167.59 VEHICULAR ACCESS
(A) Twelve feet of width for vehicular access shall be permitted for each 40 feet of lot frontage on Laurel Avenue or Camargo Roads.
(B) One vehicular access point shall be permitted on each lot of record regardless of total width.
(C) No drive aisle or curb cut access point shall exceed 24 feet in width plus appropriate flairs. The frontage of a lot shall not be entirely paved and shall employ raised curbs to prevent vehicles from turning in at various points.
(D) No more than two access points or curb cuts shall be permitted for any individual property.
(E) When possible, access to parking or loading areas is encouraged to be provided via Railroad Avenue. Access from the alley-like Railroad Avenue can improve circulation and reduce the impact of curb cuts on pedestrian movement along public sidewalks on Laurel Avenue.
(Ord. 11-19, passed 11-28-2011)
§ 167.60 LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERING
(A) Purpose. Landscaping and buffering soften the appearance of urban environments, allow for pervious surfaces in a densely developed area, assist in stormwater runoff and reduce temperatures through microclimates. The purpose of these standards is to promote landscaping and buffering that is compatible with the character of the district and buffers residential uses from the more intense site activity on commercial properties.
(B) Streetscaping. A minimum of a six-foot wide sidewalk area shall be provided between the curb and the private property line. When possible this area should include a two-foot wide planting strip, and a four-foot wide paved sidewalk. In locations where this does not already exist, it should be installed.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 167:
Residential-Scale Business Overlay District
Regulations
310
7722743.2
(C) Front yard.
(1) All unpaved areas between the building and the front property line shall be stabilized and maintained with lawn, vegetative groundcover or planting beds.
(2) The use of hardy ornamental grasses, perennials, shrubs and trees is encouraged.
(3) Fences and walls, including retaining or other walls, constructed in front yards shall be no more than three feet in height.
(D) Side and Rear Yard Buffering When Adjacent to Residential Use.
(1) Requirements. Landscaping, buffering and screening shall be provided in side and rear yards in accordance with the following chart and buffer yard types.
TABLE III: BUFFER YARD REQUIREMENTS When the site condition to be buffered is: When the adjacent use is: Residential Rear Yard Residential Side Yard Business no parking, utilities or service entrance Business parking, utilities or service entrances Public Right-of-Way / Sidewalk or Road
Front yard parking
D
D
D
D
D
Rear yard no parking, utilities or service entrances
B or C
B or C
B
None
None
Rear yard parking, utilities or service entrances
A
A
None
None
B
Side yard no parking
B, C
B, C
None
None
None
Side yard parking utilities or service entrances
A
A
B or C
B or C
B or D
(2) Types. See Table III for buffer yard requirements.
(a) Buffer A (maximum screening).
(i) A buffer yard less than five feet in width.
(ii) A fully opaque structural element from grade to six feet in height. The opaque screening element may be a wooden privacy fence, brick or stone wall.
(b) Buffer B (moderate screening).
(i) A buffer yard a minimum of five feet in width.
(ii) A 70% opaque element between grade and four feet. The screening element may be a wooden fence, or brick or stone wall, earthen berm or evergreen shrubs.
(iii) Shade or ornamental trees spaced 20 feet on center.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 167:
Residential-Scale Business Overlay District
Regulations
311
7722743.2
(c) Buffer C (moderate buffer).
(i) A buffer yard a minimum of five feet in width.
(ii) A 30% opaque elements between grade and four feet. Element may include ornamental trees, evergreens, shrubs, ornamental perennials or grasses, picket or split rail fences, wrought iron fences or combination knee walls and decorative metal work.
(iii) Shade or ornamental deciduous trees planted in groupings no more than 20 feet on center.
(d) Buffer D (ROW parking screening).
(i) A buffer yard a minimum of five feet in width.
(ii) A 100% opaque element between grade and three feet. The element may include any combination of a dense evergreen shrub, a decorative wall, permanently installed planting boxes or a wooden fence or brick or stone wall.
(E) Landscaping Materials and Maintenance. The proposed landscape materials should complement the existing trees on site or on adjacent sites if none exist on site, as well as the development’s general design and architecture. These regulations apply to all landscaping and landscaping materials installed as part of the requirements of these standards.
(1) Types. Plant types shall be reviewed by the ARO and approved by Planning Commission.
(2) Plants. Plant materials used in conformance with provision of this chapter shall conform to the current standards of the American Association of Nurserymen and shall have passed any inspections required under state regulations. Artificial plants are prohibited. All plant materials shall be living and shall meet the following requirements.
(a) Deciduous Trees.
(i) Trees which normally shed their leaves in the fall shall have a minimum caliper of two inches, and five feet tall at installation, measured at finished grade, and be species of small, medium or large maturity size in areas where there is not a visibility concern.
(ii) In areas with visibility concerns, the trees shall be species of medium to large maturity size, which can eventually maintain five feet of branch free trunk with a minimum two inch caliper.
(iii) Trees of species with roots that are known to cause damage to public roadways or other public works shall not be planted closer than 15 feet to such public works.
(iv) Prohibited trees shall include any species prohibited by the city.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 167:
Residential-Scale Business Overlay District
Regulations
312
7722743.2
(b) Evergreen Trees. Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of five feet high at the time of planting, measured from the top mass of the tree (not the tallest leader).
(3) Maintenance and Installation.
(a) All landscaping materials shall be installed in a sound, workmanship-like manner and according to accepted, good construction and planting procedures. The owner of the property shall be responsible for the continued proper maintenance of all landscaping materials and shall keep them in a proper, neat and orderly appearance, free from refuse and debris and weeds at all times. All unhealthy or dead plant material shall be replaced within one year or by the next planting period, whichever comes first. Other defective landscape material shall be replaced or repaired within three months of notice from city.
(b) No required plantings shall be removed by the property owner or agent of the owner unless the planting materials are found to be hazardous, unhealthy or dead by the city or its agents. If any healthy, mature or established plantings as required by this chapter are removed at the discretion of the owner or his or her agent they shall be replaced by the owner with a similar sized planting to those that were removed to maintain a consistent and mature appearance of plantings in that area.
(c) Hardwood mulch is permitted, but no stone, sand or rubber is permitted.
(4) Preservation of Existing Landscape Materials. Existing landscape material to remain shall be shown on the required landscape plan. Any material in satisfactory condition may be used to satisfy these requirements in whole or in part when, in the opinion of the city’s approval authority, such materials meet the requirements and achieve the objectives of this chapter.
(F) Fencing And Walls.
(1) Fences and walls can be used in conjunction with plant material to provide visual breaks between properties, buffer various uses and enhance the character of a development.
(2) These standards apply to all fences and walls installed to meet the requirements of this chapter.
(a) Types.
(i) Fencing shall not interfere with sight visibility for vehicles and pedestrians.
(ii) Privacy fencing or walls (100% opacity from grade to six feet) may be used as a screen between abutting commercial/industrial sites.
(iii) Decorative or privacy fencing may be used as a screen between commercial/ industrial sites and abutting residential sites.
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 167:
Residential-Scale Business Overlay District
Regulations
313
7722743.2
(iv) Fences running parallel to a right-of-way in commercial areas shall be 40% or more transparent such as wrought iron or picket or post and rail type fencing or less than 40 inches in height.
(b) Permitted Materials.
(i) Walls shall be constructed of brick, stone or segmented modular block wall systems to match or coordinate with the building materials on the primary building.
(ii) Fencing shall be made from natural materials. Wood fences shall be natural or have a transparent color stain finish. The finished side of the fence shall face the adjacent property or residential area. Post and rail or other partially transparent fencing may be used in conjunction with vegetative landscaping to create definition to the site. Poly vinyl chloride (PVC) and plastic fencing material must be approved by the ARO.
(Ord. 11-19, passed 11-28-2011)
§ 167.61 LIGHTING
(A) Purpose. The purpose of the lighting standards is to coordinate and unify the overall lighting appearance of nonresidential developments with regard to aesthetic and technical aspects. Site lighting components should be visually interesting and serve not only to illuminate the parking and drive areas, but also to enhance the aesthetic appearance of the site. Fixtures shall be of a design complimentary to the intent of the Main Street Core standards. (See Chapter 166.)
(B) Applicability. All developments with ten or more parking spaces are required to provide exterior lighting for all exterior doorways, pedestrian pathways and vehicular use areas. All developments with less than ten parking spaces shall provide exterior lighting at all exterior doorways. Photometrics shall be submitted for all exterior lighting.
(C) Illumination.
(1) A minimum illumination of 0.5 footcandles shall be maintained when measured at grade in all vehicular use areas and pedestrian pathways. Actual site measurement compliance shall not drop below this minimum.
(2) The footcandle intensity in vehicular use areas should be between 2.0 and 2.5 footcandles with an average-to-minimum light intensity ratio of not more than six to one and a maximum-to- minimum light intensity ratio of not more than 20 to one.
(3) An illumination of zero footcandles shall be maintained at the property line of adjacent residential properties.
(D) Maximum Height. Pole mounted lighting fixtures shall not exceed 20 feet above grade measured at the base of the pole/fixture (including any pole base) to the top of the pole/fixture. Building mounted
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 167:
Residential-Scale Business Overlay District
Regulations
314
7722743.2
fixtures shall not be more than 20 feet above average grade as measured vertically on the facade
directly below the fixture location.
(E) Fixture Types.
(1) All mounted fixtures should be full cut-off style and the use of wall packs should be
minimized.
(2) Light fixtures and poles should be compatible with the architecture and scale of the building.
The lighting style of adjacent may be considered by the city on a case-by-case basis.
(3) Luminaries shall be either all high-pressure sodium or all metal halide. The design shall be
refractive or opaque.
(4) No colored or flashing lights shall be used to illuminate the exterior of buildings.
(5) Lighted bollards may be used to illuminate pedestrian paths.
(6) Street lights required in the right-of-way to extend streetscape improvements, as part of new
development or redevelopment, shall exactly match the post and luminaries (materials and
color) in the existing Miami Avenue streetscape. (Refer to Figure 7.)
(7) Neon lighting is prohibited.
(Ord. 11-19, passed 11-28-2011)
Figure 7: Acorn type pole mounted fixture preferred in District
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 168:
Board of Zoning Appeals
315
7722743.2
CHAPTER 168: BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
General Provisions
168.01 Board of Zoning Appeals established
168.02 Board of Zoning Appeals Review.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 168.01 BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS ESTABLISHED
(A) Appointment. See Charter Art. XVII, § 1.
(B) Meetings. See Charter Art. XVII, § 2.
(C) Powers and Duties. See Charter Art. XVII, § 3.
(D) Variances. See Charter Art. XVII, § 4.
(E) Membership. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall consist of five voting members.
Cross-Reference: Zoning variances based on hardship, see § 151.125
Appeals, see § 160.067
§ 168.02 BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS JURISDICTION
(A) Direct Review of Variances. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the authority to review applications for variance, and to grant relief from strict application of the Zoning Code.
(1) Scope of Review. Pursuant to this section, an applicant may apply directly to the Board of Zoning Appeals for a variance under the following sections:
(a) § 150.05, “Conversion of Existing Accessory Buildings;”
(b) § 150.09, “Residence ‘AAA’ District Uses;”
(c) § 150.12, “Home Offices in Residential Districts;”
(d) § 150.16, “Outdoor Dining Regulations;”
(e) § 150.26, “Dimensional Variance;”
(f) § 150.30, “Panhandle Lots;”
(g) § 150.37, “Cellular or Wireless Communication Systems;”
(h) § 150.39, “Transitional Overlay District #2;”
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 168:
Board of Zoning Appeals
316
7722743.2
(i) § 151.001, et seq., “Subdivision Regulations;”
(j) § 152.12, “Variances and Appeals Process for Residential Building Code;”
(k) § 159.01, et seq., “Signs;”
(l) § 160.001, et seq., “Flood Hazard Reduction;”
(m) § 166.01, et seq., “Main Street Core District Zone Regulations;”
(n) § 167.01, et seq., “Residential-Scale Business Overlay District Regulations;” and
(o) Any other section of the City of Madeira’s Zoning Code not referenced above and which permits applications for variance.
(2) Review Process.
(a) Public Hearing. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hold a public hearing, evaluating the application for variance based upon the standards of review established under Ohio law, within sixty (60) days of receiving applicant’s variance application.
(b) Burden of Proof. Pursuant to this section, an applicant seeking a variance must demonstrate that a practical difficult exists in conforming to the applicable Zoning Code provision.
(c) Standard of Review. In reviewing an application for variance under this section, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall weigh the Duncan Factors: (i) Will the property yield a reasonable return or can there be a beneficial use of the property without the variance? (ii) Is the variance substantial? (iii) Will the essential character of the neighborhood be substantially altered or will adjoining properties suffer a substantial detriment if the variance is granted? (iv) Will the variance adversely affect the delivery of governmental services? (v) Did the property owner purchase the property with knowledge of the zoning restrictions? (vi) Can the problem be resolved by some manner other than the granting of the variance? (vii) Will the variance preserve the “spirit and intent” of the zoning resolution and will “substantial justice” be done by granting the variance?
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 168:
Board of Zoning Appeals
317
7722743.2
(d) Decision. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall issue a written decision to the applicant approving, denying, or conditionally approving an application for variance within thirty (30) days of the public hearing.
(B) Appellate Review. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the authority to hear appeals of decision rendered by the Planning Commission, City Manager, and/or ARO while enforcing the provisions of this Zoning Code. (1) Scope of Review. Pursuant to this section, if the Planning Commission, City Manager, or ARO denies requested relief to an applicant, such applicant may appeal the decision to the Board of Zoning Appeals. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have jurisdiction to hear appeals brought under the following sections: (a) §150.16, “Outdoor Dining Regulations;” (b) §150.17, “Manufacturing District Uses;” (c) §150.23, “Residence Zone Fencing;” (d) §150.24, “Parking;” (e) §150.25, “Parking and Storing of Commercial Vehicles in Residential Districts;” (f) §150.30, “Panhandle Lots;” (g) §150.38, “Transitional Overlay District;” (h) §150.39, “Transitional Overlay District #2;” (i) §150.40, “Transitional Overlay District #3;” (j) §150.42, “Transitional Residential Overlay District;” (k) §151.001, et seq., “Subdivision Regulations;” (l) §152.12, “Variances and Appeals Process for Residential building Code;” (m) §153.01, et seq., “Excavating, Filling and Grading Land;” (n) §158.01, et seq., “Property Maintenance Code;” (o) §159.01, et seq., “Signs;” (p) §160.001, et seq., “Flood Hazard Reduction;” (q) §161.01, et seq., “Architectural Review Office;” (r) §164.01, et seq., “Location of Sexually Oriented Businesses Regulated;” (s) §166.01, et seq., “Main Street Core District Zone Regulations;”
MADEIRA – LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 168:
Board of Zoning Appeals
318
7722743.2
(t) §167.01, et seq., “Residential-Scale Business Overlay District Regulations; and (u) Any other section of the City of Madeira’s Zoning Code not referenced above and which permits the appeal of a decision rendered by the Planning Commission, City Manager, or ARO. (2) Timing of Appeal. The applicant appealing a decision of the Planning Commission, City Manager, or ARO must provide notice of his or her intent to appeal such decision to the Planning Commission, City Manager, or ARO, and the Board of Zoning Appeals within thirty (30) days of the provision of written notification of denial to the applicant. (3) Hearing on Appeal. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hold a public hearing, evaluating the appeal based upon the standards of review applied by the Planning Commission, City Manager, or ARO to the initial application, within sixty (60) days of receiving applicant’s notice of appeal. Cross-Reference: Conversion of Existing Accessory Structures, see §150.05
Conditional Uses, see §§ 150.09, 150.12, 150.018, 165.05, 166.22
Outdoor Dining Regulations, see § 150.16
Manufacturing District Uses, see § 150.1
Residence Zone Fencing, see § 150.23
Parking, see §§ 150.24, 150.25
Dimensional Variance, see § 150.26 Panhandle Lots, see § 150.30 Cellular or Wireless Communication Systems, see §150.37 Transitional Overlay Districts and Transitional Residential Overlay Districts, see § § 150.38, 150.39, 150.40, 150.42
Variances and Appeals Process for Residential Building Code, see § 152.12
Excavating, Filling and Grading of Land, see § 153.01, et seq.
Property Maintenance Code, see § 158.01, et seq. Signs, see §§ 159.12, 159.26 Flood Hazard Reduction, see § 160.001, et seq.
Architectural Review Office, see § 161.01, et seq.
Location of Sexually Oriented Businesses Regulated, see § 164.01, et seq. Main Street Core District Regulations and Residential-Scale Business Overlay District Regulations, see §§ 166.06, 167.06