
Montgomery, Ohio Code of Ordinances


TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



       Chapter




         10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS




CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   10.01   Short titles



   10.02   Definitions



   10.03   Rules of construction



   10.04   Revivor; effect of amendment or repeal



   10.05   Construction of section references



   10.06   Conflicting provisions



   10.07   Severability



   10.08   Reference to offices



   10.09   Errors and omissions



   10.10   Ordinances repealed



   10.11   Ordinances unaffected



   10.12   Ordinances saved



   10.13   Application to future ordinances



   10.14   Interpretation



   10.15   Amendments to code



   10.16   Section histories; statutory references



   10.17   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities



   10.18   Conformity with Charter



 



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  SHORT TITLES.



   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the
municipality, as revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated
into component codes, titles, chapters, and sections, shall be known and
designated as the "Montgomery Code," for which designation "municipal code,"
"code of ordinances," "codified ordinances" or "code" may be substituted. 
Code title, chapter, and section headings do not constitute any part of the
law as contained in the code.



(R.C. § 1.01)



   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters, and sections are to
such components of the code unless otherwise specified.  Any component code
may be referred to and cited by its name, such as the "Traffic Code." 
Sections may be referred to and cited by the designation "§" followed by the
number, such as "§ 10.01."  Headings and captions used in this code other
than the title, chapter, and section numbers are employed for reference
purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AND may be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the sense requires it.



   ANOTHER.  When used to designate the owner of property which is the
subject of an offense, includes not only natural persons but also every other
owner of property.



   CHILD.  Includes child by adoption.



   COUNCIL.  The Legislative Authority of the municipality.



   COUNTY.  The county or counties in which the municipality is located.



   FIRE CHIEF.  Shall include the Chief of a fire department.



   IMPRISONED.  Shall have the same meaning as in R.C. § 1.05.



   INTERNET. The international computer network of both federal and
non-federal interoperable packet switched data networks, including the
graphical subnetwork known as the world wide web.



   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR.  Includes all persons, whether acting by
themselves or as a servant, agent, or employee.



   LAND or REAL ESTATE.  Includes rights and easements of incorporeal
nature.



   LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY.  The Legislative Authority of the municipality.



   MAY.  Is permissive.



   MUNICIPALITY, CITY, TOWN, VILLAGE, or MUNICIPAL CORPORATION.  When
used in this code, shall denote the municipality irrespective of its
population or legal classification.



   O.A.C.  Refers to the Ohio Administrative Code.



   OATH.  Includes affirmation; and SWEAR includes affirm.



   OWNER.  When applied to property, includes any part owner, joint
owner, or tenant in common of the whole or part of such property.



   PERSON.  Includes an individual, corporation, business trust, estate,
trust, partnership, and association.



   PERSONAL PROPERTY.  Includes all property except real property.



   PLAN OF SEWERAGE, SYSTEM OF SEWERAGE, SEWER, and SEWERS.  Includes
sewers, sewage disposal works and treatment plants, and sewage pumping
stations, together with facilities and appurtenances necessary and proper
therefor.



   PREMISES.  As applied to property, includes land and buildings.



   PROPERTY.  Includes real, personal, mixed estates, and interests.



   PUBLIC AUTHORITY.  Includes boards of education; the municipal,
county, state, or federal government, its officers, or an agency thereof; or
any duly authorized public official.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school
yard, body of water or watercourse, public conveyance, or any other place for
the sale of merchandise, public accommodation, or amusement.



   R.C. or REVISED CODE.  Refers to the Ohio Revised Code.



   REAL PROPERTY.  Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.



   REGISTERED MAIL.  Includes certified mail; and CERTIFIED MAIL includes
registered mail.



   SHALL.  Is mandatory.



   SIDEWALK.  That portion of the street between the curb line and the
adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.



   STATE.  The State of Ohio.



   STREET.  Includes alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads, highways,
viaducts, and all other public thoroughfares within the municipality.



   TENANT or OCCUPANT.  As applied to premises, includes any person
holding a written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any
part of such premises, alone or with others.



   WEEK.  Seven consecutive days.



   WHOEVER.  Includes all persons, natural and artificial; partners;
principals, agents, and employees; and all officials, public or private.



   WRITING.  Includes printing.



   WRITTEN or IN WRITING.  The terms include any representation of words,
letters, symbols, or figures; this provision does not affect any law relating
to signatures.



   YEAR.  Twelve consecutive months.



(R.C. §§ 1.02, 1.05, 1.44, 1.59, 701.01)



§ 10.03  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   Common and technical usage.  Words and phrases shall be read
in context and construed according to the rules of grammar and common
usage.  Words and phrases that have acquired a technical or particular
meaning, whether by legislative definition or otherwise, shall be construed
accordingly.



(R.C. § 1.42)



   (B)   Singular and plural; gender; tenses.  As used in this code,
unless the context otherwise requires:



      (1)   The singular includes the plural, and the plural
includes the singular.



      (2)   Words of one gender include the other genders.



      (3)   Words in the present tense include the future tense.



(R.C. § 1.43)



   (C)   Calendar; computation of time.



      (1)   The time within which an act is required by law to be
done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day;
except that when the last day falls on Sunday or a legal holiday, then the
act may be done on the next succeeding day that is not a Sunday or a legal
holiday.



      (2)   When a public office, in which an act required by law is
to be performed, is closed to the public for the entire day that constitutes
the last day for doing the act or before its usual closing time on that day,
the act may be performed on the next succeeding day that is not a Sunday or a
legal holiday.



      (3)   LEGAL HOLIDAY, as used in divisions (C)(1) and (C)(2) of
this section, means the following days:



         (a)   The first day of January, known as New Year's day;



         (b)   The third Monday in January, known as Martin
Luther King day;



         (c)   The third Monday in February, known as
Washington-Lincoln day;



         (d)   The day designated in the "Act of June 28, 1968,"
82 Stat. 250, 5 USC 6103, as amended, for the commemoration of Memorial day;



         (e)   The fourth day of July, known as Independence day;



         (f)   The first Monday in September, known as Labor day;



         (g)   The second Monday in October, known as Columbus
day;



         (h)   The eleventh day of November, known as Veteran's
day;



         (i)   The fourth Thursday in November, known as
Thanksgiving day;



         (j)   The twenty-fifth day of December, known as
Christmas day;



         (k)   Any day appointed and recommended by the Governor
of this state or the President of the United States as a holiday.



      (4)   If any day designated in this section as a legal holiday
falls on a Sunday, the next succeeding day is a legal holiday.



(R.C. § 1.14)



      (5)   When an act is to take effect or become operative from
and after a day named, no part of that day shall be included.  If priority
of legal rights depends upon the order of events on the same day, such
priority shall be determined by the times in the day at which they
respectively occurred.



(R.C. § 1.15)



      (6)   If a number of months is to be computed by counting the
months from a particular day, the period ends on the same numerical day in
the concluding month as the day of the month from which the computation is
begun, unless there are not that many days in the concluding month, in which
case the period ends on the last day of that month.



(R.C. § 1.45)



      (7)   In all cases where the law shall require any act to be
done in a reasonable time or reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time
or notice shall mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt
performance of such duty or compliance with such notice.



   (D)   Numbers.  If there is a conflict between figures and words in
expressing a number, the words govern.



(R.C. § 1.46)



   (E)   Authority.  When the law requires an act to be done which may
by law as well be done by an agent as by the principal, such requirement
shall be construed to include all such acts when done by an authorized agent.



   (F)   Joint authority.  All words purporting to give joint
authority to three or more municipal officers or other persons shall be
construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other
persons, unless it shall be otherwise expressly declared in the law giving
the authority, or it is inconsistent with state law or municipal charter
provisions.



   (G)   Exceptions.  The rules of construction shall not apply to any
law which contains any express provision excluding such construction, or when
the subject matter or context of such law is repugnant thereto.



§ 10.04  REVIVOR; EFFECT OF AMENDMENT OR REPEAL.



   (A)   The repeal of a repealing statute does not revive the
ordinance originally repealed nor impair the effect of any saving clause
therein.



(R.C. § 1.57)



   (B)   The re-enactment, amendment, or repeal of an ordinance does
not, except as provided in division (C) of this section:



      (1)   Affect the prior operation of the ordinance or any prior
action taken thereunder.



      (2)   Affect any validation, cure, right, privilege,
obligation, or liability previously acquired, accrued, accorded, or incurred
thereunder.



      (3)   Affect any violation thereof or penalty, forfeiture, or
punishment incurred in respect thereto, prior to the amendment or repeal.



      (4)   Affect any investigation, proceeding, or remedy in
respect of any privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture, or
punishment; and the investigation, proceeding, or remedy may be instituted,
continued, or enforced, and the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment imposed,
as if the ordinance had not been repealed or amended.



   (C)   If the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment for any offense is
reduced by a re-enactment or amendment of an ordinance, the penalty,
forfeiture, or punishment, if not already imposed, shall be imposed according
to the ordinance as amended.



(R.C. § 1.58)



   (D)   An ordinance which is re-enacted or amended is intended to be
a continuation of the prior ordinance and not a new enactment, so far as it
is the same as the prior ordinance.



(R.C. § 1.54)



§ 10.05  CONSTRUCTION OF SECTION REFERENCES.



   (A)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation
of a section or an inclusive group of sections, or of divisions or
subdivisions of a section, such reference shall be construed to mean a
violation of any provision of the section, sections, divisions or
subdivisions included in the reference.



   (B)   References in the code to action taken or authorized under
designated sections of the code include, in every case, action taken or
authorized under the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by
this code.



(R.C. § 1.23)



   (C)   A reference to any portion of a provision of this code applies
to all re-enactments or amendments thereof.



(R.C. § 1.55)



   (D)   If a section refers to a series of numbers or letters, the
first and the last numbers or letters are included.



(R.C. § 1.56)



   (E)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section
hereof, the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered, unless the subject
matter has been changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.06  CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.



   (A)   If a general provision conflicts with a special or local
provision, they shall be construed, if possible, so that effect is given to
both. If the conflict between the provisions is irreconcilable, the special
or local provision prevails as an exception to the general provision, unless
the general provision is the later adoption and the manifest intent is that
the general provision prevail.



(R.C. § 1.51)



   (B)   (1)   If ordinances enacted at different meetings of the
Legislative Authority are irreconcilable, the ordinance latest in date of
enactment prevails.



      (2)   If amendments to the same ordinance are enacted at
different meetings of the Legislative Authority, one amendment without
reference to another, the amendments are to be harmonized, if possible, so
that effect may be given to each. If the amendments are substantively
irreconcilable, the latest in date of enactment prevails. The fact that a
later amendment restates language deleted by an earlier amendment, or fails
to include language inserted by an earlier amendment, does not of itself make
the amendments irreconcilable. Amendments are irreconcilable only when
changes made by each cannot reasonably be put into simultaneous operation.



(R.C. § 1.52)



   (C)   In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of
this code, or between any of the provisions of this code and any standard
code adopted by the municipality pursuant to R.C. § 731.231, the provision
that establishes the higher or stricter standard shall control.



§ 10.07  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provisions of a section of this code or the application thereof
to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions or applications of the section or related sections which can
be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end
the provisions are severable.



(R.C. § 1.50)



§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of the municipality exercising the powers,
duties, or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.09  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered consisting of the misspelling of any
words, the omission of any words necessary to express the intention of the
provisions affected, the use of words to which no meaning can be attached, or
the use of a word when another word was clearly intended to express the
intention, the spelling shall be corrected, and the words supplied, omitted,
or substituted shall conform with the manifest intention, and the provision
shall have the same effect as though the correct words were contained in the
text as originally published.  No alteration shall be made or permitted if
any question exists regarding the nature or extent of such error.



§ 10.10  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   With the exception of any ordinances specifically saved by the
municipality, this code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all
of the provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein
enumerated and embraced.  All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects
treated by this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective
date of this code of ordinances.



§ 10.11  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature, all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not enumerated and embraced in this code of
ordinances, and all ordinances specifically saved by the municipality shall
remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by
necessary implication.



§ 10.12  ORDINANCES SAVED.



   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the
legislative body, or a certain municipal officer or employee, to make
additional ordinances or regulations for the purpose of carrying out the
intention of the ordinance, all ordinances and regulations of a similar
nature serving the purpose, effected prior to the codification and not
inconsistent thereto, shall remain in effect and are saved.



§ 10.13  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.14  INTERPRETATION.



   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required,
the same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state
law.



§ 10.15  AMENDMENTS TO CODE.



   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing
chapter or section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically
repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment,
substituted in its place.



   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a
new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of
this code, the proper number of such chapter or section. In addition to such
indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a
caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.



§ 10.16  SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   As legislative histories for code sections, the following may
be listed, if applicable: the Ohio Revised Code section upon which the
provision is based; the prior code section upon which the provision is based;
and the specific number and passage date of the original ordinance plus the
three most recent amending ordinances, if any.



Example:



   (R.C. § 123.45)  (`67 Code, § 1.23)  (Ord. 1-1970, passed 1-1-70;
Am. Ord. 1-1980, passed 1-1-80; Am. Ord. 1-1990, passed 1-1-90; Am. Ord.
15-1990, passed 6-1-90)



   (B)   A statutory cite set forth as a "statutory reference"
following the text of the section indicates that the reader should refer to
that statute for further information.



Example:



   § 30.08 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.



      Unless otherwise exempted by state law, all public records shall
be promptly prepared and made available for inspection to any person.



(R.C. § 149.43(B))



   Statutory reference:



      Public records, see R.C. § 149.43



§ 10.17  PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.



   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date
of this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those
laws.  This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued,
penalties incurred, or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this
code.  The liabilities, proceedings and rights are continued; punishments,
penalties, or forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had
not been enacted.  In particular, any agreement granting permission to
utilize highway rights-of-way, contracts entered into or franchises granted,
the acceptance, establishment or vacation of any highway, and the election of
corporate officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had
not been enacted.



§ 10.18  CONFORMITY WITH CHARTER.



   Should any provision of the Montgomery Code of 1976 be found to be in
conflict with the Home Rule Charter of Montgomery, Ohio, the provisions of
the Charter shall control.  Any such conflict of any provision of this code
shall render only the conflicting provision hereof invalid, and all other
provision of this code not in conflict with the Charter shall remain in force
and effect.  Should any provision of this code be susceptible to two
interpretations, one of which is in conflict with the Charter and the other
of which is in conformity with the Charter, such provision shall be given
that interpretation conforming to the Charter. 



('76 Code, § 10.13) (Ord. 1-1970, passed 1-6-70)



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   (A)   Whenever, in this municipal code or in any ordinance of the
municipality, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or
an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever the doing of any act is required or
the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific
penalty is otherwise provided, whoever violates any such provision shall be
punished by a fine not exceeding $1000, a term of imprisonment not exceeding
180 days, or both.  A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day
during or on which a violation continues or occurs.



   (B)   Whenever, in this municipal code or in any ordinance of the
municipality, any act is prohibited or declared to be unlawful and a penalty
for violation of such act is set forth in such code section or ordinance,
unless otherwise stated, any subsequent violation of such section or
ordinance within a period of 12 months shall be subject to an escalating
penalty according to the following schedule:



      (1)   A violation listed as a minor misdemeanor shall be
punishable as a fourth degree misdemeanor with a fine up to $250 and/or a
term of imprisonment not exceeding 30 days on a second offense within 12
months of the prior offense.



      (2)   A violation listed as a minor misdemeanor shall be
punishable as a third degree misdemeanor with a fine up to $500 and/or a term
of imprisonment not exceeding 60 days on a third offense within 12 months of
the first offense.



      (3)   A violation listed as a minor misdemeanor shall be
punishable as a second degree misdemeanor with a fine up to $750 and/or a
term of imprisonment not exceeding 90 days on a fourth offense within 12
months of the first offense.



   (C)   The failure of any officer or employee of the municipality to
perform any official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer
or employee to the penalty imposed for a violation unless a penalty is
specifically provided for such failure.



Cross-reference:



   Limitation on criminal prosecutions, see § 130.06



   Misdemeanor classifications, see § 130.99



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



      Chapter




         30.   GENERAL PROVISIONS





         31.   FIRE DEPARTMENT





         32.   POLICE DEPARTMENT





         33.   BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS





         34.   PERSONNEL POLICIES; BOND




         44.   INCOME TAX (EFFECTIVE THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 2015)




         44.1.   INCOME TAX (EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1, 2016)




CHAPTER 30:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   30.01   Council meetings



   30.02   Issuance of checks



   30.03   Announcement of public meetings



   30.04   Expenses analogous to fringe benefits; expense accounts



   30.05   Indemnification of officers and employees of Montgomery



   30.06   Establishing classified Civil Service positions



§ 30.01  COUNCIL MEETINGS.



   The regular meetings of the Council shall be held on the first
Wednesday evening of each calendar month and on the Wednesday 14 days prior
to the first Wednesday at a time as scheduled by the Council unless the
Council, for cause, reschedules them.  Bi-annually, the Council may schedule
an additional, regular meeting for the purpose of organizing the Council and
the meeting may be convened at its convenience.  Regular meetings shall be
held at the community hall at Montgomery Road and Schoolhouse Lane unless the
Council, for cause, provides otherwise. 



('67 Code, § 30.01) (Ord. 27-1975, passed 12-3-75; Am. Ord. 6-1978, passed
5-3-78; Am. Ord. 31-1983, passed 11-2-83)



§ 30.02  ISSUANCE OF CHECKS.



   Checks representing withdrawals and payments from the active and
inactive deposits of the municipality shall be signed by the Director of
Finance and the City Manager.  In the absence of the Director of Finance,
such checks may be signed on behalf of the Director of Finance by the
designated Acting Director of Finance, which designation shall be made by the
Director of Finance in writing, the assistant Director of Finance, or the Tax
Commissioner. In the absence of the City Manager, such checks may be signed
on behalf of the City Manager by the designated Acting City Manager, which
designation shall be made by the City Manager in writing, or the assistant
City Manager.



('67  Code, §  30.03)  (Ord. 5-1971, passed 1-6-71; Am. Ord. 27-1981,
passed 10-7-81; Am. Ord. 1-1998, passed 2-4-98)



§ 30.03  ANNOUNCEMENT OF PUBLIC MEETINGS.



   (A)   No less than quarterly, the city shall post the scheduled date
and time for City Council meetings on the city's website and within the
city's newsletter. If a meeting time or location is changed, as decided by
City Council at a prior open meeting, the new time and place shall be posted
as soon as practical on the city's website.  If time allows within the
circulation schedule of the city newsletter, such changed time and location
shall also be noted in the newsletter.



   (B)   Any person or news organization may request advance notice of
all meetings of City Council in writing delivered to the Clerk of Council.
The Clerk shall then send advance notice of such meetings of City Council
through either email (or equivalent electronic medium), by facsimile
transmission, or by regular U.S. Mail as has been designated by the
requesting person or organization. The failure of delivery shall not void any
action taken at such meeting by City Council.



   (C)   Consistent with Section 3.04 of the Charter of the City of
Montgomery, Council may hold special meetings and, except in the event of an
emergency, notice of such meeting shall be posted to the city's website and
shall be provided to those persons and media outlets requesting advance
notification no less than 24 hours in advance of such meeting in the format
requested by such person or organization.



(Ord. 28-1975, passed 12-3-75; Am. Ord. 4-2016, passed 6-1-16)



§ 30.04  EXPENSES ANALOGOUS TO FRINGE BENEFITS; EXPENSE ACCOUNTS.



   (A)   The city may provide refreshments, including beverages and
meals, provisions for parties, awards in recognition of service to the
municipality, trophies and other types of non-salaried remuneration that
inure to the benefit of officers or employees of the municipality or to
others, when the City Manager determines that such expenditures promote
morale in the municipal service or the civic interest of citizens or others
whose civic participation inures directly or indirectly to the benefit of the
city.



   (B)   The city may reimburse the Mayor, the City Manager, the
Administrative Directors, and their subordinates for such expenses as they
may reasonably incur for meals purchased for themselves and others when the
City Manager determines that the expenditures directly or indirectly promote
the public interest or municipal objectives.  The City Manager shall
establish rules governing the submission of expenses and the reimbursement
therefor.



(Ord. 11-1982, passed 6-2-82)



§ 30.05  INDEMNIFICATION OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES OF MONTGOMERY.



   (A)   The city shall, except as provided in division (B) of this
section, indemnify any current or former elected or appointed officer,
employee or member of a board or commission of the city, whether or not such
person is compensated for such service, from liability incurred in the
performance of his duties by paying any judgment in, or amount negotiated in
settlement of, any civil action arising under federal law, the law of Ohio or
the ordinances of the city.  The reasonableness of the amount of any consent
judgment or settlement shall be subject to the review and approval of the Law
Director and the City Council.



   (B)   The city shall not indemnify an officer or employee under any
of the following circumstances:



      (1)   To the extent the officer or employee is covered by a
policy of insurance for civil liability purchased by the municipality;



      (2)   When the officer or employee acts manifestly outside the
scope of his employment or official responsibilities, or with malicious
purpose, or in bad faith, or in a wanton or reckless manner;



      (3)   For any portion of a judgment that represents punitive
or exemplary damages:



      (4)   For any portion of a consent judgment or settlement that
is unreasonable.



   (C)   The city may purchase a policy of policies of insurance on
behalf of officers and employees of the city providing coverage for amounts
in excess of $1,000,000 per occurrence incurred in connection with any civil
action, demand, or claim against the officer or employee by reason of an act
or omission by the officer or employee occurring in the performance of his
duties and not coming within the terms of division (B)(2) of this section.



   (D)   This section does not affect any of the following:



      (1)   Any defense that would otherwise be available in an
action alleging personal liability of an officer or employee;



      (2)   The operation of R.C. § 9.83.



   (E)   The indemnification of officers or employees against judgments
or settlements pursuant to this section shall be accomplished only through
the following procedure:



      (1)   If the city determines that the actions or omissions of
its officer or employee who is to be indemnified were not within the terms of
division (B)(2) of this section, an indemnity agreement shall be prepared by
the Law Director, specifying that the city will indemnify the officer or
employee from a particular judgment that has been rendered or a particular
settlement amount that has been negotiated.  The agreement shall name the
person or entity to whom payment by the municipality of the judgment or
settlement amount will be made, and the agreement shall not be effective
until it is approved by the officer or employee to be indemnified, the Law
Director and the City Council.  The Law Director shall approve the indemnity
agreement unless he finds that division (B) of this section prohibits the
municipality from indemnifying the officer or employee, or prohibits the city
from indemnifying the officer or employee for a portion of a judgment or
settlement and the indemnity agreement would indemnify the officer or
employee for all or part of that portion.



      (2)   If sufficient moneys have not been appropriated the City
Council shall appropriate sufficient funds to pay the indemnification, and no
payment shall be made until the appropriation has been made.



   (F)   An officer or employee may commence an action against the city
in a court of competent jurisdiction to prove that he is entitled to
indemnification pursuant to division (A) of this section and that division
(B) of this section does not prohibit or limit his indemnification and
seeking either a judgment against the city for a sum of money that the
officer or employee has paid to satisfy a judgment or settlement or an order
directing the city to pay a judgment or settlement against the officer or
employee which has not been satisfied.



   (G)   An action brought pursuant to this section shall be commenced
no later than two years after the cause of action arising under this section
accrues.  A cause of action arising under this section accrues upon the
entry of a money judgment against the officer or employee if the time for
filing an appeal in the action lapses without the filing of an appeal, upon
the conclusion of the final appeal in any action in which a money judgment is
entered against the officer or employee if an appeal is filed in the action,
or upon execution of any settlement agreement requiring payment of money by
the officer or employee.



(Ord. 8-1988, passed 2-3-88)



§ 30.06  ESTABLISHING CLASSIFIED CIVIL SERVICE POSITIONS.



   Pursuant to the authority granted to City Council by Charter § 6.04,
Council hereby designates the classified service of the city to include all
uniformed employees in the Police Department and Fire and Emergency Medical
Service, excluding the Chief of Police, all lieutenants in the Police
Department, the Fire Chief and all assistant chiefs within the Fire
Department. The uniformed employees within such departments shall not include
any clerical or administrative positions within such departments, nor shall
they include any temporary or part-time positions within either department
nor any members of the auxiliary unit of the Police Department.



(Ord. 1-2003, passed 2-5-03)



CHAPTER 31:  FIRE DEPARTMENT



Section



   31.01   Creation and initial hiring procedures



Cross-reference:



   Establishing classified Civil Service positions, see § 30.06



§ 31.01  CREATION AND INITIAL HIRING PROCEDURES.



   (A)   By virtue of the power granted in R.C. § 715.05, there is
created a fire department to be known as the Fire Department of Montgomery,
Ohio.



   (B)   Other than as provided in this section, the employees of the
Fire Department, with the exception of those employees exempted by the
Charter of the City of Montgomery, shall be considered to be within the
classified service of the city and shall be subject to its civil service
regulations.



(Ord. 27-1992, passed 11-4-92)



CHAPTER 32:  POLICE DEPARTMENT



Section



   32.01   Creation; members



   32.02   Action outside territorial limits



Cross-reference:



   Establishing classified Civil Service positions, see § 30.06



§ 32.01  CREATION; MEMBERS.



   (A)   By virtue of the power granted in R.C. § 715.05, there is
created a police department to be known as "The Police Department of
Montgomery, Ohio."



   (B)   The Department shall be under the control and shall be
directly responsible to the City Manager and shall consist of the following:



      (1)   The Chief of Police.



      (2)   As many lieutenants as are from time to time determined
by Council.



      (3)   As many sergeants as are from time to time determined by
Council.



      (4)   As many patrolmen as are from time to time determined by
Council.



      (5)   Also such other special patrolmen as are from time to
time determined for special call or for part-time work as and when directed
by the Chief of Police or the City Manager or the Mayor. 



('67 Code, § 32.01)



§ 32.02  ACTION OUTSIDE TERRITORIAL LIMITS.



   Any action taken by any member of the Police Department, outside the
territorial limits of the municipality, if taken in pursuance of any police
matter involving the municipality, or if taken in the line of cooperation
upon official police business with any of the other governmental units of
Hamilton County, Ohio, or if taken under the authority of a Mutual Assistance
Agreement, which action is ordered or approved by the Chief of Police of the
municipality, or other supervisory officer, or if done upon an emergency
basis, is subsequently ratified by the Chief of Police, shall be considered
to be an action performed in the course of his employment by the member of
the Police Department. 



('67 Code, § 32.06)



CHAPTER 33:  BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



Section



Investment Committee



   33.01   Creation; authority



Park and Recreation Commission



   33.05   Creation; authority



Civil Service Commission



   33.15   Definitions



   33.16   Organization and duties



   33.17   Official records



   33.18   Classification



   33.19   Application for entrance examination



   33.20   Entrance examinations



   33.21   Eligible lists



   33.22   Appointments to the competitive service



   33.23   Probation



   33.24   Promotions



   33.25   Transfers



   33.26   Layoff and recall



   33.27   Performance records



   33.28   Removals, reductions or suspensions



   33.29   Collective bargaining agreement



Community Improvement Corporation



   33.40   Establishment; purpose



   33.41   Authorization for agreement and plan



Beautification Commission



   33.50   Creation; members; authority



Sister Cities Commission



   33.60   Creation; members; authority



Arts Commission



   33.70   Creation; members; authority



Environmental Advisory Commission



   33.80   Creation; members; authority



Cross-reference:



   Board of Tax Review, see § 44.13



   Board of Zoning Appeals, see Charter § 6.02



   Civil Service Commission, see Charter § 6.04



   Establishing classified Civil Service positions, see § 30.06



   Landmarks Commission, see Charter § 6.05



   Park and Recreation Commission, see Charter § 6.03



   Planning Commission, see Charter § 6.01



   Removal of members of boards or commissions, see Charter § 6.06



INVESTMENT COMMITTEE



§ 33.01  CREATION; AUTHORITY.



   (A)   Pursuant to the authority of R.C. §§ 731.56 and 731.57,
there is created an Investment Committee empowered and directed to invest
municipal funds in accordance with the procedures and requirements set forth
in such sections.



   (B)   The Investment Committee shall be comprised of the City
Manager, the Director of Finance, the Director of Law, and two Council
members who shall be designated by motion of Council effective January 1st of
each calendar year, such appointments to run for that entire year.



   (C)   When, in the opinion of the Investment Committee, there are
moneys in the treasury of the municipal corporation which will not be
required to be used for a period of six months or more, the Committee may
invest such funds in those interest-bearing bonds and obligations set forth
in R.C. § 731.56.



   (D)   In all matters pertaining to the investment of public funds,
the accounting therefor and the custody thereof, the Investment Committee and
the Department of Finance shall be governed by the provisions of R.C. §§
731.55 to 731.59, inclusive.



   (E)   Linked deposit program. 



      (1)   The city hereby establishes a linked deposit program
wherein the city, when possible and according to the conditions and
requirements listed below, shall place reduced-rate investments with eligible
lenders to be linked to lower interest loans for eligible small business
owners.



      (2)   In order to participate in the program, a lending
institution must have at least one branch office located within the city,
must have a Memorandum of Agreement for Deposit of Public Funds on file with
the city, must sign the Lender Application for the city's linked deposit
program, and must agree that as the principal is paid down by the business,
that portion of the funds shall be available for withdrawal by the city,
quarterly or semi-annually.



      (3)   In order for a small business to be eligible for
consideration for the city's linked deposit program, it must, as a
prerequisite, meet the following:



         (a)   Complete the city's application for participation
in the program;



         (b)   Forward a completed business plan to the city;



         (c)   The business plan must meet the strategic economic
development goals of the city;



         (d)   The small business must be retaining or creating
jobs within the city;



         (e)   The small business shall be organized for profit.



      (4)   Once the business applicant has fulfilled the above
requirements, and the eligible lender has forwarded a completed application
to the city, the City Manager and Finance Director shall evaluate the
application to determine if the business is eligible for the program, whether
the city is financially capable of linking deposits to assist the business,
and whether it is in the city's best interest to accept the particular
applicant. The City Manager shall then make a recommendation to the City
Council. City Council shall authorize each linked deposit application through
approval of a resolution. Upon approval, the Finance Director shall
communicate with the lender to make the necessary deposit. The city shall
have the discretion to deny an application if it determines that the
applicant is not eligible or if the city is not financially able to assist
the business.



      (5)   The city shall place no more than $400,000 into
reduced-rate investments which are linked to lower interest loans.



      (6)   Each approved linked deposit is valid for two years with
two renewal periods. The initial renewal may be for a two year period. The
final renewal may be for a one year period. No linked deposit shall extend
for more than five years. Any request for renewal shall be made in writing to
the City Manager at least 90 days before the expiration period. Renewal shall
be based on the prerequisites in subdivision (B)(3), and if all conditions
have been met, the City Manager shall renew the linked deposit. All
recipients of a linked deposit shall comply with all Montgomery Building and
Zoning Codes and the requirements of the specific lender's loan. Failure to
do so may result in the withdrawal of city funds from the linked deposit. 



(Ord. 26-1995, passed 12-6-95)



(Ord. 3-1974, passed 5-1-74; Am. Ord. 27-1981, passed 10-7-81; Am. Ord.
8-1992, passed 5-6-92)



Statutory reference:



   Linked deposit program authorized, see R.C. § 135.80



PARK AND RECREATION COMMISSION



§ 33.05  CREATION; AUTHORITY.



   (A)   The Park and Recreation Commission shall have and exercise all
powers, authority, and duties conferred upon it by the Charter and state
statutes.



   (B)   The Parks and Recreation Commission shall consist of seven
members who shall be appointed by Council to serve for three year, staggered
terms.  All appointments made after the effective date of this section shall
be for three years other than in the event of vacancies, which shall be
filled for the unexpired term in the manner in which the original
appointments were made.  No more than two members of the Parks and
Recreation Commission shall be non-residents of the city.



   (C)   The Commission shall elect its own chairman and secretary
annually and may adopt its own rules and regulations for the conduct of its
business. 



(Adopting Ord.) (Am. Ord. 27-1981, passed 10-7-81; Am. Ord. 6-1982, passed
3-4-82; Am. Ord. 37-1993, passed 12-1-93)



Cross-reference:



   Park and Recreation Commission, see Charter § 6.03



CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION



§ 33.15  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of §§ 33.15 to 33.29, inclusive, the following
definitions shall apply:



   CITY MANAGER.  The City Manager shall be the appointing authority for
the City of Montgomery.



   CLASS OR CLASSIFICATION.  A group of positions established under the
rules adopted by the Civil Service Commission which are sufficiently similar
with respect to duties, responsibilities, and qualification requirements and
which are designated by the same descriptive title and equitably compensated
within the same salary range.



   CLASSIFIED SERVICE.  Council shall establish by ordinance the
classified and unclassified service in the city. The classified service shall
not include:



      (1)   Elected officials;



      (2)   Custodian of Council records;



      (3)   Members of boards and commissions appointed by Council
or City Manager;



      (4)   The City Manager and Assistant City Manager;



      (5)   The Administrative Directors and Department Heads
including the Chief of Police and Fire Chief;



      (6)   Unskilled labor, as defined by the Civil Service
Commission;



      (7)   Any temporary or part-time office or position requiring
the qualifications of an expert;



      (8)   Members of an auxiliary unit of the Police Department.



   ELIGIBLE LIST.  A list of the names of persons who have been found
qualified, through suitable tests for employment in positions allocated to a
specified class, arranged in the order of merit.



   EMERGENCY EMPLOYEE.  Any employee whose services are required in case
of an emergency for a period not to exceed 30 days.



   NEW POSITION.  A position created within a department of the city,
which position was not previously existent.



   PART-TIME EMPLOYEE.  An employee who averages less than 37.5 hours
work per week calculated on an annual basis.



   PERMANENT EMPLOYEE.  Any employee in service to the city who has been
regularly appointed after serving a probationary period.



   PROMOTION.  A transfer made in accordance with these rules from a
lower classification to a higher classification involving an increase in
responsibilities, a change in classification title, and the application of a
higher salary range.



   PROVISIONAL EMPLOYEE.  Any employee temporarily filling a position
without competition pending the establishment of an eligible list.



   SEASONAL EMPLOYEE.  Any employee in the classified service whose
services are required only during certain parts of each year, such a position
being intermittent or broken in its nature.



   TEMPORARY EMPLOYEE.  Any employee appointed for a specified period,
for a special project; or one who is replacing a regular employee on leave.



(Ord. 12-1972, passed 7-20-72; Am. Ord. 27-1981, passed 10-7-81; Am. Ord.
22-1999, passed 9-29-99; Am. Ord. 12-2002, passed 10-2-02)



Cross-reference:



   Civil Service Commission, see Charter § 6.04



§ 33.16  ORGANIZATION AND DUTIES.



   (A)   Officers. The Civil Service Commission shall consist of three
members appointed by Council for three year terms, pursuant to the Charter.
Biennially, upon the appointment of a new member or the reappointment of a
current member at the expiration of his or her regular term, the Commission
shall meet to elect a Chair and Vice-Chair. These members shall serve in that
capacity through the remainder of the biennial term. (The term of office
would be changed to three years if the proposed Charter change is accepted.)



   (B)   Civil Service Secretary. The Commission shall appoint a
Secretary who may or may not be a member of the Commission. Subject to the
approval of the Commission, the Secretary shall be responsible for assuring
the scheduling of examinations, oversight of examinations, certifying the
eligible list, and recording the official records of the Commission. The
Secretary, with the direction of the Chair, shall set the agenda and record
the proceedings of the Commission.



   (C)   Official signatures. The Chair of the Commission, or in his or
her absence or incapacity the Vice-Chair, with the Secretary together shall
sign the minutes and other official acts of the Commission.



   (D)   Powers and duties of the Commission. The Commission shall
direct the administration and enforcement of the state Civil Service law,
City Charter, and city ordinances relative to the Civil Service and such
other rules as may be adopted by the Commission governing its procedures
consistent with these laws.



(Ord. 12-1972, passed 7-20-72; Am. Ord. 27-1981, passed 10-7-81; Am. Ord.
22-1999, passed 9-29-99; Am. Ord. 12-2002, passed 10-2-02)



§ 33.17  OFFICIAL RECORDS.



   The Secretary shall assure that a record of the minutes and other
official actions of the Commission are maintained as required under these
rules and under the laws of the State of Ohio. A copy of such minute records
shall be filed with the office of the Clerk of Council.



(Ord. 12-1972, passed 7-20-72; Am. Ord. 22-1999, passed 9-29-99; Am. Ord.
12-2002, passed 10-2-02)



§ 33.18  CLASSIFICATION.



   (A)   From time to time, the Civil Service Commission shall adopt a
classification plan setting forth a job description for each position within
the classified service.



   (B)   Reclassification of positions. Whenever a new or revised
classification is approved by the Council, the Commission shall determine
whether there is currently an employee fulfilling that classification whose
position shall be reclassified to the new title without further examination,
or whether an examination shall be required to fill the new position.



(Ord. 12-1972, passed 7-20-72; Am. Ord. 22-1999, passed 9-29-99; Am. Ord.
12-2002, passed 10-2-02)



§ 33.19  APPLICATION FOR ENTRANCE EXAMINATION.



   (A)   Notice of examination.  Notice of competitive entrance
examination (open to persons employed in the civil service and to those who
have not been so employed) shall be given by advertisement in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city and by posting notices conspicuously in the
offices of the City, and elsewhere as may be deemed advisable, not less than
two weeks prior to the date for such examination.  This notice requirement
may be waived in the case of special examinations for positions when there is
substantial difficulty in obtaining qualified applicants.  This does not
dispense with the requirement to conduct appropriate appointment examinations.



   (B)   Personal application.  All applications shall be completed
and filed with the offices of the city no later than the date specified in
the announcement of the examination. Assistance shall be given to any
disabled persons who may require physical assistance in completing the
application for examination.



   (C)   Citizenship.  The city is required to verify the identity and
employment authorization for all employees consistent with the I-9 Employment
Eligibility Verification requirements of the U.S. Department of Homeland
Security.



   (D)   Age requirements.  Consistent with applicable law, giving
consideration to appropriate age and disability restrictions, the Commission
may establish maximum and minimum age limits for each examination.  The
Commission may accept applications of persons under the minimum age limit if
in their judgment the eligible list will not be posted before such applicant
shall reach the minimum age limit.  An applicant will be deemed to be within
the age limits for an examination if he or she is within the age limits any
time within the month in which the examination is held.



   (E)   Educational requirements.  The Commission may establish
general or specialized educational requirements for open competitive
examinations.



   (F)   Rejection of application.  The Commission may reject any
application for cause, among which the following shall be sufficient:



      (1)   The applicant lacks any of the minimum qualifications;



      (2)   The applicant is not within the prescribed age limits;



      (3)   The applicant does not meet the bona fide occupational
qualifications required of the position to which he or she seeks appointment;



      (4)   The applicant has been convicted of a crime of
disgraceful conduct, or the applicant has been dismissed from previous
employment for flagrant delinquency or misconduct;



      (5)   The applicant has made a false statement in his or her
application with regard to any material fact;



      (6)   The applicant was previously in the classified service
in the same or any other type of employment and was removed for cause and did
not resign in good standing;



      (7)   The applicant, after notification, did not promptly
present himself or herself at the time and place designated for the
examination;



      (8)   The applicant is otherwise ineligible for the
examination as provided herein.



   (G)   Postponement and/or cancellation of examinations.  Any
examination may be postponed or cancelled at the discretion of the
Commission.  In any such case, each applicant shall be notified of the
postponement or cancellation and any action by the Commission as a result of
such postponement or cancellation and the reason therefore.



   (H)   Fees.  The Commission may charge a nominal fee to any
examinee, such fee to be appropriate for the cost incurred by the Commission
to conduct such an examination. Fees may be waived by the Commission at any
time upon application for financial hardship.  Such hardship shall not be
considered by the Commission in weighing the merits and fitness of an
examinee.



(Ord. 12-1972, passed 7-20-72; Am. Ord. 29-1979, passed 11-7-79; Am. Ord.
10-1982, passed 4-7-82; Am. Ord. 22-1999, passed 9-19-99; Am. Ord. 12-2002,
passed 10-2-02)



§ 33.20  ENTRANCE EXAMINATIONS.



   (A)   All entrance examinations shall be practical in character,
shall relate directly to those matters which will fairly test the relative
capacity of the person examined to discharge the particular duties of the
class of positions to which appointment is sought, and when appropriate, such
examinations shall include tests of physical qualifications, health and
dexterity.



   (B)   Content of examinations.  The entrance examination held to
establish a list of eligibles for any class shall consist of one or more of
the following parts:



      (1)   Written test.  This part, when required, shall include
a written demonstration designed to show the familiarity of competitors with
the knowledge necessary to perform the responsibility of the class of
positions to which the examinee seeks appointment. Additionally, such test
shall assess the examinee's use and knowledge of the English language, the
range of his or her general information, or his or her general educational
attainments.



      (2)   Oral test.  This part, when required, shall include a
personal interview with the Civil Service Commission or its designee for a
class of positions where ability to deal with other persons, to meet the
public, or other personal qualifications must be determined.  An oral test
may also be used in examinations where a written test is unnecessary or
impracticable.



      (3)   Performance tests.  This part, when required, shall
include such tests of performance or trade as will determine the ability and
manual skill of competitors to perform the work involved in the position to
which he or she seeks appointment.



   (C)   Method of rating examinations.  The Commission shall
establish the relative weight to be given to each part of the examination.
The proficiency of each competitor in each part of the examination shall be
rated on a scale of 1 to 100 before weighting. The various parts of an
examination shall then be compiled to determine an applicant's overall score.
The names of the applicants receiving a score of 70 or more shall be posted
in the city offices and entered on the appropriate eligible list. The grade
of any applicant failing to qualify shall not be made public.



   (D)   Minimum grades on each section.  The Commission may, at its
discretion, determine a minimum grade for any part or parts of an
examination.  Any candidate who fails to attain at least this minimum grade
on any part shall be considered to have failed the examination as a whole and
shall not be examined on any further part or parts of the examination, if
they are planned.



   (E)   Inspection of examination papers.  Any applicant may inspect
his or her examination papers, for an examination in which he or she has
participated, within 30 days after the results of any examinations are
approved by the Commission. An applicant may review his or her papers only
once.  No applicant will be permitted to take notes, copy or reproduce any
portion of the examination papers.



(Ord. 12-1972, passed 7-20-72; Am. Ord. 22-1999, passed 9-29-99; Am. Ord.
12-2002, passed 10-2-02)



§ 33.21  ELIGIBLE LISTS.



   (A)   Posting of lists. From the results of each examination, the
Commission shall prepare and keep open to public inspection an eligible list
of the persons whose score in the examination for the class is not less than
70 and who are otherwise eligible for appointment. These persons shall be
notified and take rank upon the eligible lists in the order of their relative
grades without reference to priority of time of examination.



   (B)   Duration of lists. The term of eligibility of each list and
the names appearing thereon shall be fixed by the Commission at not less than
six months nor more than two years. Any list that has been in effect for more
than six months may be abolished at any time when the Commission determines
it to be in the best public interest. The Commission at any time may abolish
a list if the Commission is not able to certify from such list the minimum
number of applicants necessary for consideration for original appointment.



   (C)   Removal from list. The name of any person appearing on an
eligible list who fails to report for an interview with the City Manager or
his designee; who fails to respond to a notice from the Commission; who
declines an appointment without reason satisfactory to the Commission; who
cannot be located by the postal authorities; or, at the option of the Civil
Service Commission, if the person has been passed over for appointment from
the certified list on three occasions, shall be removed from the eligible
list. Ineligible applicants so removed shall be notified to this effect
unless his or her whereabouts are unknown. The ineligible applicant may be
reinstated to the eligible list upon application to the Secretary and the
Commission for good cause shown. In the case an eligible's name appears on
more than one list, a permanent appointment to a position in one class shall
cause his or her name to be removed from other eligible lists for classes,
the salary of which is equal or lower to the position to which the eligible
has been appointed. If the eligible list in question has resulted from a
promotional examination, resignation from the service shall be cause for
removal from the eligible list.



   (D)   Disqualification of eligibles and employees on layoff lists.
If at any time after the creation of an eligible list or layoff list, the
Commission has reason to believe that any person whose name appears on any
list is disqualified for appointment or recall because of any of the reasons
listed herein, developed subsequent to the examination or layoff, such person
shall be notified and given an opportunity to be heard before the Commission
to the grounds for such disqualification. If such person fails to appear
before the Commission for a hearing to be heard on the reasons for
disqualification or fails to establish by a preponderance of the evidence
that the reason for such disqualification was untrue, the eligible's name
shall be removed from the appropriate list. The reasons for disqualification
or removal of an eligible applicant or employee from a layoff list are as
follows:



      (1)   Physical or psychological incapacity;



      (2)   Errors disclosed in computing scores;



      (3)   False statements made in the application;



      (4)   Personal activities which are in violation of the rules
of the Civil Service Commission or in violation of any rules or regulations
established by the Ohio Department of Administrative Services governing the
employment and appointment of persons to the classified service in the State
of Ohio.



   (E)   Change of address. Each person on an eligible list shall file
with the Commission written notice of any change of address, and failure to
do so may cause his or her name to be removed from the list.



   (F)   Revocation of list. An eligible list may be revoked and
another examination ordered when in the judgment of the Commission such
action is deemed advisable as a result of errors, fraud, or obviously
inappropriate standards prescribed in connection with any examination. All
competitors in the first examination shall be given an opportunity to compete
and a new eligible list shall be established. No eligible list shall be
altered or revoked except upon written notice to all persons whose standing
may be affected by such revocation or alteration, and only upon an entry of
the reasons for such alteration or revocation in the minutes of the
Commission.



(Ord. 12-1972, passed 7-20-72; Am. Ord. 22-1999, passed 9-29-99; Am. Ord.
12-2002, passed 10-2-02)



§ 33.22  APPOINTMENTS TO THE COMPETITIVE SERVICE.



   (A)   Certification process.



      (1)   Immediately upon receipt of written request for
certification, the Commission shall certify to the City Manager from the
current eligible list, the names, addresses, and rank of a minimum of 10
persons standing highest on such appropriate eligible list.  If there shall
be more than one vacancy to be filled, the Commission shall certify
additional names for each vacancy to be filled as follows:



         (a)   For two to four vacancies, 15 names shall be given.



         (b)   For five to eight vacancies, 20 names shall be
given.



      (2)   The Commission may certify less than the minimum numbers
as required above if the Commission finds that the test was valid and the
resulting number of applicants eligible for certification will provide an
adequate basis from which the appointing authority can fill the appropriate
vacancy. Under no circumstances, however, may the Commission certify fewer
than 50% of the minimum number of candidates required herein.



   (B)   Notice of certification.  Written notice of certification
directing the persons certified to report for an interview with the City
Manager or his designee shall be mailed to that applicant at the address on
file with the Commission at the same time the certification is submitted to
the City Manager.



   (C)   Notice of result of employment interview.  After interviewing
each eligible who has been certified, the City Manager or his designee shall
report to the Commission the outcome of each interview and the name or names
of the persons to be appointed to the Civil Service and the date of such
appointment.



   (D)   Cancellation of certifications.  If at any time after
eligibles have been certified by the Commission, at the request of the City
Manager, the City Manager decides not to fill the vacancy, or decides to fill
the vacancy by other means which meet the approval of the Commission, the
certification shall be cancelled, and the eligibles whose names have been
certified to the City Manager shall be so notified. An entry shall be made on
the minutes of the Commission recording the action taken and the reasons
therefor.



   (E)   Provisional appointment.  Whenever there are urgent reasons
for filling a vacancy and the Commission is unable, upon request, to certify
a list of persons eligible for appointment through competitive examination,
the City Manager may, with the approval of the Commission, nominate a
qualified person for provisional appointment.  This provisional appointment
shall continue in force only until a regular appointment can be made from an
eligible list which shall be prepared by the Commission within 90 calendar
days after the provisional appointment.



   (F)   Emergency appointments.  In case of an emergency, which
requires the employment of extra persons without delay, an appointment may be
made by the City Manager without regard to these rules.  In no such case
shall an emergency appointment continue longer than 30 calendar days, and in
no case shall successive emergency appointments be permitted.  An emergency
appointment shall be promptly reported to the Commission, with the reasons
therefor.  The Commission reserves the right to inquire into the nature of
the emergency presented.



   (G)   Temporary appointments.  Whenever a department requires
temporary assistance because of a special project or a temporary increase in
the work load, temporary appointments can be made from an appropriate
eligible list for the duration of such unusual work, which shall not exceed a
period of six months.  If an employee is on leave and must be replaced, a
temporary appointment can be made for the duration of the leave of absence. 
The acceptance or rejection by an eligible of a temporary appointment shall
not affect his or her standing on the eligible list, nor shall the period of
temporary service be counted as part of the probationary service in case of
subsequent permanent appointment.



   (H)   Reinstatements of former employees.  Any permanent employee
who has resigned in good standing may apply for reinstatement to the
employee's former department with the city if such application is filed
within six months of the effective date of the employee's resignation. The
application shall be reviewed by the City Manager who shall issue a
recommendation to the Civil Service Commission as to whether or not to accept
the application for reinstatement, and what conditions, if any, shall apply
to such reinstatement. The Civil Service Commission, within 30 days of the
application for reinstatement, shall consider the application and the City
Manager's recommendation. If the Civil Service Commission determines that
good cause has been shown to accept such reinstatement, the Commission may
either return the employee to the list of applicants eligible for original
appointment to the department during the next vacancy, if no current vacancy
exists, or the Commission may return the employee to service with the
department at the employee's previous level or at a lower level in the
department where such current vacancy exists. The employee's name shall then
be certified to the City Manager, in addition to the minimum number of names
from the eligible list as required by division (A) of this section, when
there is an opening within the department and a request by the City Manager
for a certified list for appointment to the department. A reinstated employee
may remain on the eligible list until the earlier of the expiration or
revocation of the list as provided by § 33.21, or one year from the date of
the employee's resignation from employment. The Commission may impose any
conditions upon reinstatement including an additional probationary period as
the Commission deems appropriate.



   (I)   Review of examination papers by City Manager.  The City
Manager or an authorized representative of the City Manager shall be
privileged to examine the papers of applicants, should this be requested in
connection with determining the relative fitness of persons under
consideration for appointment. 



(Ord. 12-1972, passed 7-20-72; Am. Ord. 6-1980, passed 5-7-80; Am. Ord.
22-1999, passed 9-29-99; Am. Ord. 12-2002, passed 10-2-02)



§ 33.23  PROBATION.



   (A)   Probationary period.  All classified appointments and
promotions shall be for a probationary period of 12 months. No appointment or
promotion shall be deemed final until the appointee has satisfactorily served
his or her probationary period. A probationary employee may be removed at any
time during the probationary period with or without cause and without right
of appeal to the Commission. The probationary period of a newly hired and
appointed employee, but not a promoted employee, may be extended for up to an
additional six months by the City Manager with notice to the Commission.



   (B)   Any employee failing to qualify in his or her probationary
period shall be ineligible for any civil service examination for a period of
two years from the date of separation from service, unless, in the judgment
of the Commission, the cause of his or her removal will not affect his or her
ability in some other class of employment with the city.



   (C)   Return to former position.  It shall be the policy of the
municipality that an employee shall not have to risk his or her tenure in
order to better his or her status with the city.  Therefore, if any employee
with Civil Service status fails to qualify during a probationary period for a
higher position, he or she shall be returned to his or her former position,
or to one substantially similar, if the reason for failing probation would
not affect his or her performance on the previous job.



(Ord. 12-1972, passed 7-20-72; Am. Ord. 22-1999, passed 9-29-99; Am. Ord.
12-2002, passed 10-2-02)



§ 33.24  PROMOTIONS.



   (A)   Commission to rule on promotional examinations.  Whenever
there is a vacancy in a position within the classified service, having a
classification above a lower grade in a series, the Commission shall
determine whether the position is to be filled by promotional examination or
by open-competitive examination.  If the Commission determines the vacancy
is to be filled by promotional examination, the Commission shall determine
which class or classes of employees in the classified service shall be
eligible to compete.  If the position is to be filled by open-competitive
examination, the Commission shall determine what service requirements are
necessary from candidates outside the City's classified service.  When a
promotional examination is held, the eligible list resulting from such
examination shall be used to fill the vacancy as provided in § 33.24(F). 
If an open-competitive examination is held, the procedure set forth in §§
33.19 through 33.22 shall be followed to fill the position; provided however,
the number of eligible candidates certified for promotion shall be set by §
33.24(F).



   (B)   Promotional examinations/open-competitive examination.



      (1)   A promotional examination or an open-competitive
examination is a fitness test as defined in division (E) of this section. 
The examination is used to determine the relative standing of applicants for
promotion or appointment to a position in a specified class.  The Commission
shall determine what experience would be a natural preparation for the
position to which to be appointed.  The Commission shall determine whether
or not service in a specific position for a specific period of time is
required before an employee may be eligible for promotional examination. 
Provided, however, to be eligible for the promotional examination for the
position of Sergeant within the Police Department, an applicant must have
three prior years of full-time service with the city as a patrol officer and
to be eligible for the promotional examination for the position of Lieutenant
within the Fire Department, an applicant must have three prior years of
full-time service with the city as a firefighter/paramedic.  If the
Commission elects to hold an open-competitive examination for appointment to
either the Sergeant's position within the Police Department or Lieutenant's
position within the Fire Department, the Commission shall determine in
advance of the notice of examination what prior service within another
jurisdiction is required at a minimum to be eligible to take the examination.



      (2)   No employee shall be deemed eligible for a promotional
examination whose last performance rating within the city was determined to
be unsatisfactory.  Also, if an employee with a satisfactory rating has been
reprimanded since the last performance rating or if an applicant from an
outside department seeking a promotion in an open-competitive examination has
been reprimanded with his employer during the previous 12 months, the
Commission may disapprove his or her application for examination after first
giving the applicant an opportunity to be heard before the Commission.  If
the Commission from such hearing decides to disapprove the application, the
reasons for the disapproval shall be stated in writing and a copy presented
to the applicant.



   (C)   Announcement of examination.  Whenever the Commission orders
a promotional examination to be held, notice of the examination shall be
published by the Commission and posted in the department or departments in
which the eligible employees then serve.  Additionally, it shall be the duty
of the department head in each department in which such eligible employees
serve to provide a minimum of 30 days advance written notice of the date of
the promotional examination and the closing date specified by the Commission
for registration for the examination to each employee within the department
who is eligible for such examination.  If the examination is determined to
be an open-competitive examination as provided by Charter § 6.04, the
Commission shall appropriately advertise such examination in a newspaper in
general circulation within the city and in such other public media from which
the city would typically draw applications for employment.  Such
advertisements shall occur a minimum of 30 days in advance of the closing
date specified by the Commission for registration for the examination.



   (D)   Application for examinations.  Each eligible applicant who
desires to compete for a promotional or open-competitive examination must
complete a prescribed application form and present the application to the
office of the City Manager on or before the closing date specified in the
official announcement of the examination.



   (E)   Character of examinations.



      (1)   All promotional and open-competitive examinations shall
be practical in character and shall relate directly to those matters which
fairly test the relative capacity of the person being examined to discharge
the particular duties of the class of positions to which promotion or
appointment is sought.  As may be determined by the Commission, the test may
include a written component, an assessment center evaluation, and an oral
interview designed to test the applicant's knowledge and applied skills,
which in the determination of the Commission, are necessary to fulfill the
responsibilities of the position to which the applicant is being tested. 
Before announcing a promotional or open-competitive examination, the
Commission shall determine what component parts will comprise the examination
and the relative weight to be given to each component part.  This
information shall be communicated with the notice of eligibility or public
advertisement as required in division (C) of this section.



      (2)   In a promotional examination conducted among employees
currently serving in the classified service of the city, an applicant must
first attain a passing score on the examination, after which the final score
of an applicant in a promotional examination may be determined by adding
points to the passing score obtained on the examination for the following:



         (a)   Seniority.  For each full year of the first four
years of creditable service, one percentage point shall be added to the
applicant's final grade; for each full year of creditable service for the
next 10 years of such service, 0.6 percentage points shall be added to the
applicant's final grade.  No applicant may be awarded more than 10
percentage points to the final grade for seniority service.  Creditable
service shall consist of the years of continuous service with the city. 
Continuous service is defined as service which is not broken by dismissal or
resignation without reinstatement.  However, seniority credit is not given
for service as an unclassified, emergency, or provisional employee.  An
employee whose municipal service is interrupted by layoff or by resignation
followed by reinstatement as permitted by § 33.22 shall receive credit for
his or her service prior to such layoff or resignation.  Any employee whose
municipal service is interrupted only by military service shall receive
credit for seniority on the basis of his or her combined municipal and
military service.



         (b)   Performance.  There shall be added to the
applicant's test score the score on a scale of 0-10, achieved by such
employee in his or her most recent performance evaluation.  If the scale
used by the department for the most recent performance evaluation is not on a
0-10 scale, then the numerical scale used by the department shall be
appropriately converted to a 0-10 scale and each employee's most recent
performance evaluation restated with such conversion.



      (3)   In an open-competitive examination, at the time the
Commission determines the component parts of an examination and the relative
weight to be given to each component, the Commission also shall determine
whether or not additional credit shall be given for seniority service with
the city or another jurisdiction and whether past performance evaluations
shall be scored and how to credit such scores.



   (F)   Promotional or appointment eligibility list.  In both a
promotional and open-competitive examination, the names and final grades
representing the combined total from the weighted test score, plus seniority
credit and performance credit as appropriate for the highest three applicants
who have tested for a position, shall be certified by the Commission to the
City Manager from which the City Manager shall make a final appointment to
fill the position.  The City Manager may conduct such additional interviews
as may be appropriate to familiarize the City Manager with the applicant's
performance history and ability to fill the position in question.  There
shall be no additional points awarded for such interview with the City
Manager, but the City Manager may choose any one of the three highest ranked
applicants to fill the position.



   (G)   Inspection of examination papers.  Any applicant may inspect
his or her examination papers within 30 days after the results of any
promotional or open-competitive examination in which he or she has competed
are approved by the Commission.  An applicant may review his or her papers
only once.  No applicant will be permitted to take notes, copy, or otherwise
reproduce any portion of his or her examination papers.



   (H)   Promotion without examination.  The Commission recognizes the
following exceptional situations in which it may authorize a promotion
without competition of eligible employees.  If a vacancy exists in the
classification requiring particular and exceptional qualifications of a
scientific, managerial, professional, or educational character, and the City
Manager establishes in writing to the satisfaction of the Commission that
only one subordinate employee of the department has such qualifications,
promotion may be approved under such circumstances consistent with R.C. §
124.30(B) and all Administrative Code regulations adopted in support thereof.



   (I)   Temporary promotions.  An interim or temporary appointment to
a higher position made necessary by reason of sickness, disability or other
absence of a regular employee may be authorized without examination by the
Commission upon the written request of the City Manager who shall set forth
such information necessary to substantiate such request.  All such temporary
positions shall continue only during such period of sickness or disability
and cannot be converted to a permanent appointment without appropriate
promotional or open-competitive examination.  The reason for such temporary
promotion and the proposed duration for such temporary promotion shall be
recorded in the minutes of the Commission.



(Ord. 12-1972, passed 7-20-72; Am. Ord. 31-1981, passed 12-2-81; Am. Ord.
10-1982, passed 4-7-82; Am. Ord. 22-1999, passed 9-29-99; Am. Ord. 12-2002,
passed 10-2-02; Am. Ord. 3-2008, passed 5-7-08)



§ 33.25  TRANSFERS.



   (A)   Interdepartmental transfers.  Any employee in the classified
service who has served the required probationary term may be transferred with
the approval of the Commission from a position in one department to a
position of the same class in another department, upon consent of the City
Manager and with the consent of the employee to be transferred. Such transfer
shall not require an additional probationary period.



   (B)   Assignment to other work.  Any employee in the classified
service may be assigned to other work than that described in the
specifications of his or her classification but of the same general level of
responsibility, for a period not exceeding 30 days, without notice to the
Commission, but with the consent of the City Manager. Such assignment shall
involve no change in compensation. No person shall be employed for more than
30 days on other duties than those implied by his or her class title unless
he or she has qualified through competitive examination as proscribed
herein. 



(Ord. 12-1972, passed 7-20-72; Am. Ord. 22-1999, passed 9-29-99; Am. Ord.
12-2002, passed 10-2-02)



§ 33.26  LAYOFF AND RECALL.



   (A)   Layoff procedure.



      (1)   When it becomes necessary in any department through lack
of work or financial restrictions, or for other causes, to reduce the number
of employees in a given class, employees without civil service status shall
be laid off first, in such order as the department head determines.  Such
employees are not given any preference if the positions are ultimately
restored.



      (2)   If it becomes necessary to lay off an employee in the
classified service, the layoff will be made in reverse order of seniority.



      (3)   If the employee subject to layoff occupies the class
normally filled by promotion, demotion in lieu of layoff will first be
applied.  The employee with the least seniority in the class will be demoted
in lieu of layoff, provided his or her seniority exceeds that of the newest
employee in the lower class. An employee's compensation shall be adjusted
appropriately to the range of compensation which apply to the position to
which demoted.



   (B)   Recall.  Employees holding permanent positions in the
classified service who have been laid off will be listed on an appropriate
layoff list.  In case of vacancy in the same position in the same department
such an employee shall be recalled if the vacancy occurs within two years of
layoff.  Employees on layoff may be recalled for work in other departments,
or in other similar classes, only subject to approval of the Commission. 



(Ord. 12-1972, passed 7-20-72; Am. Ord. 22-1999, passed 9-29-99; Am. Ord.
12-2002, passed 10-2-02)



§ 33.27  PERFORMANCE RECORDS.



   (A)   Performance reports. Performance ratings relative to the
conduct and capacity of all employees in the classified service shall be
completed annually by the department heads on forms prescribed by the City
Manager. Such performance reports shall be filed with the office of the City
Manager, a copy retained by the department head, and a copy presented to the
employee.



   (B)   Appeal from rating. Upon receipt of an annual performance
rating, an employee, dissatisfied with such rating, may request a review of
such rating with the department head. If the employee is still not satisfied
with the final rating or any adjustment in the rating made by the department
head after such review, the employee may appeal his or her rating to the
Commission provided such appeal is filed within 60 days of the time the
performance report originally was filed with the City Manager. Such request
for review by the Commission shall identify the issue or issues on the
performance rating which the appellant believes are improper and the reasons
therefor. The Commission then shall conduct a hearing and may determine that:
the evaluation stand unaltered; all or a part of the evaluation be expunged
from the employee's personnel file; the individual rating be raised or
lowered; or any other appropriate remedy. The Commission shall not alter or
expunge a performance evaluation unless the employee establishes by a
preponderance of the evidence that the rater or reviewer abused his or her
discretion producing an inaccurate, unfair or prejudicial evaluation.



(Ord. 12-1972, passed 7-20-72; Am. Ord. 22-1999, passed 9-29-99; Am. Ord.
12-2002, passed 10-2-02)



§ 33.28  REMOVALS, REDUCTIONS OR SUSPENSIONS.



   (A)   The tenure of every employee in the classified service shall
be during good behavior and efficient service and no such employee shall be
reduced in pay or position, suspended, or removed except for incompetency,
inefficiency, dishonesty, drunkenness, immoral conduct, insubordination,
discourteous treatment of the public, neglect of duty, violation of the rules
and procedures adopted by the city or the department in question, any other
failure of good behavior, or any other acts of misfeasance, malfeasance, or
nonfeasance in office.



   (B)   If a department head, or acting department head, determines
that an employee should be suspended for any of the reasons as set forth
above, the department head shall file a written report with the City Manager
setting forth facts to support such disciplinary action and the recommended
disciplinary suspension or dismissal. A copy of the report shall be presented
to the employee and thereafter a pre-disciplinary conference shall be
conducted by the City Manager, or his designee, within a reasonable period of
time to give the employee an opportunity to explain the alleged misconduct to
determine whether and what disciplinary action shall be taken.



   (C)   At any time during the disciplinary process, the employee may
waive, in writing, the opportunity for a pre-disciplinary conference. The
employee may accept the form and severity of the disciplinary action proposal
without further appeal or the employee may allow the City Manager to issue a
decision based upon the report submitted from which the employee may file an
appeal as provided herein.



   (D)   After such pre-disciplinary conference, the City Manager may
dismiss the charges or implement such appropriate disciplinary action as he
or she may determine. A written report setting forth the recommended
disciplinary action and the reasons therefore shall be filed with the
Commission and a copy presented to the employee. Any disciplinary action
resulting in a suspension of greater than three days, a demotion or dismissal
may be appealed to the Commission within 10 calendar days following the
receipt of the written disciplinary decision by the City Manager. To perfect
the appeal, the employee shall file a written appeal with the Commission
within 10 calendar days from receipt of the disciplinary order. In the event
such an appeal is filed, the Commission shall hear, or appoint a Trial Board
to hear, such appeal within 30 calendar days from and after its filing with
the Commission. The Commission or Trial Board may affirm, disaffirm or modify
the judgment of the City Manager. Written notice shall be given to the
appellant/employee and to the City Manager of the time and place of hearing
of the appeal, which hearing shall be open to the public.



   (E)   Appeal proceedings. The Commission or Trial Board shall hear
evidence upon the charge and specifications as filed with the City Manager by
the department head. No material amendments of, or additions to said charges
or specifications will be considered by the Commission or Trial Board after
the charges are filed by the City Manager.



      (1)   Order of proof. The order of proof shall be as follows:
The City Manager shall present his or her evidence in support of the charges.
The appellant shall then produce such evidence as he or she may wish to offer
in defense of the charges. The parties in interest may then offer rebuttal
evidence. Each party shall then be given an opportunity to make final
arguments to the Commission or Trial Board, which the Commission or Trial
Board, in their sole discretion, may request to be submitted in writing
rather than argued orally before the Commission or Trial Board.



      (2)   Evidence and counsel. The admission of evidence shall be
governed by the Ohio Rules of Evidence. The Commission shall have the power
to administer oaths and to issue subpoenas to require the attendance of
witnesses and the production of relevant documents. The City Manager may be
represented by the City Law Director or other legal counsel. The appellant
also may be represented by legal counsel of his or her own choosing at the
employee's own expense. After reviewing the evidence and the arguments by
both parties, the Commission or Trial Board shall render its judgment
affirming, disaffirming or modifying the disciplinary decision of the City
Manager. Thereafter, the decision by the Commission or Trial Board may be
appealed as permissible under Ohio law.



      (3)   Failure of parties to appear. If the disciplined
employee shall fail to appear at the time fixed for the hearing, the
Commission or Trial Board shall hear the evidence available and render
judgment thereon. If the City Manager shall fail to appear at the time fixed
for the hearing and if no evidence shall be offered in support of his or her
disciplinary decision, the Commission or Trial Board may render judgment as
by default or may hear evidence offered by the disciplined employee and
render judgment thereon.



   (F)   Resignation before decision. The disciplined employee may
submit a resignation to the City Manager before final action by the
Commission or Trial Board. Such resignation shall be considered a withdrawal
of the charges and a separation from service by the disciplined employee. It
shall then be recorded as a resignation on the records of the Commission and
the proceedings shall be dismissed without judgment.



   (G)   Compensation when appeal is sustained. Whenever the dismissal,
demotion or suspension of an employee is disapproved by the Commission or
Trial Board, and a reinstatement ordered, the employee involved may, as
determined by the Commission or Trial Board, receive the pay he or she has
lost because of such dismissal, demotion or suspension. The Commission or
Trial Board shall make a specific finding concerning reinstatement, back pay
and benefits as may be appropriate in the final determination of the case.



   (H)   Disqualification for reappointment. Any employee who is
dismissed for misconduct or delinquency, or who resigns while not in good
standing, shall be disqualified from taking any Civil Service examination
with the city for two years following the date of separation from service,
and his or her name shall be removed from all eligible lists, unless, in the
judgment of the Commission, the cause of his or her dismissal, or resignation
under charges, will not affect the possibility of his or her usefulness in
some other type of employment with the city.



   (I)   Demotions for physical incapacity. When an employee becomes
physically disabled or otherwise incapacitated from the performance of the
duties of his or her position, the employee, with the consent of the City
Manager, may request that he or she be reclassified or transferred to a
vacant position which will accommodate his or her physical needs including
reclassification or transfer to a position carrying a lower compensation. The
circumstances regarding such a change in classification shall be reported to
the Commission and the reclassification shall not become effective until
approved by the Commission. Such voluntary demotion to accommodate the
physical needs of an employee shall not be considered as a disciplinary
demotion and no right of appeal shall exist to the Commission as set forth
herein.



(Ord. 12-1972, passed 7-20-72; Am. Ord. 22-1999, passed 9-29-99; Am. Ord.
12-2002, passed 10-2-02)



§ 33.29  COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT.



   If anything contained in this chapter, setting forth the rules for the
appointment, classification, promotion or discipline of classified employees,
should be in conflict with the provisions of a collective bargaining
agreement governing the employment of a municipal personnel, the terms of
such collective bargaining agreement shall supersede and shall prevail over
provisions of this chapter. 



(Ord. 14-1989, passed 5-3-89; Am. Ord. 22-1999, passed 9-29-99; Am. Ord.
12-2002, passed 10-2-02)



COMMUNITY IMPROVEMENT CORPORATION



§ 33.40  ESTABLISHMENT; PURPOSE.



   Pursuant to authority conferred in R.C. § 1724.10, the City Council
determines that it is the policy of the city to promote the health, safety,
morals, and general welfare of its inhabitants through the designation of a
community improvement corporation as the agency and instrumentality of this
municipal corporation for the industrial, commercial, distribution, and
research development within this municipality.  The Montgomery Community
Improvement Corporation, a community improvement corporation organized as a
corporation not-for-profit in the manner provided in R.C. Ch. 1724, is
designated as this municipality's agency and instrumentality for the
industrial, commercial, distribution, and research development in this
municipality.



(Ord. 21-1984, passed 9-5-84; Am. Ord. 12-2002, passed 10-2-02)



§ 33.41  AUTHORIZATION FOR AGREEMENT AND PLAN.



   The City Manager is authorized to enter into an agreement and plan of
industrial, commercial distribution and research development with the
Montgomery Community Improvement Corporation as permitted by R.C. Chapter
1724, and as may be separately approved from time to time by the City Council
by resolution.



(Ord. 21-1984, passed 9-5-84; Am. Ord. 12-2002, passed 10-2-02; Am. Ord.
5-2015, passed 3-4-15)



BEAUTIFICATION COMMISSION



§ 33.50  CREATION; MEMBERS; AUTHORITY.



   (A)   The Beautification Commission shall annually develop and
update a plan for the care of trees, shrubs and flowers in all public
areas.  It shall advise the Administration and the City Council on the
prudent and productive use of financial resources for the purposes within its
charge.  It shall propose programs, submit an annual budget, supervise such
undertakings as are authorized by Council and report its progress annually.



   (B)   The Beautification Commission shall consist of seven members
who shall be appointed by Council to serve for three year, staggered terms.
Subsequent to the effective date of this section, Council shall appoint seven
members to the Commission, with two being appointed for a term which shall
expire one year after the initial appointment, two being appointed for a term
which shall expire two years after the initial appointment and three being
appointed for a term which shall expire three years after the initial
appointment. Thereafter, all future appointments shall be for three year
terms except that vacancies shall be filled for any unexpired term in the
manner in which original appointments were made.



   (C)   In order to facilitate an orderly transition, the current
eight members of the Beautification Commission may continue service on the
Beautification Commission until one of the current members resigns, is not
reappointed, or until February 28, 1998 whichever comes first.



   (D)   The Commission shall elect its own Chair and may adopt its own
rules and regulations for the conduct of its business.



(Ord. 34-1988, passed 11-2-88; Am. Ord. 12-1995, passed 5-3-95)



SISTER CITIES COMMISSION



§ 33.60  CREATION; MEMBERS; AUTHORITY.



   (A)   The Sister Cities Commission shall plan for and maintain
productive Sister City relationships with foreign communities approved by the
City Council. It shall establish programs and exchanges and promote
relationships that will tend to improve international understanding between
governments and their citizens.  It shall propose programs, submit an annual
budget, supervise such undertakings as are authorized by City Council and
report its progress annually.



   (B)   The Sister Cities Commission shall consist of seven members
who shall be appointed by Council to serve for three year, staggered terms
except that vacancies shall be filled for any unexpired term in the manner in
which original appointments were made.  No more than three members of the
Sister Cities Commission shall be non-residents of the city.



   (C)   The Commission shall elect its own Chair and may adopt its own
rules and regulations for the conduct of its business.



(Ord. 36-1993, passed 12-1-93; Am. Ord. 4-2002, passed 3-6-02)



ARTS COMMISSION



§ 33.70  CREATION; MEMBERS; AUTHORITY.



   (A)   The Arts Commission shall foster and promote the visual and
performing arts within the city for the benefit of its residents. It shall
advise the City Council and the Administration on the prudent and productive
use of financial resources for the purposes within its charge. It shall
propose programs, submit an annual budget, supervise such undertakings as are
authorized by City Council and report its progress annually.



   (B)   The Arts Commission shall consist of seven members who shall
be appointed by Council to serve for three year, staggered terms. Subsequent
to the effective date of this section, Council shall appoint seven members to
the Commission, with three being appointed for a term which shall expire one
year after the initial appointment, two being appointed for a term which
shall expire two years after the initial appointment and two being appointed
for a term which shall expire three years after the initial appointment.
Thereafter, all future appointments shall be for three year terms except that
vacancies shall be filled for any unexpired term in the manner in which
original appointments were made. No more than two members of the Arts
Commission shall be non-residents of the city.



   (C)   The Commission shall elect its own Chair and may adopt its own
rules and regulations for the conduct of its business.



(Ord. 38-1993, passed 12-1-93)



ENVIRONMENTAL ADVISORY COMMISSION



§ 33.80  CREATION; MEMBERS; AUTHORITY.



   (A)   There is hereby established the Environmental Advisory
Commission whose purpose shall be to provide education and information to the
public and to be a resource for the city administration and City Council on
environmental issues such as yard waste, recycling, storm water management,
water resources management, air pollution control, noise pollution control,
soil and landscape protection, and protection of flora and fauna.



   (B)   The Environmental Advisory Commission shall consist of seven
members appointed by Council to serve three-year staggered terms commencing
February 1 in the appropriate year of appointment.  Vacancies to the
Commission shall be filled by Council for the unexpired term in the manner in
which the original appointments were made.



   (C)   The Environmental Advisory Commission shall hold regularly
scheduled meetings at announced times.  The quorum shall be four members. 
At its first meeting each February it shall organize, selecting its Chair,
Vice Chair and Secretary.  The Commission shall establish its own Rules of
Procedure and it shall keep a record of its proceedings and all matters
coming before it.



   (D)   With the adoption of this section, the Commission shall be
organized as follows:



      (1)   The term of three current members of the Commission, as
designated by Council, shall continue until January 31, 2007;



      (2)   The term of two current members of the Commission, as
designated by Council, shall continue until January 31, 2008;



      (3)   The term of two current members of the Commission, as
designated by Council, shall continue until January 31, 2009; and



      (4)   After the initial terms have concluded, each successive
term shall be three years.



(Ord. 9-2006, passed 5-3-06)



CHAPTER 34:  PERSONNEL POLICIES; BOND



Section



General Provisions



   34.01   Compensation/wages and benefits



   34.02   Roster of personnel



   34.03   Employment authorization



   34.04   Full and part-time personnel



   34.05   Employee leave benefits



   34.06   Statutorily required contributions to pensions and
retirement funds



   34.07   Longevity pay



   34.08   Collective bargaining agreement



   34.09   Transitional employment appointments



Bond



   34.15   Municipal officials



Cross-reference:



   Civil Service Commission and regulations, see §§ 33.15 et seq.



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 34.01  COMPENSATION/WAGES AND BENEFITS.



   (A)   The Council shall establish a general schedule of municipal
compensation for all offices and positions in the municipal service:



      (1)   The compensation of the municipality's regular personnel
and the compensation of part-time, temporary and seasonal personnel shall be
governed by a schedule established by the Council for such employees. The
schedule shall provide a range of pay for each position.



      (2)   During the first year of employment in the municipal
service, an employee shall be compensated at the lower end of the pay range
unless the City Manager shall determine that a higher rate, not exceeding the
maximum, is warranted by virtue of skill or experience. Such employee's rate
of pay may thereafter be increased annually based on satisfactory performance
as set by the City Manager in conjunction with the periodic evaluation of
performance until the maximum rate is attained.



   (B)   Elected officials of the municipality shall be paid on a
quarterly basis. Payroll periods for employees shall be weekly or bi-weekly
as the City Manager shall designate.



   (C)   Medical.



      (1)   Each full-time employee shall be entitled to medical
insurance coverage as established by City Council and subject to any
negotiated benefits within a collective bargaining agreement. City Council
shall choose the insurance carrier, or carriers, to provide such coverage,
the plan options to be offered to employees, and the maximum contribution for
such coverage to be paid by the city.



      (2)   If the cost to provide such insurance coverage exceeds
the maximum contribution limits established by City Council, 50% of the cost
in excess of such maximum contribution shall be paid by the city and 50% of
the cost in excess of the maximum contribution shall be paid by the employee.
Insurance cost payments to be paid by the employee shall be made by payroll
deduction.



      (3)   (a)   If the administration determines that it is
necessary to change insurance coverages and/or if the anticipated cost of
insurance coverage, as it exists or as proposed, will exceed the maximum
contribution limits established by City Council, then these issues shall be
referred to the Employee/Management Healthcare Benefits Committee for review
and recommendation to the City Council. The Committee shall be comprised of
five members, one of whom shall be appointed by the Police Department
bargaining unit, one of whom shall be appointed by the Fire Department
bargaining unit, one of whom shall be appointed by the Public Works
Department bargaining unit, and one of whom shall be appointed by the
administrative employees who are not members of an organized and recognized
bargaining unit. The fifth member of the Committee shall be appointed by the
City Manager.



         (b)   The Committee shall have the authority to
recommend a change in either the level of, or provider for, comprehensive
major medical coverage and such additional healthcare benefits as may be
authorized by City Council including dental insurance, optical benefits, life
insurance or other related benefits. The Committee shall have the authority
to recommend to City Council that Council continue the current plan benefits,
even if such plan benefits exceed the maximum contribution limits, if the
Committee determines that such health care benefits at such cost are in the
best interest of the city and employees. The Committee shall not have the
authority to modify the maximum contribution limits on employer paid health
care benefits. A majority of the Committee shall constitute a quorum and it
may take action or make recommendation only by a consensus vote of its
Committee members. If the Committee is unable to reach a consensus after
exhausting all efforts to do so, their recommendation may be made by a
majority of the Committee members. Council may consider but is not bound by
the recommendations of the Committee.



   (D)   Salaried/exempt employees bonus program.



      (1) Effective January 1, 2008, there is hereby established the
salaried/exempt employees bonus program. The purpose of the program is to
appropriate to the City Manager a sum of money annually to be used to award
discretionary bonuses to department heads, highly compensated employees, and
other salaried/exempt employees. This group of employees are exempt employees
as defined in the Fair Labor Standards Act and the regulations promulgated
under the authority of the Act. As exempt employees, they are not entitled to
overtime compensation when they work in excess of their work week hours. Many
of these employees work far in excess of 40 hours per week attending
after-hour meetings or answering the call to address problems arising after
work hours.



      (2)   This bonus program will allow the City Manager, in his
or her discretion, to award bonus compensation to such employees for their
exempt work from the bonus pool appropriated by City Council. City Council
may or may not appropriate monies to the bonus pool on an annual basis.



      (3)   The bonus awarded by the City Manager shall not be based
upon hourly compensation at time and one-half, nor shall eligible employees
lose their exempt status by participating in the program. The amount and
timing for compensation solely shall be within the discretion of the City
Manager. The exempt employees who shall participate also shall be determined
in the discretion of the City Manager. The amount of any bonus and the exempt
employees who shall receive such bonuses may vary from year to year. Any
bonus awarded shall not increase the employee's base salary in the
determination of annual compensation nor shall the failure to award a bonus
or the award of a lesser bonus from year to year be considered as
disciplinary action.



      (4)   The City Manager shall report to City Council not less
than annually the amount of each bonus awarded, the list of exempt employees
to whom such bonuses are paid, and the basis for awarding an individual
bonus. 



   (E)   Wellness incentive program.  The city shall offer a wellness
incentive program for its full-time and part-time employees. This program
shall be developed by the City Manager with the assistance of an employee
committee. The program shall allow eligible employees to qualify to receive
an annual wellness incentive payment in an amount established by City
Council.  Employees who qualify for an incentive award shall receive their
incentive pay no later than March 1 of the year after acceptable levels of
program participation by the employee have been achieved.



   (F)   In addition to the wage compensation, medical insurance and
wellness incentive as provided herein, Council from time to time may
authorize additional non-compensatory benefits such as dental insurance,
vision benefits, life insurance, accidental death and disability and/or
similar benefits.



   (G)   The compensation and benefits prescribed herein shall
constitute the total remuneration for the work performed in the public
service by a municipal officer or employee unless otherwise provided by
Council.



(Ord. 30-1973, passed 12-27-73; Am. Ord. 27-1981, passed 10-7-81; Am. Ord.
20-1987, passed 9-2-87; Am. Ord. 12-1989, passed 5-3-89; Am. Ord. 11-1999,
passed 7-7-99; Am. Ord. 14-2001, passed 11-7-01; Am. Ord. 4-2012, passed
3-7-12)



§ 34.02  ROSTER OF PERSONNEL.



   A roster of all persons in the employment of the municipality shall be
maintained by the city administration.  The roster of personnel shall record
the full or part-time classification of each position in the municipal
service, the person's name, address, date of appointment to, or employment
in, the municipal service, the department in which employed, the title of the
office or the position held, the salary or compensation of the officer or
employee, and, in the case of resignation, separation or removal, the date
thereof.



(Ord. 30-1973, passed 12-27-73; Am. Ord. 20-1987, passed 9-2-87; Am. Ord.
11-1999, passed 7-7-99; Am. Ord. 4-2012, passed 3-7-12)



§ 34.03  EMPLOYMENT AUTHORIZATION.



   Department heads shall, on written application to the City Manager
setting forth such facts and circumstances which such department head
believes justifies the employment of additional personnel, and with the
approval of the City Manager, employ such persons as shall be necessary to
conduct the work of the department, provided that the total salaries and
wages of a department shall not exceed the total amount appropriated for the
department or for the purpose which occasions the employment.



(Ord. 30-1973, passed 12-27-73; Am. Ord. 27-1981, passed 10-7-81; Am. Ord.
20-1987, passed 9-2-87; Am. Ord. 11-1999, passed 7-7-99; Am. Ord. 4-2012,
passed 3-7-12)



§ 34.04  FULL AND PART-TIME PERSONNEL.



   (A)   For the purposes of determining eligibility for employment
benefits set forth within this chapter, except as otherwise mandated by
pre-empting state or federal legislation, municipal officials and personnel
shall be considered as full-time personnel if they work at least 37.5 hours
per week on an annual basis.  The Law Director and Clerk of Council shall
not be considered full-time employees regardless of the number of hours
worked.  An employee who works less than 37.5 hours per week on an annual
basis is considered a part-time employee.



   (B)   Part-time city employees are not eligible to accrue sick
leave, vacation leave, personal leave, holiday pay or longevity bonuses. 
Part-time employees may participate in any other benefit programs established
by City Council consistent with the policies for eligibility and
participation as established by the City Council and/or City Manager.



(Ord. 12-1976, passed 5-5-76; Am. Ord. 27-1981, passed 10-7-81; Am. Ord.
20-1987, passed 9-2-87; Am. Ord. 13-1995, passed 5-3-95; Am. Ord. 11-1999,
passed 7-7-99; Am. Ord. 4-2012, passed 3-7-12; Am. Ord. 3-2013, passed 2-6-13)



§ 34.05  EMPLOYEE LEAVE BENEFITS.



   (A)   Vacation.  Each full-time municipal employee with one or more
years of credited service with a state agency or political subdivision of the
state shall be entitled to vacation with pay corresponding to the following
schedule.  Credited service shall only include full-time service with any
state agency or political subdivision of the state.  Full-time service with
any such agency or subdivision shall be the same as defined in § 34.04(A).



 

Completed years of service
 
Hours to accrue per bi-weekly pay period




Less than 6 years
 
3.077


6
 
3.385


7
 
3.692


8
 
4.000


9
 
4.308


10
 
4.615


11
 
4.923


12
 
5.231


13
 
5.538


14
 
5.846


15 or more
 
6.154




 



      (1)   Accumulation rights.  Vacation time may be carried over
and accumulated in subsequent calendar years in an amount not to exceed the
amount of vacation earned in a two-year period.



   (B)   Sick leave.



      (1)   Effective January 1, 2002 each full-time employee of the
municipality shall be entitled to receive sick leave with pay at the rate of
3.692 hours for each completed 80 hours of service. The policies and
procedures for utilizing sick leave shall be established by the City Manager
subject to any rights reserved within a negotiated collective bargaining
agreement.



      (2)   Effective January 1, 2002 when an employee has
accumulated 864 hours of unused sick leave the employee may, subject to
regulations established by the City Manager, surrender or redeem sick leave
days at the employee's then current rate of pay at the rate of one hour of
such compensation for each one and one-half hours of sick leave surrendered.
The City Manager shall establish rules governing the frequency of redemption,
the maximum number of days which may be redeemed within a period, and such
other incidents of redemption as may be necessary to protect the public
interest and rights of employees. Sick leave cannot be accumulated in excess
of 960 hours.



      (3)   An employee who retires from the city with 10 to 19
years of service with the City of Montgomery shall be paid for one-third the
value of his or her accrued but unused sick leave up to a maximum accumulated
sick leave of 960 hours which equates to a 320 hour pay-out.



      (4)   An employee who retires from the city with 20 or more
years of service with the City of Montgomery shall be paid for one-half the
value of his or her accrued, but unused sick leave up to a maximum
accumulated sick leave of 960 hours which equates to a 480 hour pay-out.



   (C)   Jury duty.  If a full-time employee is called for jury duty,
the city will permit the employee to take the necessary time off and the city
will pay the employee's regular pay, not to exceed eight hours per day, for
work time lost while on jury duty. Fire Department employees may be paid up
to 24 hours per day for work time lost as a result of jury duty. In order to
receive jury duty pay, an employee must present a statement of jury service
and an accounting of jury duty pay to his or her department head. The
employee shall reimburse to the city all compensation paid to the employee by
the court system for jury duty.



   (D)   Holidays. With the exception of employees whose terms of
employment are governed by separate collective bargaining agreements, all
full-time employees shall be paid for the holidays declared in this section
and should not be required to work on such holidays unless in the opinion of
the employee's supervisor, the failure to work on such holiday would impair
the public service.



      (1)   The following are recognized holidays for employees
other than those whose terms of employment are governed by separate
collective bargaining agreements:



         (a)   New Years Day;



         (b)   Martin Luther King, Jr. Day;



         (c)   Memorial Day;



         (d)   Independence Day;



         (e)   Labor Day;



         (f)   Thanksgiving Day;



         (g)   The day following Thanksgiving Day;



         (h)   Christmas Eve; and



         (i)   Christmas Day.



      (2)   Holidays are scheduled on the day designated by common
business practice.



      (3)   In the event any of the above listed holidays should
fall on Sunday, the Monday immediately following such holiday shall be
observed as the holiday. In the event any of the above holidays should fall
on a Saturday, the Friday immediately preceding the observed date shall be
the holiday. If a non-exempt employee is scheduled to work on any of the
listed holidays, those employees shall be paid at one and one-half times the
rate of pay for the hours worked on the holiday.



   (E)   Personal leave.



      (1)   Each full-time employee, other than those employees
whose terms of employment are governed by a separate collective bargaining
agreement, shall be provided with 32 hours annually for personal leave which
must be used during the calendar year in which the leave is awarded. Such
leave shall not be charged to the employee's vacation time.



      (2)   Personal leave may be used by the employee subject to
the approval of the employee's supervisor and such regulations as the City
Manager may promulgate. The regulations may vary among departments and
offices.



      (3)   Personal leave shall be calculated annually and will be
pro-rated for new employees. Personal leave not taken shall not carry forward
beyond the calendar year. Personal leave not taken shall not be compensable
in money unless the City Manager establishes regulations to the contrary.



   (F)   Prior service credit.



      (1)   Any employee who transfers from one political
subdivision of the state to the city shall be credited with the unused
balance of his accumulated sick leave up to a maximum of 960 hours upon
presentation of appropriate documentation.



      (2)   Upon presentation of appropriate documentation, any
employee previously employed by a political subdivision of the state is
entitled to have his prior service with any of these employers counted as
service with the city for the purpose of computing vacation credit. The
anniversary date of his employment, for the purpose of computing the amount
of vacation leave, is the anniversary date of such prior service.



(Ord. 19-1995, passed 6-7-95; Am. Ord. 9-1998, passed 7-1-98; Am. Ord.
11-1999, passed 7-7-99; Am. Ord. 12-1999, passed 7-21-99; Am. Ord. 9-2001,
passed 8-1-01; Am. Ord. 2-2002, passed 1-2-02; Am. Ord. 9-2004, passed
6-2-04; Am. Ord. 11-2007, passed 8-1-07; Am. Ord. 9-2008, passed 5-7-08; Am.
Ord. 4-2012, passed 3-7-12; Am. Ord. 3-2013, passed 2-16-13)



§ 34.06  STATUTORILY REQUIRED CONTRIBUTIONS TO PENSIONS AND RETIREMENT
FUNDS.



   (A)   (1)   Effective July 26, 1998, the full amount of the
statutorily required employee contributions to the Public Employees
Retirement System of Ohio shall be withheld from the gross pay of each
employee who is or will become a contributing member of the Public Employees
Retirement System of Ohio and shall be "picked up" (assumed and paid to the
Public Employees Retirement System of Ohio) by the city. This "pick-up" by
the city is, and shall be designated as, public employee contributions and
shall be in lieu of contributions to the Public Employees Retirement System
of Ohio by each person who is a contributing member of the Public Employees
Retirement System of Ohio. No person subject to this "pick-up" shall have the
option of choosing to receive the statutorily required contribution to the
Public Employees Retirement System of Ohio directly instead of having it
"picked-up" by the city or of being excluded from the "pick-up".



      (2)   Effective August 1, 2001, city employees who are or
become contributing members of the Public Employees Retirement System of Ohio
may purchase additional service credit, tax deferred, and the City of
Montgomery shall withhold the required service credit deduction from the
gross pay of each person who elects to do so and shall "pick up" (assume and
pay) such deduction to the Public Employees Retirement System of Ohio. A
person electing this "pick up" deduction shall not have the option of
choosing to receive the payroll deduction directly instead of having this
deduction "picked up" by the city. Members who have elected to participate in
this plan cannot increase, decrease, or terminate the amount of the "pick up"
deduction.



   (B)   (1)   Effective July 26, 1998, the full amount of the
statutorily required contributions to the Police & Firemen's Disability &
Pension Fund of Ohio shall be withheld from the gross pay of each employee
who is or will become a contributing member of the Police & Firemen's
Disability & Pension Fund of Ohio and shall be "picked up" (assumed and paid
to the Police & Firemen's Disability & Pension Fund of Ohio) by the City of
Montgomery. This "pick-up" by the City of Montgomery is, and shall be
designated as, public employee contributions and shall be in lieu of
contributions to the Police & Firemen's Disability & Pension Fund of Ohio by
each person who is a contributing member to the Police & Firemen's Disability
& Pension Fund of Ohio. No person subject to this "pick up" shall have the
option of choosing to receive the statutorily required contribution to the
Police & Firemen's Disability & Pension Fund of Ohio directly instead of
having it "picked up" by the city or of being excluded from the "pick up".



      (2)   Effective August 1, 2001, city employees who are or
become contributing members of the Police and Firemen's Disability and
Pension Fund may purchase additional service credit, tax deferred, and the
City of Montgomery shall withhold the required service credit deduction from
the gross pay of each person who elects to do so and shall "pick up" (assume
and pay) such deduction to the Police and Firemen's Disability and Pension
Fund. A person electing this "pick up" deduction shall not have the option of
choosing to receive the payroll deduction directly instead of having this
deduction "picked up" by the City of Montgomery. Members who have elected to
participate in this plan cannot increase, decrease, or terminate the amount
of the "pick up" deduction.



(Ord. 7-1998, passed 7-1-98; Am. Ord. 8-1998, passed 7-1-98; Am. Ord.
11-1999, passed 7-7-99; Am. Ord. 7-2001, passed 8-1-01; Am. Ord. 8-2001,
passed 8-1-01; Am. Ord. 11-2001, passed 9-5-01; Am. Ord. 4-2012, passed
3-7-12)



§ 34.07  LONGEVITY PAY.



   (A)   All full-time municipal personnel shall be compensated with an
annual longevity bonus computed upon the employee's tenure in the municipal
service of Montgomery and payable at the close of the first full pay period
following the employees anniversary of hire. The amount of the bonus shall
correspond to the following schedule:



 

Length of Service
 
Amount


0 to 4 years
 
-0-


5 years
 
$350


6 years or more
 
$375 and an additional $25 per year of service



 



   (B)   A municipal employee who is rated, graded or tested for
qualification or for performance of the duties assigned to that employee
shall not receive his or her longevity payment for any year in which the
employee fails to secure a satisfactory performance review.



(Ord. 19-1995, passed 6-7-95; Am. Ord. 9-1998, passed 7-1-98; Am. Ord.
11-1999, passed 7-7-99; Am. Ord. 12-1999, passed 7-21-99; Am. Ord. 4-2012,
passed 3-7-12)



§ 34.08  COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT.



   If anything contained in this chapter should be in conflict with
provisions of a collective bargaining agreement governing the employment of
municipal personnel, the terms of such collective bargaining agreement shall
supersede and shall prevail over provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 15-1989, passed 5-3-89; Am. Ord. 11-1999, passed 7-7-99)



§ 34.09  TRANSITIONAL EMPLOYMENT APPOINTMENTS.



   During an employment transition, such as the retirement or resignation
of an employee, when an overlapping period of employment with the
transitioning employee and the proposed appointee may be important for
succession training, the City Manager is authorized to appoint two persons to
the same job position within the city.  Such overlap appointment may not
exceed a period of 45 days and the cost for such overlapping appointment must
be appropriately budgeted.  Under such circumstances, the incumbent, or
transitioning employee, will hold the official job designation for all
statutory, signatory, and decision-making purposes.



(Ord. 20-2014, passed 12-17-14)



BOND



§ 34.15  MUNICIPAL OFFICIALS.



   (A)   The following elected and appointed officials of the
municipality shall, upon election or appointment to office, furnish a
corporate surety bond issued by a company authorized to do business in Ohio
to protect the municipality against loss due to his/her actions in the
amounts set forth below. Premiums thereon shall be paid by the municipality.



      (1)   City Manager:  $25,000



      (2)   Finance Director:  $25,000



      (3)   Assistant Finance Director/Tax Commissioner:  $25,000



   (B)   Whenever, in the opinion of the City Manager, by reason of the
scope and nature of the responsibilities of a position in the municipal
service, bonding is considered desirable in order to protect the interests of
the municipality, the City Manager shall require that such officer or
employee furnish an official bond in an amount he/she deems sufficient, based
upon his/her evaluation of the amount of money or negotiable paper for which
such officer or employee is responsible.



(Ord. 30-1973, passed 12-27-73; Am. Ord. 27-1981, passed 10-7-81; Am. Ord.
11-1999, passed 7-7-99; Am. Ord. 4-2012, passed 3-7-12)



CHAPTER 44:  INCOME TAX
(EFFECTIVE THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 2015)



Section



   44.01   Purpose



   44.02   Definitions



   44.03   Imposition of tax



   44.04   Effective period



   44.05   Return and payment of tax



   44.06   Collection at source



   44.07   Declarations



   44.08   Duties of the Tax Commissioner



   44.09   Investigative powers of the Tax Commissioner



   44.10   Interest and penalties



   44.11   Collection of unpaid taxes and refunds of overpayments



   44.12   Violations



   44.13   Board of Tax Review



   44.14   Allocation of funds



   44.15   Credit for tax paid to another municipality



   44.16   Information required to be given by landlord



   44.17   Savings clause



 



   44.99   Penalty



§ 44.01  PURPOSE.



   To provide funds for the purposes of general municipal operations,
maintenance, new equipment, extension and enlargement of municipal services
and facilities, and capital improvements of the city there is levied a tax on
qualifying wages, commissions, and other compensation, and on net profits and
other taxable income as hereinafter provided. 



(Ord. 1-1972, passed 1-5-72; Am. Ord. 1-2001, passed 1-24-01; Am. Ord.
1-2005, passed 1-5-05)



§ 44.02  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter the following words and
phrases shall have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively,
except as and if the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



   ADJUSTED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME.  Any corporation's federal taxable
income before net operating losses and special deductions as determined under
the Internal Revenue Code, but including subsequent adjustments from required
additions and deductions. Pass-through entities must compute adjustments from
required additions and deductions. Pass-through entities must compute
adjusted federal taxable income as if the pass-through entity was a C
corporation. This definition does not apply to any taxpayer required to file
a return under R.C. § 5745.03 or to the net profit from a sole
proprietorship.



   ASSOCIATION.  A partnership, limited partnership, limited liability
company, S corporation or any other form of unincorporated enterprise, owned
by one or more persons.



   BOARD OF REVIEW.  The Board created by and constituted as provided for
in § 44.13.



   BUSINESS.  An enterprise, activity, profession, or undertaking of any
nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for profit, whether by an
individual, partnership, association, corporation, or any other entity,
including but not limited to the renting or leasing of property, real,
personal or mixed.



   CORPORATION.  A corporation or joint stock association organized under
the laws of the United States, the State of Ohio, or any other state,
territory, or foreign country or dependency except those that are treated as
an association for purposes of this chapter.



   DOMICILE.  A principal residence that the taxpayer intends to use for
an indefinite time and to which whenever he is absent he intends to return. 
A taxpayer has only one domicile even though he may have more than one
residence.



   EMPLOYEE.  One who works for wages, salary, commission, or other types
of compensation in the services of an employer.



   EMPLOYER.  An individual, partnership, association, corporation,
governmental body, unit, or agency, or any other entity, whether or not
organized for profit, who or that employs one or more persons on a salary,
wage, commission, or other compensation basis.



   FISCAL YEAR.  An accounting period of 12 months ending on any day
other than December 31.



   FORM 2106. Internal Revenue Service Form 2106 filed by a taxpayer
pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.



   GENERIC FORM.  An electronic or paper form designed for reporting
estimated municipal income taxes and annual municipal income tax liability or
for filing a refund claim that is not prescribed by a particular municipal
corporation for the reporting of that municipal corporation's tax on income.
Any municipality that requires taxpayers to file income tax returns, reports,
or other documents shall accept for filing a generic form of such a return,
report, or document if the generic form, once completed and filed, contains
all of the information required to be submitted with the municipality's
prescribed returns, reports, or documents.



   GROSS RECEIPTS.  Total income of taxpayers from whatever source
derived.



   INCOME FROM A PASS-THROUGH ENTITY.  Partnership income of partners,
membership interest of members of a limited liability company, distributive
shares of shareholders of an S corporation, or other distributive or
proportionate ownership shares of income from other pass-through entities.



   INTANGIBLE INCOME.  Income of any of the following types:  income
yield, interest, capital gains, dividends, or other income arising from the
ownership, sale, exchange, or other disposition of intangible property
including, but not limited to, investments, deposits, money, or credits as
those terms are defined in Chapter 5701 of the Ohio Revised Code, and
patents, copyrights, trademarks, tradenames, investments in real estate
investment trusts, investments in regulated investment companies, and
appreciation on deferred compensation. INTANGIBLE INCOME does not include
prizes, awards, or other income associated with any lottery winnings or other
similar games of chance.



   INTERNAL REVENUE CODE.  The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, 100 Stat.
2085, 26 U.S.C. 1, as amended.



   INTERNET.  The international computer network of both federal and
nonfederal interoperable packet switched data networks, including the
graphical subnetwork known as the world wide web.



   JOINT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.  Districts created under the Ohio
Revised Code §§ 715.70 through 715.83, as amended from time to time.



   LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY.  A limited liability company formed under
Chapter 1705 of the Ohio Revised Code or under the laws of another state.



   MUNICIPALITY.  The City of Montgomery, Ohio.



   NET PROFIT.  For a taxpayer other than an individual means adjusted
federal taxable income and NET PROFIT for a taxpayer who is an individual
means the individual's profit, other than amounts described in § 44.03(F),
required to be reported on Schedule C, Schedule E, or Schedule F.



   NONQUALIFIED DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN.  A compensation plan
described in Section 3121(v)(2)(C) of the Internal Revenue Code.



   NONRESIDENT.  An domiciled outside the municipality.



   NONRESIDENT INCORPORATED BUSINESS ENTITY.  An incorporated business
entity not having an office or place of business within the municipality.



   NONRESIDENT UNINCORPORATED BUSINESS ENTITY.  An unincorporated
business entity not having an office or place of business within the
municipality.



   OTHER PAYER.  Any person, other than an individual's employer or the
employer's agent, that pays an individual any amount included in the federal
gross income of the individual.



   OWNER.  A partner of a partnership, a member of a limited liability
company, a shareholder of an S corporation, or other person with an ownership
interest in a pass-through entity.



   OWNER'S PROPORTIONATE SHARE.  With respect to each owner of a
pass-through entity, means the ratio of the owner's income from the
pass-through entity that is subject to taxation by the municipal corporation,
to the total income from that entity of all owners whose income from the
entity is subject to taxation by that municipal corporation.



   PARTNERSHIP.  An association of two or more persons to carry-on as
co-owners a business for profit and including such an association that has
limited liability under R.C. § 1775.61, its successor statute, or similar
statute of another state.



   PASS-THROUGH ENTITY.  A partnership, limited liability company, S
corporation, or any other class of entity the income or profits from which
are given pass-through treatment under the Internal Revenue Code.



   PERSON.  Individuals, firms, companies, business trusts, estates,
trusts, partnerhips, limited liability companies, associations, corporations,
governmental entities, and any other entity. Wherever used in any clause
prescribing or imposing a penalty, the term "person" as applied to an
unincorporated entity, shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as
applied to corporations, the officers thereof.



   PLACE OF BUSINESS.  Any bona fide office (other than a mere statutory
office); factory, warehouse, or other space which is occupied and used by the
taxpayer in carrying on any business activity, individually or through one or
more of his regular employees and/or agents, regularly in attendance.



   PRINCIPAL PLACE OF BUSINESS.  In the case of an employer having
headquarters' activities at a place of business within a taxing municipality,
the place of business at which the headquarters is situated. In the case of
any employer not having its headquarters' activities at a place of business
within a taxing municipality, the term means the largest place of business
located in a taxing municipality.



   QUALIFIED PLAN.  A retirement plan satisfying the requirements under
Section 401 of the Internal Revenue Code as amended.



   QUALIFYING WAGES.  Wages, as defined in Section 3121(a) of the
Internal Revenue Code, without regard to any wage limitations, adjusted in
accordance with R.C. § 718.03(A).



   RESIDENT.  An individual domiciled in the municipality.



   RESIDENT INCORPORATED BUSINESS ENTITY.  An incorporated business
entity whose office, place of operations or business situs is within the
municipality.



   RESIDENT UNINCORPORATED BUSINESS ENTITY.  An unincorporated business
entity having an office or place of business within the municipality.



   RETURN PREPARER.  Any person other than a taxpayer that is authorized
by a taxpayer to complete or file an income tax return, report, or other
document for or on behalf of the taxpayer.



   S CORPORATION.  A corporation that has made an election under
subchapter S of Chapter 1 of subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code for its
taxable year.



   SCHEDULE C.  Internal Revenue Service Schedule C filed by a taxpayer
pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.



   SCHEDULE E.  Internal Revenue Service Schedule E filed by a taxpayer
pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.



   SCHEDULE F.  Internal Revenue Service Schedule F filed by a taxpayer
pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.



   TAX COMMISSIONER.  The Tax Commissioner of the municipality or the
person authorized to execute the duties of the Commissioner.



   TAXABLE INCOME.  Qualifying wages paid by an employer or employers,
compensation for personal services, other income defined by statute as
taxable, and/or adjusted federal taxable income from the operation of a
business, profession, or other enterprise or activity adjusted in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.



   TAXABLE YEAR.  The calendar year, or the fiscal year upon the basis of
which net profits are to be computed under this chapter and, in the case of a
return for a fractional part of a year, the period for which such return is
required to be made.



   TAXING MUNICIPALITY.  A municipality levying a tax on income earned by
nonresidents working within such municipality or on income earned by its
residents.



   TAXPAYER. A person subject to a tax on income levied by a municipal
corporation. TAXPAYER does not include any person that is a disregarded
entity or a qualifying subchapter S subsidiary for federal income tax
purposes, but "taxpayer" includes any other person who owns the disregarded
entity or qualifying subchapter S subsidiary.



   (B)   The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall
include the feminine and the neuter.



(Ord. 1-1972, passed 1-5-72; Am. Ord. 1-2001, passed 1-24-01; Am. Ord.
1-2005, passed 1-5-05)



§ 44.03  IMPOSITION OF TAX.



   (A)   Basis of imposition.  An annual tax, for the purposes
specified in § 44.01 is levied at the rate of 1% per annum upon the
following:



      (1)   On all qualifying wages, commissions, other
compensation, and other taxable income earned or received by residents of the
municipality.



      (2)   On all qualifying wages, commissions, other
compensation, and other taxable income earned or received by non-residents
for work done or services performed or rendered in the municipality.



      (3)   On the portion attributable to the municipality of the
net profits earned by all resident unincorporated businesses, professions, or
other activities derived from sales made, work done or services performed or
rendered, and business or other activities conducted in the municipality.



      (4)   On the portion of the distributive share of the net
profits earned during the effective period of this chapter by a resident
partner or owner of a resident unincorporated business entity not
attributable to the municipality and not levied against such unincorporated
business entity.



      (5)   On the portion attributable to the municipality of the
net profits by all nonresident unincorporated businesses, professions, or
other activities, derived from work done or services performed or rendered,
and business or other activities conducted in the municipality, whether or
not such person, other unincorporated entity, profession or other entity has
an office or place of business in the municipality. On the portion of the
distributive share of the net profits earned by a resident owner of a
nonresident unincorporated business entity not attributable to the city, and
not levied against such unincorporated business entity.



      (6)   On the portion attributable to the municipality of the
net profits earned by all corporations derived from sales made, work done or
services performed or rendered, and business or other activities conducted in
the municipality whether or not such corporations have an office or place of
business in the municipality.



      (7)   On all income received as gambling winnings as reported
on the Internal Revenue Service Forms W-2G, Form 5754 and/or any other form
required by the Internal Revenue Service that reports winnings from gambling,
prizes and lottery winnings.



   (B)   Business both in and outside the municipal boundaries. This
section does not apply to taxpayers that are subject to and required to file
reports under R.C. Chapter 5745. Except as otherwise provided in division (D)
of this section, net profit from a business or profession conducted both
within and without the boundaries of a municipal corporation shall be
considered as having a taxable situs in such municipal corporation for
purposes of municipal income taxation in the same proportion as the average
ratio of the following:



      (1)   Multiply the entire net profits of the business by a
business apportionment percentage formula to be determined by:



         (a)   The average original cost of the real and tangible
personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession
in the municipality during the taxable period to the average original cost of
all of the real and tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer
in the business or profession during the same period, wherever situated.



As used in the preceding paragraph, real property shall include property
rented or leased by the taxpayer and the value of such property shall be
determined by multiplying the annual rental thereon by eight;



         (b)   Wages, salaries, and other compensation paid
during the taxable period to persons employed in the business or profession
for services performed in such municipal corporation to wages, salaries, and
other compensation paid during the same period to persons employed in the
business or profession, wherever their services are performed, excluding
compensation that is not taxable by the municipal corporation under R.C. §
718.011;



         (c)   Gross receipts of the business or profession from
sales made in such municipal corporation during the taxable period to gross
receipts of the business or profession during the same period from sales and
services, wherever made or performed. (d) Adding together the percentages
determined in accordance with divisions (a), (b), and (c) above, or such of
the aforesaid percentages as are applicable to the particular taxpayer, and
dividing the total so obtained by the number of percentages used in deriving
said total.



            1.   A factor is applicable even though it may be
apportioned entirely in or outside the municipality.



            2.   Provided that in the event a just and
equitable result cannot be obtained under the business apportionment
percentage formula provided for herein, the Board of Review, upon application
of the taxpayer or the Tax Commissioner, shall, under uniform regulation
adopted by the Board, have the authority to substitute other factors or
methods calculated to effect a fair and proper apportionment.



   (C)   As used in division (B) of this section, "sales made in such
municipal corporation" means:



      (1)   All sales of tangible personal property delivered within
such municipal corporation regardless of where title passes if shipped or
delivered from a stock of goods within such municipal corporation;



      (2)   All sales of tangible personal property delivered within
such municipal corporation regardless of where title passes even though
transported from a point outside such municipal corporation if the taxpayer
is regularly engaged through its own employees and/or agents in the
solicitation or promotion of sales within such municipal corporation and the
sales result from such solicitation or promotion;



      (3)   All sales of tangible personal property shipped from a
place within such municipal corporation to purchasers outside such municipal
corporation regardless of where title passes if the taxpayer is not, through
its own employees and/or agents, regularly engaged in the solicitation or
promotion of sales at the place where delivery is made.



   (D)   Net operating loss (NOL) carry-forward.



      (1)   The portion of a net operating loss sustained in any
taxable year apportioned to the municipality, may be applied against the
portion of the profit of succeeding tax years apportioned to the
municipality, until exhausted, but in no event for more than the five taxable
years immediately following the year in which the loss occurred.  No portion
of a net operating loss shall be carried back against net profits of any
prior year.



      (2)   The portion of a net operating loss sustained shall be
apportioned to the municipality in the same manner as provided herein for
apportioning net profits to the municipality.



      (3)   The Tax Commissioner shall provide by rules and
regulations the manner in which such net operating loss carry-forward shall
be determined.



      (4)   The net operating loss of a taxpayer that loses its
legal identity, by any means such as merger or consolidation, shall not be
allowed as a carry forward loss deduction to the surviving or new taxpayer.



      (5)   The net operating loss sustained by a business or
profession is not deductible from employee earnings, but may be carried
forward as provided in division (1) above. However, if a taxpayer is engaged
in two or more taxable business activities to be included in the same return,
the net loss of one unincorporated business activity (except any portion of a
loss reportable for municipal income tax purposes to another municipality)
may be used to offset the profits of another for purposes of arriving at
overall net profits.



   (E)   Consolidated returns.



      (1)   Filing of consolidated returns may be permitted or
required in accordance with rules and regulations prescribed by the Tax
Commissioner.



      (2)   In the case of a corporation that carried on
transactions with its stockholders or with other corporations related by
stock ownership, interlocking directorates, or some other method, the Tax
Commissioner shall require such information, in addition to the return
hereinafter provided for, as he may deem necessary to ascertain whether net
profits are properly allocated to the municipality.  If the Tax Commissioner
finds net profits are not properly allocated to the municipality by reason of
transactions with stockholders or with other corporations related by stock
ownership, interlocking directorates, or some other method, he may require
the filing of a consolidated return or adjust such transactions so as to
produce a fair and proper allocation of net profits to the municipality.



   (F)   Exceptions.  The provisions of the chapter shall not be
construed as levying a tax upon the following:



      (1)   Proceeds from welfare benefits, unemployment insurance
benefits, pensions, social security benefits, and qualified retirement plans
as defined by the Internal Revenue Service.



      (2)   Proceeds of insurance, annuities, Workers' Compensation
insurance, permanent disability benefits, compensation for damages for
personal injury and like reimbursements, not including damages for loss of
profits and wages.



      (3)   Dues, contributions and similar payments received by
charitable, religious, educational organizations, or labor unions, trade or
professional associations, lodges and similar organizations.



      (4)   Gains from involuntary conversion, cancellation of
indebtedness, interest on federal obligations and income of a decedent's
estate during the period of administration (except such income from the
operation of a business).



      (5)   Spousal support.



      (6)   Compensation for damage to property by way of insurance
or otherwise.



      (7)   Interest and dividends from intangible property.



      (8)   Military pay or allowances of members of the Armed
Forces of the United States and of members of their reserve components,
including the Ohio National Guard (R.C. § 718.01).



      (9)   Income of any charitable, educational, fraternal or
other type of nonprofit association or organization enumerated in R.C. §
718.01 to the extent that such income is derived from tax-exempt real estate,
tax-exempt tangible or intangible property, or tax-exempt activities.



      (10)   Any association or organization falling in the category
listed in the preceding paragraph receiving income from non-exempt real
estate, tangible or intangible personal property, or business activities of a
type ordinarily conducted for profit by taxpayers operating for profit shall
not be excluded hereunder.



      (11)   In the event any association or organization receives
taxable income as provided in the preceding paragraph from real or personal
property ownership or income producing business located both within and
without the corporate limits of the municipality, it shall calculate its
income apportioned to the municipality under the method or methods provided
above.



      (12)   If exempt for federal income tax purposes, fellowship
and scholarship grants are excluded from municipal income tax.



      (13)   The rental value of a home furnished to a minister of
the gospel as part of his compensation, or the rental allowance paid to a
minister of the gospel as part of his compensation, to the extent used by him
to rent or provide a home pursuant to Section 107 of the Internal Revenue
Code.



      (14)   Compensation paid under Section R.C. § 3501.28 to a
person serving as a precinct official, to the extent that such compensation
does not exceed $1,000 annually. Such compensation in excess of $1,000 may be
subjected to taxation. The payer of such compensation is not required to
withhold municipal tax from that compensation.



      (15)   Compensation paid to an employee of a transit
authority, regional transit authority, or a regional transit commission
created under R.C. Chapter 306 for operating a transit bus or other motor
vehicle for the authority or commission in or through the municipality,
unless the bus or vehicle is operated on a regularly scheduled route, the
operator is subject to such tax by reason of residence or domicile in the
municipality, or the headquarter of the authority or commission is located
within the municipality.



      (16)   The municipality shall not tax the compensation paid to
a nonresident individual for personal services performed by the individual in
the municipality on 12 or fewer days in a calendar year unless one of the
following applies:



         (a)   The individual is an employee of another person,
the principal place of business of the individual's employer is located in
another municipality in Ohio that imposes a tax applying to compensation paid
to the individual for services paid on those days; and the individual is not
liable to that other municipality for tax on the compensation paid for such
services.



         (b)   The individual is a professional entertainer or
professional athlete, the promoter of a professional entertainment or sports
event, or an employee of such promoter, all as may be reasonably defined by
the municipality.



      (17)   The income of a public utility, when that public
utility is subject to the tax levied under R.C. § 5727.24 or § 5727.30,
except a municipal corporation may tax the following, subject to R.C. Chapter
5745:



         (a)   The income of an electric company or combined
company;



         (b)   The income of a telephone company.



   As used in division (F)(17) of this section, "combined company",
"electric company", and "telephone company" have the same meanings as in R.C.
§ 5727.01.



      (18)   Generally the above noted items in this section are the
only forms of income not subject to the tax. Any other income, benefits, or
other forms of compensation shall be taxable.



(Ord. 1-1972, passed 1-5-72; Am. Ord. 1-2001, passed 1-24-01; Am. Ord.
1-2005, passed 1-5-05)



§ 44.04  EFFECTIVE PERIOD.



   The tax shall be levied, collected, and paid with respect to the
income, qualifying wages, commissions, and other compensation earned, and
shall be levied with respect to the net profits of the persons, businesses,
professions, or other activities earned or received from and after the
effective dater of this Tax Code.



(Ord. 1-1972, passed 1-5-72; Am. Ord. 1-2001, passed 1-24-01; Am. Ord.
1-2005, passed 1-5-05)



§ 44.05  RETURN AND PAYMENT OF TAX.



   (A)   Dates and exemptions.



      (1)   On or before April 30 in each year prior to the tax year
2004 and April 15 of each year thereafter, the following persons shall make
and file a return with the Tax Commissioner:



         (a)   Each person who engages in business or other
activity, or whose qualifying wages, commissions, other compensation, and
other taxable income is subject to the tax imposed by this chapter, whether
or not a tax is due thereon.



         (b)   Each resident who engages in business or other
activity, or whose qualifying wages, commissions, other compensation and
other taxable income is subject to the tax imposed by this chapter, whether
or not a tax be due thereon.



      (2)   When the return is made for a fiscal year or other
period different from the calendar year, the return shall be filed on or
before the fifteenth day of the fourth month following the end of such fiscal
year or period. The Tax Commissioner is hereby authorized to provide by
regulation that the return of an employer or employers, showing the amount of
municipal tax deducted by said employer or employers from the salaries,
wages, commissions or other compensation of an employee, and paid by him or
them to the Tax Commissioner may be accepted as the return required of any
employee whose sole income, subject to tax under this Tax Code, is such
qualifying wage, commissions, other compensation, and other taxable income.



      (3)   Filings, including requests for extensions, must be
received in the office of the Tax Commissioner by the due date.



   (B)   A husband and wife may file either separate returns or a joint
return for municipal purposes, even though one of the spouses has neither
taxable income nor deductions included on the municipal return regardless of
whether their federal and state returns were filed separately or jointly. If
a joint city return is made, the tax shall be computed on the aggregate
taxable income and the liability with respect to the tax shall be joint and
several.



   (C)   The return shall be filed with the Tax Commissioner on a form
or forms furnished by or obtainable upon request from the Tax Commissioner;
or on a generic form, if the generic form, when completed and filed, contains
all of the information required to be submitted with the municipality's
prescribed return and, if the taxpayer or return preparer filing the generic
form otherwise complies with the Tax Code governing the filing of returns.



   (D)   The return shall set forth:



      (1)   The aggregate amounts of qualifying wages, commissions,
and other compensation earned, received, apportioned or set aside, other
income defined by statute as taxable, and gross income from any business,
profession or other activity, less allowable expenses incurred in the
acquisition of such gross income, earned during the preceding year and
subject to said tax; and



      (2)   The amount of the tax imposed by this chapter on such
earnings and profits; and



      (3)   Such other pertinent statements, information returns,
copies of federal or state tax returns and/or schedules, or other information
as the Tax Commissioner may require, including a statement that the figures
used in the return are the figures used in the return for federal income tax,
adjusted to set forth only such income as is taxable under the provisions of
this chapter.



   (E)   Extensions.



      (1)   Any taxpayer that has requested an extension for filing
a federal income tax return may request an extension for the filing of the
municipality's tax return. The taxpayer shall make the request by filing a
copy of the taxpayer's request for a federal filing extension with the Tax
Commissioner.



      (2)   Any taxpayer not required to file a federal income tax
return may request an extension for filing the municipality's tax return in
writing.



      (3)   The request for extension must be filed on or before the
original due date for the annual return. If the request is granted, the
extended due date of the municipal income tax return shall be the last day of
the month following the month to which the due date of the federal income tax
return has been extended.



      (4)   The Tax Commissioner may deny a taxpayer's request for
extension if the taxpayer:



         (a)   Fails to timely file the request;



         (b)   Fails to file a copy of the federal extension
request (if applicable);



         (c)   Owes the municipality any delinquent income tax or
any penalty, interest, assessment or other charge for the late payment or
nonpayment of income tax;



         (d)   Has failed to file any required income tax return,
report, or other related document for a prior tax period.



      (5)   The granting of an extension for filing a municipal
income tax return does not extend the due date as provided in this section
for paying of the tax; hence, penalty and interest may apply to any unpaid
tax during the period of extension at the rate set out by § 44.10. Interest
but no penalty shall be assessed in those cases in which the return is filed
and the final tax paid within the extension period provided all other filing
and payment requirements of the Tax Code have been met. Any extension by the
Tax Commissioner shall be granted upon the condition that declaration filing
and payment requirements have been fulfilled; however, if, upon further
examination it then becomes evident that declaration filing and payment
requirements have not been fulfilled, penalty and interest may be assessed in
full and in the same manner as though no extension had been granted.



   (F)   Payments with returns.



      (1)   The taxpayer making a return shall at the time of the
filing thereof pay to the Tax Commissioner the amount of taxes shown as due
thereon; provided that where the source, pursuant to the provisions of §
44.06 of this chapter; or where any portion of the tax shall have been paid
by the taxpayer pursuant to the provisions of § 44.07 of this chapter, or
where an income tax, credited against the municipal tax pursuant to § 44.15
hereof has been paid to another municipality, credit for the amount so paid
shall be deducted from the amount shown to be due and only the balance, if
any, shall be due and payable at the time of filing said return.



      (2)   A taxpayer who has overpaid the amount of tax to which
the municipality is entitled under the provisions of this chapter may have
such overpayment applied against any subsequent liability hereunder or, as
his election indicated on the return, such overpayment, or part thereof,
shall be refunded, provided that no additional taxes or refunds of less than
$1.01 shall be collected or refunded.



   (G)   Amended returns.



      (1)   Where necessary, an amended return shall be filed in
order to report additional income and pay any additional tax due, or claim a
refund of tax overpaid, subject to the requirements and/or limitations
contained in §§ 44.11 and 44.15. The Tax Commissioner shall provide by
regulation the format in which such amended return shall be filed. A taxpayer
may not change the method of accounting or apportionment of net profits after
the due date for filing the original return.



      (2)   Within three months from the final determination of any
federal tax liability affecting the taxpayer's municipal tax liability, such
taxpayer shall make and file an amended municipal return showing income
subject to the municipality tax based upon such final determination of
federal tax liability, and pay any additional tax shown due thereon or make
claim for refund of any overpayment.



(Ord. 1-1972, passed 1-5-72; Am. Ord. 25-1984, passed 10-3-84; Am. Ord.
3-1995, passed 1-4-95; Am. Ord. 1-2001, passed 1-24-01; Am. Ord. 1-2005,
passed 1-5-05)



§ 44.06  COLLECTION AT SOURCE.



   (A)   Withholding by employer. Each employer within, or doing
business within, the municipality who employs one or more persons on a
salary, wage, commission or other compensation basis shall deduct, when such
salary, wage, commission or other compensation is paid, allocated or set
aside, the tax of 1% on the qualifying wages due by such employer to each
such employee and shall make a return and payment to the Tax Commissioner the
amount of taxes so deducted.



      (1)   Employers who withhold taxes imposed by this chapter
which exceed $200 per month or $2,400 per year for all employees shall, on or
before the fifteenth day of each month make a return and pay to the Tax
Commissioner the amount of taxes deducted during the preceding month.



      (2)   All other employers shall, on or before the last day of
April, July, October, and January of each year make a return and pay to the
Tax Commissioner the amount of taxes deducted during the preceding calendar
quarter. The Tax Commissioner may revoke the approval of quarterly filing and
payments whenever the Tax Commissioner has reason to believe that the
conditions for granting such authorization have changed, were judged
incorrectly, were not met, or when it is in the best interest of the
municipality to do so. Notice of withdrawal shall be made in writing and, in
such case, the employer must begin to file in accordance with this section.



      (3)   Each employer shall be liable for the payment of the tax
required to be deducted and withheld, whether or not such taxes have in fact
been withheld. Nothing in this section prohibits an employer from withholding
tax on a basis greater than qualifying wages.



      (4)   An employer is not required to make any withholding with
respect to an individual's disqualifying disposition of an incentive stock
option if, at the time of the disqualifying disposition, the individual is
not an employee of the corporation with respect to whose stock the option has
been issued.



   (B)   (1)   An employee is not relieved from liability for a tax
by the failure of the employer to withhold the tax as required by a municipal
corporation or by the employer's exemption from the requirement to withhold
the tax.



      (2)   The failure of an employer to remit to the municipal
corporation the tax withheld relieves the employee from liability for that
tax unless the employee colluded with the employer in connection with the
failure to remit the tax withheld.



   (C)   Employer considered as trustee. Each employer in collecting
said tax shall be deemed to hold the same, until payment is made by such
employer to the municipality, as a trustee for the benefit of the
municipality, and any such tax collected by such employer from his employees
shall, until the same is paid to the municipality, be deemed a trust fund in
the hands of such employer. Each employer shall be liable for the payment of
the tax required to be deducted and withheld, whether or not such tax, in
fact, has been withheld.



   (D)   Corporation officers personal liability. Any person who is
required to withhold tax from qualifying wages shall pay all such tax to the
municipality in accordance with the provisions of this section. In the event
taxes withheld from the qualifying wages of employees are not paid to the
municipality in accordance with the provisions of this section, all officers,
members, managers, employees, and trustees having control or supervision of
or charged with the responsibility of filing the return and making payment
are jointly and severally personally liable for the tax not returned or paid
to the municipality as well as any related interest and penalties, and are
also liable under the provisions of § 44.12 hereof. The dissolution,
termination, or bankruptcy of a corporation, partnership, limited liability
company, or business trust does not discharge an officer's, partners
member's, manager's, employee's, or trustee's liability for a failure of the
corporation, limited liability company, or business trust to file returns or
pay said taxes.



   (E)   Employees listings.  Each employer shall file a withholding
tax reconciliation (Form W-3) showing the sum total of all compensation paid
all employees, the portion of which, (if any) was not subject to withholding
along with an explanation for same, and the portion of which was subject to
withholding, together with the amount of such withholdings remitted. Such
return shall include information concerning each employee from whom the
municipal tax was withheld, showing the name, address, zip code and social
security number of each such employee, the total amount of compensation paid
during the year and the amount of municipal tax withheld. If the total tax
withheld from any employee included tax withheld and remitted to another
municipality, the amount of same shall be separately shown on the return of
information to the municipality concerning each employee. The withholding tax
reconciliation shall be filed by each employer on or before February 28
following the end of such calendar year.



   (F)   In addition to the wage reporting requirements of this
section, any person required by the Internal Revenue Service to report on
Form 1099-Misc. payments to individuals not treated as employees for services
performed shall also report such payments to the municipality when the
services were performed in the municipality. The information may be submitted
on a listing, and shall include the name, address and social security number
(or federal identification number), and the amount of the payments made.
Federal Form(s) 1099 may be submitted in lieu of such listing. The
information shall be filed annually on or before February 28 following the
end of such calendar year.



   (G)   Domestic servants. No person shall be required to withhold the
tax on the qualifying wages, commissions, other compensation and other
taxable income paid domestic servants employed exclusively in or about such
person's residence. However, such domestic servants shall be responsible for
filing and paying their own returns and taxes.



(Ord. 1-1972, passed 1-5-72; Am. Ord. 23-1980, passed 11-5-80; Am. Ord.
1-2001, passed 1-24-01; Am. Ord. 1-2005, passed 1-5-05)



§ 44.07  DECLARATIONS.



   (A)   Requirement for filing.  Every person who anticipates any
taxable income which is not subject to § 44.06 hereof, or engages in any
business, profession, enterprise, or activity resulting in income subject to
the tax imposed by this chapter, shall file a declaration setting forth such
estimated income or the estimated profit or loss from such business activity,
together with the estimated tax due thereon, if any. Provided, however, if a
person's income is wholly from qualifying wages from which the tax will be
held and remitted to this municipality in accordance with § 44.06, such
person need not file a declaration.



   (B)   Dates for filing.



      (1)   Such declaration shall be filed on or before April 15 of
each year during the life of this chapter, or on or before the fifteenth day
of the fourth month following the date the taxpayer first becomes subject to
the provisions of this section.



      (2)   Those taxpayers reporting on a fiscal year basis shall
file a declaration on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month
following the start of each fiscal year or period.



   (C)   Forms, credit for tax withheld or paid another community.



      (1)   The declaration shall be filed upon a form furnished by,
obtainable from the Tax Commissioner or an acceptable generic form.  Credit
shall be taken for municipal tax to be withheld from any portion of such
income. Credit may be taken for tax to be paid to or to be withheld and
remitted to another taxing municipality in accordance with § 44.15.



      (2)   A declaration of estimated tax to be paid the
municipality shall be accompanied by a payment of at least 1/4 of the
estimated tax, less credit for taxes withheld or paid  to another
municipality, and at least a similar amount shall be paid on or before the
fifteenth day of the fourth month and the last day of the seventh, tenth, and
thirteenth months after the beginning of the tax year.



   (D)   Amended declaration.



      (1)   A declaration may be amended at any time, provided that
in case an amended declaration is filed, the unpaid balance shown due thereon
shall be paid in equal installments on or before the remaining payment dates.



      (2)   If it appears that the original declaration and
accompanying payments made for such year underestimated the taxpayer's income
by 30% or more, the difference between 70% of the taxpayer's tax liability
and the amount of estimated tax he actually paid on or before December 31, or
the date fixed by regulation, whichever is applicable, shall be subject to
the interest and penalty provisions of § 44.10 hereof.



   (E)   Annual return required. On or before the fifteenth day of the
fourth month following the end of the calendar or fiscal year following that
for which the declaration was filed, an annual return shall be filed and any
balance which may be due the municipality shall be paid therewith in
accordance with the provisions of § 44.05 hereof. 



(Ord. 1-1972, passed 1-5-72; Am. Ord. 1-2001, passed 1-24-01; Am. Ord.
1-2005, passed 1-5-05)



§ 44.08  DUTIES OF THE TAX COMMISSIONER.



   (A)   Collection and maintenance responsibility.



      (1)   There is hereby created an income tax bureau for the
administration of the provisions of this chapter.  Such bureau shall consist
of a Tax Commissioner, Deputy Tax Commissioner and such clerical and
secretarial personnel as may be determined to be necessary for the
administration of this chapter.  All such personnel shall be appointed by
the City Manager except that the Tax Commissioner shall be appointed by the
City Manager with the consent of the Council.



      (2)   It shall be the duty of the Tax Commissioner to collect
and receive the tax imposed by this chapter in the manner prescribed therein,
and to keep an accurate record thereof, and to report all monies so received.



      (3)   It shall be the duty of the Tax Commissioner to enforce
payment of all income taxes owing the municipality, to keep accurate records
for a minimum of six years, showing the amount due from each taxpayer
required to file a declaration or make any return including a return of taxes
withheld, and to show the date and amounts of payments thereof.



   (B)   Enforcement authority. 



      (1)   The Tax Commissioner is hereby charged with the
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, including the interpretation
and enforcement of the rules and regulations, and is hereby empowered,
subject to the approval of the Board of Review, to adopt and promulgate and
to enforce rules and regulations authorized or required by this chapter,
relating to any matter or thing pertaining to the collection and payment of
taxes and the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter, including provisions for the examination and correction of returns.



      (2)   The Tax Commissioner, or any of his authorized agents,
is authorized to arrange for the payment of unpaid taxes, interest, and
penalties on a schedule of installment payments, when the taxpayer has proved
to the Tax Commissioner that, due to certain hardship conditions, he is
unable to pay the full amount of the tax due. The authorization shall not be
granted until proper returns are filed by the taxpayer for all amounts owed
by him under this chapter. Failure to make any deferred payment when due
shall cause the total amount unpaid, including penalty and interest, to
become payable on demand, and the provisions of §§ 44.10, 44.11 and 44.99
shall apply.



   (C)   Determination of taxes.  In any case where a taxpayer has
failed to file a return or has filed a return which does not show the proper
amount of tax due, the Tax Commissioner may determine the amount of tax
appearing to be due the municipality from the taxpayer and may send to such
taxpayer a written statement showing the amount of tax so determined,
together with interest and penalties thereon, if any.



   (D)   Compromise authority.  Subject to the consent of the Board of
Review or pursuant to regulation approved by the Board of Review, the Tax
Commissioner shall have the power to compromise any liability imposed by this
chapter. 



(Ord. 1972, passed 1-5-72; Am. Ord. 27-1981, passed 10-7-81; Am. Ord. 1-2001,
passed 1-24-01; Am. Ord. 1-2005, passed 1-5-05)



§ 44.09  INVESTIGATIVE POWERS OF THE TAX COMMISSIONER.



   (A)   Examination of taxpayers records.  The Tax Commissioner, or
any of his authorized agents, is authorized to examine the books, papers,
records, and federal income tax returns of any employer, or taxpayer, or any
person subject to, or whom the Tax Commissioner believes is subject to, the
provisions of this chapter, for the purpose of verifying the accuracy of any
return made, or if no return was made, to ascertain the tax or withholdings
due under this chapter. Every such employer, supposed employer, taxpayer, or
supposed taxpayer is hereby directed and required to furnish, upon written
request of the Tax Commissioner, or his duly authorized agent or employees,
the means, facilities, and opportunity for making such examinations and
investigations as are hereby authorized.



   (B)   Investigative questionnaires.  The Tax Commissioner may
require any taxpayer, or any person who the Commissioner may reasonably
presume to be required to file a return or pay a tax, to complete and return
a questionnaire from which the Commissioner may determine whether such person
shall be required to file a return or pay a tax.  In said questionnaire the
Commissioner may demand information concerning residency, income, sources of
income, and any other information that bears upon the question of taxability.



   (C)   Appearance orders to taxpayers.  The Tax Commissioner is
hereby authorized to order any person, presumed to have knowledge of the
facts, to appear at the office of the Tax Commissioner and to examine such
person, under oath, concerning any income which was or should have been
returned for taxation, or withheld, or any transaction tending to affect such
income, and for this purpose may compel the production of books, papers,
records, and federal income tax returns, and the attendance of all persons
before him, whether as parties or witnesses, whenever he believes such
persons have knowledge of such income or information pertinent to such
inquiry.



   (D)   Result of refusal to submit information. The refusal to
produce books, papers, records, and federal income tax returns, or to
complete a taxpayer questionnaire, or the refusal to submit to such
examination by any employer or person, subject, or presumed to be subject, to
the tax or by any officer, agent, or employee of a person subject to the tax
or required to withhold tax, or the failure of any person to comply with the
provisions of this section or with an order or subpoena of the Tax
Commissioner authorized hereby shall be deemed a violation of this chapter
punishable as provided in § 44.12 hereof.



   (E)   Retention of records by taxpayer.  Every taxpayer shall
retain all records necessary to compute his tax liability for a period of six
years from the date his return is filed or the taxes required to be withheld
are paid.



   (F)   Confidential nature of information.  Any information gained
as a result of any returns, investigations, questionnaires, hearings, or
verifications required or authorized by this chapter shall be confidential,
and no disclosure thereof shall be made except to municipal, county, state,
or federal taxing agencies, or, except for official purposes as the Director
of Law shall determine, or except in accordance with proper judicial order. 
Any person divulging such information in violation of this section shall be
fined not more than $1,000 and imprisoned not more than one hundred eighty
days, or both, for each offense.  Each disclosure shall constitute a
separate offense.  In addition to the above penalty, any employee of the
municipality who violates the provisions of this section relative to the
disclosure of confidential information may be subject to disciplinary action
including immediate termination. 



(Ord. 1-1972, passed 1-5-72; Am. Ord. 13-1985, passed 6-19-85; Am. Ord.
1-2001, passed 1-24-01; Am. Ord. 1-2005, passed 1-5-05)



§ 44.10  INTEREST AND PENALTIES.



   (A)   Interest.  All taxes imposed and monies withheld or required
to be withheld by employers under the provisions of this chapter, remaining
unpaid after they become due, shall bear interest at the rate of 1% per month.



   (B)   Penalties.  In addition to interest as provided in division
(A) hereof, penalties for failure to file tax returns in a timely manner,
failure to pay taxes and to withhold and remit taxes pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter are imposed as follows:



      (1)   In the case of taxpayers failing to file a return
required by this chapter within the time-frames set forth herein, and
including any lawfully permitted extensions, the taxpayer shall pay a penalty
of $25 upon a first offense, $50 upon a second offense, $100 upon a third
offense and $150 upon a fourth or any subsequent offense.



      (2)   In the case of taxpayers failing to pay the full amount
of tax due, a penalty as follows:



         (a)   A penalty of 1% per month, or fraction thereof, of
the amount of the unpaid tax, if the tax is paid during the first six months
after the tax became due;



         (b)   A penalty of 2% per month, or fraction thereof, of
the amount of the unpaid tax, if the tax is paid during the seventh and
twelfth month after the tax became due; and



         (c)   A penalty of 4% per month, or fraction thereof, of
the amount of the unpaid tax, if the tax is paid later than 12 months after
it became due.  The percentages herein specified, when used, shall apply
from the first month of delinquency.



   (C)   Exceptions.  A penalty shall not be assessed or an additional
tax assessment made by the Tax Commissioner when a return has been filed in
good faith and the tax paid thereon within the time prescribed by the Tax
Commissioner; and provided that, in the absence of fraud, neither penalty nor
interest shall be assessed on any additional tax assessment resulting from a
federal audit, providing an amended return is filed and the additional tax is
paid within three months after final determination of the federal tax
liability.



   (D)   Abatement by Board of Review. No abatement or reduction in any
penalty or interest imposed under this chapter shall be made unless by the
Board of Review and pursuant to the provisions of § 44.13 of this Code. An
appeal seeking an abatement or reduction in any penalty or interest shall be
taken within 30 days from the imposition of such penalty or interest and the
Board shall, upon hearing, have jurisdiction to affirm, reverse or modify any
such imposition of penalty or interest, or any part thereof.



(Ord. 1-1972, passed 1-5-72; Am. Ord. 23-1980, passed 11-5-80; Am. Ord.
3-1995, passed 1-4-95; Am. Ord. 1-2001, passed 1-24-01; Am. Ord. 1-2005,
passed 1-5-05)



§ 44.11  COLLECTION OF UNPAID TAXES AND REFUNDS OF OVERPAYMENTS.



   (A)   All taxes imposed by this chapter shall be collectible,
together with any interest and penalties thereon, by suit as other debts of
like amount are recoverable. No additional assessment shall be made after
three years from the time of payment of any tax due hereunder; provided
however, there shall be no period of limitation on an additional assessment
in a case of a return that omits taxable income in excess of $10,000 for the
tax year in question or in the case of filing a false or fraudulent return
with intent to evade the tax, or in the case of failure to file a return. In
those cases in which the Commissioner of Internal Revenue and the taxpayer
have executed a waiver of the federal statute of limitations the period
within which an additional assessment may be made by the Tax Commissioner
shall be extended one year from the time of the final determination of the
federal tax liability.



   (B)   Taxes erroneously paid shall not be refunded unless a claim
for such refund has been filed within three years from the date on which such
payment was made or the return was due, or within three months after final
determination of the federal tax liability, whichever is later.



   (C)   Interest shall be allowed and paid on any overpayment by a
taxpayer of any municipal income tax obligation from the date of the
overpayment until the date of the refund of the overpayment, except that if
any overpayment is refunded within 90 days after the final filing date of the
annual return, 90 days after the complete return is filed, or 90 days after
an amendment is made in such return as a result of an appeal, whichever is
later, no interest shall be allowed on the refunded overpayment. For purposes
of computing the payment of interest on overpayments, no amount of tax for
any taxable year shall be treated as having been paid before the date on
which the tax return for that year was due without regard to any extension of
time for filing that return. The interest shall be paid at the rate of
interest prescribed by R.C. § 5703.47.



(Am. Ord. 1-2001, passed 1-24-01; Am. Ord. 1-2005, passed 1-5-05)



§ 44.12  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   No person shall:



      (1)   Fail, neglect, or refuse to make any return or
declaration required by this chapter; or



      (2)   Make an incomplete, false, or fraudulent return; or



      (3)   Fail, neglect, or refuse to pay the tax, penalties, or
interest imposed by this chapter; or



      (4)   Fail, neglect, or refuse to withhold the tax from his
employees and remit such withholding tax to the Tax Commissioner; or



      (5)   Refuse to permit the Tax Commissioner or any duly
authorized agent or employee to examine his or his employer's books, records,
papers, and federal income tax returns; or



      (6)   Fail to appear before the Tax Commissioner and to
produce his or her employer's books, records, papers, or federal income tax
returns upon order or subpoena of the Tax Commissioner; or



      (7)   Refuse to disclose to the Tax Commissioner any
information with respect to such person's or such person's employer's income
or net profits; or



      (8)   Fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter or
any order or subpoena of the Tax Commissioner; or



      (9)   Fail, neglect, or refuse to make any payment on the
estimated tax for any year as required by § 44.07; or



      (10)   Fail to use ordinary diligence in maintaining proper
records of employees' residence addresses, total wages paid and municipal tax
withheld; or to knowingly give the Tax Commissioner false information; or



      (11)   Attempt to do anything whatever to avoid the payment of
the whole or any part of the tax, penalties, or interest imposed by this
chapter.



   (B)   If any corporation or association violates this section, any
employee of said corporation or association having control or supervision of
or charged with the responsibility of complying with this section, the
President, Chief Executive Officer or Chief Financial Officer of such
corporation, association, limited liability company or partnership, or any
owner, director, officer, manager or trustee who is responsible for the
execution of the corporation's or association's fiscal responsibilities
pursuant to this section, shall also be personally liable for the violation
and subject to the penalty provided herein.



   (C)   Statute of Limitations.



      (1)   Civil actions to recover municipal income taxes and
penalties and interest on municipal income taxes shall be brought within
three years after the tax was due or the return was filed, whichever is later.



      (2)   Prosecutions for an offense made punishable under this
chapter shall be commenced within three years after the commission of the
offense, provided that in the case of fraud, failure to file a return, or the
omission of 25% or more of income required to be reported, prosecutions may
be commenced within six years after the commission of the offense.



(R.C. § 718.12(A), (B))



   (D)   Failure to obtain forms not a defense.  The failure of any
employer, taxpayer, or person to receive or procure a return, declaration, or
other required form shall not excuse him from making any information return,
return, or declaration, from filing such form, or from paying the tax.



   (E)   Responsibility of corporation employees.  The term "person"
as used in this section shall include in the case of an association or
corporation not having any partner, member, or officer within the
municipality, any employee or agent of such association or corporation who
can be found within the corporate limits of the municipality.



(Ord. 1-1972, passed 1-5-72; Am. Ord. 1-2001, passed 1-24-01; Am. Ord.
1-2005, passed 1-5-05)  Penalty, see § 44.99.



§ 44.13  BOARD OF TAX REVIEW.



   (A)   Composition.  The Board of Tax Review shall consist of three
members. The three members of the Board of Tax Review must be domiciled in
the City of Montgomery, Ohio. Two members shall be appointed by the City
Council, which may also appoint an alternate to serve when there may be a
conflict, illness, temporary absence or similar reason. The Council
appointees may not be employees, elected officials, or contractors with the
city at any time during their term or in the five years immediately preceding
the date of appointment. One member shall be appointed by the City Manager.
This member may be an employee of the municipality, but may not be the
director of finance or equivalent officer, or the Tax Administrator or other
similar official or an employee directly involved in municipal tax matters,
or any direct subordinate thereof.



   (B)   Term. The term for members of the Board of Tax Review
appointed by the City Council shall be two years. There is no limit on the
number of terms that a member may serve should the member be reappointed by
the City Council. The Board member appointed by the City Manager shall serve
at the discretion of the City Manager.



   (C)   Removal. Members of the Board of Tax Review appointed by the
City Council may be removed by the City Council as set forth in R.C. §
718.11(A)(4). A member of the Board who, for any reason, ceases to meet the
qualifications for the position prescribed by this section shall resign
immediately by operation of law.



   (D)   Vacancies. A vacancy in an unexpired term shall be filled in
the same manner as the original appointment within 60 days of when the
vacancy was created. Any member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior
to the expiration of the term for which the member's predecessor was
appointed shall hold office for the remainder of such term. No vacancy on the
Board shall impair the power and authority of the remaining members to
exercise all the powers of the Board.



   (E)   Temporary appointment. If a member is temporarily unable to
serve on the Board due to a conflict of interest, illness, absence, or
similar reason, the alternate designated by City Council temporarily shall
serve in the place of a Council appointed member's absence. The City Manager
shall appoint another individual to temporarily serve on the Board in the
member's place if the City Manager appointed member is absent. This
appointment shall be subject to the same requirements and limitations as are
applicable to the appointment of the member temporarily unable to serve.



(Ord. 1-1972, passed 1-5-72; Am. Ord. 27-1981, passed 10-7-81; Am. Ord.
1-2001, passed 1-24-01; Am. Ord. 1-2005, passed 1-5-05; Am. Ord. 9-2009,
passed 10-7-09; Am. Ord. 3-2016, passed 3-2-16)



§ 44.14  ALLOCATION OF FUNDS.



   The funds collected under the provision of this chapter shall be
disbursed for the following purposes:



   (A)   20% to the capital improvement fund;



   (B)   80% to the general fund for the purpose of general municipal
operations.



(Ord. 1-1972, passed 1-5-72; Am. Ord. 12-2000, passed 12-6-00; Am. Ord.
1-2001, passed 1-24-01; Am. Ord. 1-2005, passed 1-5-05; Am. Ord. 21-2006,
passed 12-6-06; Am. Ord. 5-2012, passed 5-2-12; Am. Ord. 1-2017, passed
1-4-17)



§ 44.15  CREDIT FOR TAX PAID TO ANOTHER MUNICIPALITY.



   (A)   Limitation on amount paid.  Every individual taxpayer who
resides in the municipality and who receives salaries, wages, commissions, or
other compensation or net profits from sales made, work done or services
performed or rendered outside of the municipality, if it be made to appear
that he has paid a municipal income tax on such income, taxable under this
chapter, to another municipality, shall be allowed a credit for such tax
paid, against the tax imposed by this chapter in an amount not to exceed the
tax due the city under this chapter.  When a taxpayer pays a tax to another
municipality on a portion of the taxpayer's income a credit shall be allowed
for the amount paid to the other municipality on said portion of the
taxpayer's income in an amount not to exceed the tax due the city under this
chapter on said portion.  On any portion of a taxpayer's income for which no
tax has been calculated and paid to another municipality a tax shall be
calculated and paid to the city under this chapter.



   (B)   Credits and limitations thereof.  Notwithstanding the
provisions contained in § 44.11 hereof, or any other provisions inconsistent
herewith, a claim for refund or credit under this section shall be made in
such manner as the Tax Commissioner may by regulation provide.  No such
claim for refund or credit shall be allowed unless made on or before the date
of filing the taxpayer's final return unless such taxpayer's employer files
with the Tax Commissioner a list showing the tax withheld from taxpayer's
wages, salaries, or commissions for other municipalities.



   (C)   Except as noted in division (D) of this section, if tax or
withholding is paid to a municipal corporation on income or wages, and if a
second municipal corporation imposes a tax on that income or wages after the
time period allowed for a refund of the tax or withholding paid to the first
municipal corporation, the second municipal corporation shall allow a
nonrefundable credit, against the tax or withholding the second municipality
claims is due with respect to such income or wages, equal to the tax or
withholding paid to the first municipal corporation with respect to such
income or wages.



   (D)   If the tax rate in the second municipal corporation is less
than the tax rate in the first municipal corporation, then the credit
described in division (C) of this section shall be calculated using the tax
rate in effect in the second municipal corporation.



(Ord. 1-1972, passed 1-5-72; Am. Ord. 2-1983, passed 1-5-83; Am. Ord.
24-1987, passed 11-4-87; Am. Ord. 1-2001, passed 1-24-01; Am. Ord. 1-2005,
passed 1-5-05)



§ 44.16  INFORMATION REQUIRED TO BE GIVEN BY LANDLORD.



   (A)   Landlord information required.  Every landlord who owns or
controls rental property located within the city, and who rents to tenants
who occupy the property for 30 days or more, shall, within 30 days after a
new tenant occupies the rental property, file with the Tax Commissioner a
report showing the name, address and telephone number, if available, of each
such tenant.



   (B)   Termination of tenancy.  Within 30 days after a tenant
vacates an apartment, room or other rental unit located within the city, the
property owner of such unit shall file with the Tax Commissioner a report
showing the name of that person, the property address, the date of vacation
of the rental property and a forwarding address, if available.



   (C)   Annually, with the filing of a return due under this chapter,
every landlord who owns or controls rental property located within the city,
shall file a report listing the current tenants who occupy the rental
property, showing the name, address and telephone number, if available, of
each such tenant.



   (D)   Penalty.  A willful violation of this section shall be an
offense punishable by a fine not to exceed $150.



(Ord. 9-1991, passed 4-3-91; Am. Ord. 1-2001, passed 1-24-01; Am. Ord.
2-2004, passed 4-7-04; Am. Ord. 1-2005, passed 1-5-05) 



§ 44.17  SAVINGS CLAUSE.



   This chapter shall not apply to any person, firm or corporation, or to
any property as to whom or which, it is beyond the power of Council to impose
the tax herein provided for.  Any sentence, clause, section or part of this
chapter, or any tax against or exception granted any individual or any of the
several groups of persons, or forms of income specified herein if found to be
unconstitutional or illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality
or invalidity shall affect only such clause, sentence, section or part of
this chapter and shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses, sections or other parts of this chapter.  It is hereby
declared to be the intention of Council of the Municipality that this chapter
would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid
sentence or part hereof, not been included therein.



(Ord. 1-2001, passed 1-24-01; Am. Ord. 1-2005, passed 1-5-05)



§ 44.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any of the
provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise specified, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $1,000 or imprisoned not more
than 180 days, or both, for each offense.



   (B)   If a person is charged in a criminal complaint with violating
§§ 44.12(A) or 44.12(B), R.C. § 2935.36 shall apply to the offense
permitting a diversion program in lieu of conviction, except that a person is
ineligible for diversion under that section if the person previously has been
diverted from conviction pursuant to this division (B) or any similar section
under state law or another municipal code.  If the person completes the
diversion program to the satisfaction of the court, the court shall dismiss
the complaint and order the record in the case sealed under R.C. § 2953.52.
If the person fails to satisfactorily complete the diversion program, the
court shall proceed with the complaint. The Court is authorized to establish
an appropriate administrative fee to be paid to the Court to offset the costs
of prosecution and administering the program. This fee shall be in addition
to any other penalties, fees or interest which may be due upon such
delinquent tax obligation.



(Ord. 9-1991, passed 4-3-91; Am. Ord. 1-2001, passed 1-24-01; Am. Ord.
1-2005, passed 1-5-05; Am. Ord. 8-2012, passed 11-7-12)



CHAPTER 44.1:  INCOME TAX (EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1, 2016)



Section



   44.1.01   Authority to levy tax; purposes of tax; rate



      44.1.011   Authority to levy tax



      44.1.012   Purposes of tax; rate



      44.1.013   Allocation of funds



      44.1.014   Statement of procedural history; state mandated
changes to municipal income tax



   44.1.02   Effective date



   44.1.03   Definitions



   44.1.04   Income subject to tax for individuals



      44.1.041   Determining municipal taxable income for individuals



      44.1.042   Domicile



      44.1.043   Exemption for member or employee of General
Assembly and certain judges



   44.1.05   Collection at source



      44.1.051   Collection at source; withholding from qualifying
wages



      44.1.052   Collection at source; occasional entrant



      44.1.053    (Intentionally left blank)



   44.1.06   Income subject to net profit tax



      44.1.061   Determining municipal taxable income for taxpayers
who are not individuals



      44.1.062   Net profit; income subject to net profit tax;
alternative apportionment



      44.1.063   Consolidated federal income tax return



      44.1.064   Tax credit for businesses that foster new jobs in
Ohio



      44.1.065   Tax credits to foster job retention



   44.1.07   Declaration of estimated tax



   44.1.08   Credit for tax paid



      44.1.081   Credit for tax paid to another municipality



      44.1.082   Refundable credit for qualifying loss



      44.1.083   Credit for person working in joint economic
development district or zone



      44.1.084   Credit for tax beyond statute for obtaining refund



   44.1.09   Annual return



      44.1.091   Return and payment of tax



      44.1.092   Return and payment of tax; individuals serving in
combat zone



      44.1.093   Use of Ohio Business Gateway; types of filings
authorized



      44.1.094   Extension of time to file



      44.1.095   Amended returns



      44.1.096   Refunds



   44.1.10   Penalty, interest, fees and charges



   44.1.11   Audit



   44.1.12   Rounding



   44.1.13   Authority and powers of the Tax Administrator



      44.1.131   Authority of Tax Administrator; administrative
powers of the Tax Administrator



      44.1.132   Authority of Tax Administrator; compromise of claim
and payment over time



      44.1.133   Authority of Tax Administrator; right to examine



      44.1.134   Authority of Tax Administrator; requiring
identifying information



   44.1.14   Confidentiality



   44.1.15   Fraud



   44.1.16   Opinion of the Tax Administrator



   44.1.17   Assessment; appeal based on presumption of delivery



   44.1.18   Board of Tax Review; appeal to Board of Tax Review



   44.1.19   Actions to recover; statute of limitations



   44.1.20   Adoption of rules



   44.1.30   Information required to be given by landlord



   44.1.97   Collection after termination of chapter



   44.1.98   Savings clause



   44.1.99   Violations; penalty



§ 44.1.01  AUTHORITY TO LEVY TAX; PURPOSES OF TAX; RATE



§ 44.1.011  AUTHORITY TO LEVY TAX.



   (A)   The tax on income and the withholding tax established by this
chapter are authorized by Article XVIII, Section 3 of the Ohio Constitution.
The tax on income and the withholding tax established by this chapter are
deemed to be levied in accordance with, and to be consistent with, the
provisions and limitations of R.C. Chapter 718.  This chapter is deemed to
incorporate the provisions of R.C. Chapter 718.



   (B)   The tax is an annual tax levied on the income of every person
residing in or earning or receiving income in the municipal corporation, and
shall be measured by municipal taxable income. The municipality shall tax
income at a uniform rate. The tax is levied on municipal taxable income, as
defined herein.



(Ord. 8-2015, passed 11-4-15)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to tax income and withhold tax, see R.C. § 718.04)



§ 44.1.012  PURPOSES OF TAX; RATE.



   (A)   Purpose of tax.  This tax is imposed to provide funds for the
purposes of general municipal operations, maintenance, new equipment,
extension and enlargement of municipal services and facilities, and capital
improvements of the city.



   (B)   Rate of tax.  For the purposes specified in division (A) of
this section, a tax is levied at a rate of 1% per annum on municipal taxable
income as defined herein.



(Ord. 8-2015, passed 11-4-15)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see R.C. § 718.04



§ 44.1.013  ALLOCATION OF FUNDS.



   The funds collected under the provision of this chapter shall be
disbursed for the following purposes:



   (A)   Twenty percent to the Capital Improvement Fund;



   (B)   Seventy-six percent to the General Fund for the purpose of
general municipal operations; and



   (C)   Four percent to the Debt Retirement Fund to the extent and
limit of the indebted obligations of the municipality in any fiscal year; the
balance after debt retirement to the Street Maintenance and Repair Fund.



(Ord. 8-2015, passed 11-4-15)



§ 44.1.014  STATEMENT OF PROCEDURAL HISTORY; STATE MANDATED CHANGES TO
MUNICIPAL INCOME TAX.



   (A)   Significant and wide-ranging amendments to R.C. Chapter 718
were enacted by Am Sub H.B. 5, passed by the 130th General Assembly, and
signed by Governor Kasich on December 19, 2014, and H.B. 5 required municipal
corporations to conform to and adopt the provisions of R.C. Chapter 718 in
order to have the authority to impose, enforce, administer and collect a
municipal income tax.



   (B)   As mandated by H.B. 5, municipal income tax Ordinance 8- 2015,
effective January 1, 2016, comprehensively amends Chapter 44 of the
Montgomery Code of Ordinances by enacting a new Chapter 44.1 in accordance
with the provisions of R.C. Chapter 718 to allow the municipality to continue
the income tax and withholding tax administration and collection efforts on
behalf of the municipality.



(Ord. 8-2015, passed 11-4-15)



§ 44.1.02  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   (A)   Ordinance 8-2015, effective January 1, 2016, and corresponding
changes to R.C. Chapter 718, apply to municipal taxable years beginning on or
after January 1, 2016. All provisions of this chapter apply to taxable years
beginning 2016 and succeeding taxable years.



   (B)   Ordinance 8-2015 does not repeal the existing sections of
Chapter 44 for any taxable year prior to 2016, but rather enacts this chapter
effective January 1, 2016. For municipal taxable years beginning before
January 1, 2016, the municipality shall continue to administer, audit, and
enforce the income tax of the municipality under R.C. Chapter 718 and
ordinances and resolutions of the municipality as this chapter and those
ordinances and resolutions existed before January 1, 2016.



(Ord. 8-2015, passed 11-4-15)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see R.C. § 718.04



§ 44.1.03  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Any term used in this chapter that is not otherwise defined in
this chapter has the same meaning as when used in a comparable context in
laws of the United States relating to federal income taxation or in R.C.
Title LVII, unless a different meaning is clearly required. If a term used in
this chapter that is not otherwise defined in this chapter is used in a
comparable context in both the laws of the United States relating to federal
income tax and in R.C. Title LVII and the use is not consistent, then the use
of the term in the laws of the United States relating to federal income tax
shall control over the use of the term in R.C. Title LVII.



   (B)   For purposes of this section, the singular shall include the
plural, and the masculine shall include the feminine and the gender-neutral.



   (C)   As used in this chapter:



      (1)   ADJUSTED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME.  For a person required
to file as a C corporation, or for a person that has elected to be taxed as a
C corporation under division (C)(23)(d) of this section, means a C
corporation's federal taxable income before net operating losses and special
deductions as determined under the Internal Revenue Code, adjusted as follows:



         (a)   Deduct intangible income to the extent included in
federal taxable income. The deduction shall be allowed regardless of whether
the intangible income relates to assets used in a trade or business or assets
held for the production of income;



         (b)   Add an amount equal to 5% of intangible income
deducted under division (C)(1)(a) of this section, but excluding that portion
of intangible income directly related to the sale, exchange, or other
disposition of property described in section 1221 of the Internal Revenue
Code;



         (c)   Add any losses allowed as a deduction in the
computation of federal taxable income if the losses directly relate to the
sale, exchange, or other disposition of an asset described in section 1221 or
1231 of the Internal Revenue Code;



         (d)   1.   Except as provided in division (C)(1)(d)2.
of this section, deduct income and gain included in federal taxable income to
the extent the income and gain directly relate to the sale, exchange, or
other disposition of an asset described in section 1221 or 1231 of the
Internal Revenue Code;



            2.   Division (C)(1)(d)1. of this section does not
apply to the extent the income or gain is income or gain described in section
1245 or 1250 of the Internal Revenue Code.



         (e)   Add taxes on or measured by net income allowed as
a deduction in the computation of federal taxable income;



         (f)   In the case of a real estate investment trust or
regulated investment company, add all amounts with respect to dividends to,
distributions to, or amounts set aside for or credited to the benefit of
investors and allowed as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable
income;



         (g)   Deduct, to the extent not otherwise deducted or
excluded in computing federal taxable income, any income derived from a
transfer agreement or from the enterprise transferred under that agreement
under R.C. § 4313.02;



         (h)   1.   Except as limited by divisions
(C)(1)(h)2., 3. and 4. of this section, deduct any net operating loss
incurred by the person in a taxable year beginning on or after January 1,
2017.



               The amount of such net operating loss shall be
deducted from net profit that is reduced by exempt income to the extent
necessary to reduce municipal taxable income to zero, with any remaining
unused portion of the net operating loss carried forward to not more than
five consecutive taxable years following the taxable year in which the loss
was incurred, but in no case for more years than necessary for the deduction
to be fully utilized.



            2.   No person shall use the deduction allowed by
division (C)(1)(h) of this section to offset qualifying wages.



            3.   a.   For taxable years beginning in 2018,
2019, 2020, 2021, or 2022, a person may not deduct, for purposes of an income
tax levied by a municipal corporation that levies an income tax before
January 1, 2016, more than 50% of the amount of the deduction otherwise
allowed by division (C)(1)(h)1. of this section.



               b.   For taxable years beginning in 2023 or
thereafter, a person may deduct, for purposes of an income tax levied by a
municipal corporation that levies an income tax before January 1, 2016, the
full amount allowed by division (C)(1)(h)1. of this section.



            4.   Any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward
deduction that is available must be utilized before a taxpayer may deduct any
amount pursuant to division (C)(1)(h) of this section.



            5.   Nothing in division (C)(1)(h)3.a. of this
section precludes a person from carrying forward, for use with respect to any
return filed for a taxable year beginning after 2018, any amount of net
operating loss that was not fully utilized by operation of division
(C)(1)(h)3.a. of this section. To the extent that an amount of net operating
loss that was not fully utilized in one or more taxable years by operation of
division (C)(1)(h)3.a. of this section is carried forward for use with
respect to a return filed for a taxable year beginning in 2019, 2020, 2021,
or 2022, the limitation described in division (C)(1)(h)3.a. of this section
shall apply to the amount carried forward.



         (i)   Deduct any net profit of a pass-through entity
owned directly or indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer's
federal taxable income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes
that net profit in the group's federal taxable income in accordance with §
44.1.063(E)(3)(b).



         (j)   Add any loss incurred by a pass-through entity
owned directly or indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer's
federal taxable income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes
that loss in the group's federal taxable income in accordance with §
44.1.063(E)(3)(b).



         If the taxpayer is not a C corporation, is not a
disregarded entity that has made the election described in division
(C)(47)(b) of this section, is not a publicly traded partnership that has
made the election described in division (C)(23)(d) of this section, and is
not an individual, the taxpayer shall compute adjusted federal taxable income
under this section as if the taxpayer were a C corporation, except guaranteed
payments and other similar amounts paid or accrued to a partner, former
partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member shall not
be allowed as a deductible expense unless such payments are in consideration
for the use of capital and treated as payment of interest under section 469
of the Internal Revenue Code or United States Treasury regulations. Amounts
paid or accrued to a qualified self-employed retirement plan with respect to
a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former
member of the taxpayer, amounts paid or accrued to or for health insurance
for a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or
former member, and amounts paid or accrued to or for life insurance for a
partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former
member shall not be allowed as a deduction.



         Nothing in division (C)(1) of this section shall be
construed as allowing the taxpayer to add or deduct any amount more than once
or shall be construed as allowing any taxpayer to deduct any amount paid to
or accrued for purposes of federal self-employment tax.



      (2)   (a)   ASSESSMENT.



            1.   A written finding by the Tax Administrator
that a person has underpaid municipal income tax, or owes penalty and
interest, or any combination of tax, penalty, or interest, to the municipal
corporation;



            2.   A full or partial denial of a refund request
issued under § 44.1.096(B)(2);



            3.   A Tax Administrator's denial of a taxpayer's
request for use of an alternative apportionment method, issued under §
44.1.062(B)(2); or



            4.   A Tax Administrator's requirement for a
taxpayer to use an alternative apportionment method, issued under §
44.1.062(B)(3).



            5.   For purposes of division (C)(2)(a)1., 2., 3.
and 4. of this section, an assessment shall commence the person's time
limitation for making an appeal to the Board of Tax Review pursuant to §
44.1.18, and shall have "ASSESSMENT" written in all capital letters at the
top of such finding.



         (b)   ASSESSMENT does not include notice(s) denying a
request for refund issued under § 44.1.096(B)(3), a billing statement
notifying a taxpayer of current or past-due balances owed to the municipal
corporation, a Tax Administrator's request for additional information, a
notification to the taxpayer of mathematical errors, or a Tax Administrator's
other written correspondence to a person or taxpayer that does not meet the
criteria prescribed by division (C)(2)(a) of this section.



      (3)   AUDIT.  The examination of a person or the inspection
of the books, records, memoranda, or accounts of a person, ordered to appear
before the Tax Administrator, for the purpose of determining liability for a
municipal income tax.



      (4)   BOARD OF REVIEW.  Has same meaning as LOCAL BOARD OF
TAX REVIEW.



      (5)   CALENDAR QUARTER.  The three-month period ending on the
last day of March, June, September, or December.



      (6)   CASINO OPERATOR and CASINO FACILITY.  Have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 3772.01.



      (7)   CERTIFIED MAIL, EXPRESS MAIL, UNITED STATES MAIL, POSTAL
SERVICE, and similar terms include any delivery service authorized pursuant
to R.C. § 5703.056.



      (8)   COMPENSATION.  Any form of remuneration paid to an
employee for personal services.



      (9)   DISREGARDED ENTITY.  A single member limited liability
company, a qualifying subchapter S subsidiary, or another entity if the
company, subsidiary, or entity is a disregarded entity for federal income tax
purposes.



      (10)   DOMICILE.  The true, fixed and permanent home of the
taxpayer to which, whenever absent, the taxpayer intends to return.



      (11)   EXEMPT INCOME.



         (a)   The military pay or allowances of members of the
Armed Forces of the United States or members of their reserve components,
including the national guard of any state;



         (b)   Intentionally left blank.



         (c)   Social Security benefits, railroad retirement
benefits, unemployment compensation, pensions, retirement benefit payments,
payments from annuities, and similar payments made to an employee or to the
beneficiary of an employee under a retirement program or plan, disability
payments received from private industry or local, state, or federal
governments or from charitable, religious or educational organizations, and
the proceeds of sickness, accident, or liability insurance policies. As used
in division (C)(11)(c) of this section, UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION does not
include supplemental unemployment compensation described in section
3402(o)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code.



         (d)   The income of religious, fraternal, charitable,
scientific, literary, or educational institutions to the extent such income
is derived from tax-exempt real estate, tax-exempt tangible or intangible
property, or tax-exempt activities.



         (e)   Compensation paid under R.C. § 3501.28 or 3501.36
to a person serving as a precinct election official to the extent that such
compensation does not exceed $1,000 for the taxable year. Such compensation
in excess of $1,000 for the taxable year may be subject to taxation by a
municipal corporation. A municipal corporation shall not require the payer of
such compensation to withhold any tax from that compensation.



         (f)   Dues, contributions, and similar payments received
by charitable, religious, educational, or literary organizations or labor
unions, lodges, and similar organizations;



         (g)   Alimony and child support received;



         (h)   Awards for personal injuries or for damages to
property from insurance proceeds or otherwise, excluding compensation paid
for lost salaries or wages or awards for punitive damages;



         (i)   Income of a public utility when that public
utility is subject to the tax levied under R.C. § 5727.24 or 5727.30. 
Division (C)(11)(i) of this section does not apply for purposes of R.C.
Chapter 5745;



         (j)   Gains from involuntary conversions, interest on
federal obligations, items of income subject to a tax levied by the state and
that a municipal corporation is specifically prohibited by law from taxing,
and income of a decedent's estate during the period of administration except
such income from the operation of a trade or business;



         (k)   Compensation or allowances excluded from federal
gross income under section 107 of the Internal Revenue Code;



         (l)   Employee compensation that is not qualifying wages
as defined in division (C)(34) of this section;



         (m)   Compensation paid to a person employed within the
boundaries of a United States Air Force base under the jurisdiction of the
United States Air Force that is used for the housing of members of the United
States Air Force and is a center for Air Force operations, unless the person
is subject to taxation because of residence or domicile. If the compensation
is subject to taxation because of residence or domicile, tax on such income
shall be payable only to the municipal corporation of residence or domicile.



         (n)   An S corporation shareholder's distributive share
of net profits of the S corporation, other than any part of the distributive
share of net profits that represents wages as defined in section 3121(a) of
the Internal Revenue Code or net earnings from self-employment as defined in
section 1402(a) of the Internal Revenue Code.



         (o)   Intentionally left blank



         (p)   1.   Except as provided in divisions
(C)(11)(p)2., 3., and 4. of this section, qualifying wages described in
division § 44.1.052(B)(1) or (E) to the extent the qualifying wages are not
subject to withholding for the municipality under either of those divisions.



            2.   The exemption provided in division
(C)(11)(p)1. of this section does not apply with respect to the municipal
corporation in which the employee resided at the time the employee earned the
qualifying wages.



            3.   The exemption provided in division
(C)(11)(p)1. of this section does not apply to qualifying wages that an
employer elects to withhold under § 44.1.052(D)(2).



            4.   The exemption provided in division
(C)(11)(p)1. of this section does not apply to qualifying wages if both of
the following conditions apply:



               a.   For qualifying wages described in §
44.1.052(B)(1), the employee's employer withholds and remits tax on the
qualifying wages to the municipal corporation in which the employee's
principal place of work is situated, or, for qualifying wages described in §
44.1.052(E), the employee's employer withholds and remits tax on the
qualifying wages to the municipal corporation in which the employer's fixed
location is located;



               b.   The employee receives a refund of the
tax described in division (C)(11)(p)4.a. of this section on the basis of the
employee not performing services in that municipal corporation.



         (q)   1.   Except as provided in division
(C)(11)(q)2. or 3. of this section, compensation that is not qualifying wages
paid to a nonresident individual for personal services performed in the
municipality on not more than 20 days in a taxable year.



            2.   The exemption provided in division
(C)(11)(q)1. of this section does not apply under either of the following
circumstances:



               a.   The individual's base of operation is
located in the municipality.



               b.   The individual is a professional
athlete, professional entertainer, or public figure, and the compensation is
paid for the performance of services in the individual's capacity as a
professional athlete, professional entertainer, or public figure. For
purposes of division (C)(11)(q)2.b. of this section, "professional athlete,"
"professional entertainer," and "public figure" have the same meanings as in
§ 44.1.052.



            3.    Compensation to which division (C)(11)(q) of
this section applies shall be treated as earned or received at the
individual's base of operation. If the individual does not have a base of
operation, the compensation shall be treated as earned or received where the
individual is domiciled.



            4.   For purposes of division (C)(11)(q) of this
section, BASE OF OPERATION means the location where an individual owns or
rents an office, storefront, or similar facility to which the individual
regularly reports and at which the individual regularly performs personal
services for compensation.



         (r)   Compensation paid to a person for personal
services performed for a political subdivision on property owned by the
political subdivision, regardless of whether the compensation is received by
an employee of the subdivision or another person performing services for the
subdivision under a contract with the subdivision, if the property on which
services are performed is annexed to a municipal corporation pursuant to R.C.
§ 709.023 on or after March 27, 2013, unless the person is subject to such
taxation because of residence. If the compensation is subject to taxation
because of residence, municipal income tax shall be payable only to the
municipal corporation of residence.



         (s)   Income the taxation of which is prohibited by the
constitution or laws of the United States.



            Any item of income that is exempt income of a
pass-through entity under division (C)(11) of this section is exempt income
of each owner of the pass-through entity to the extent of that owner's
distributive or proportionate share of that item of the entity's income.



      (12)   FORM 2106.  Internal Revenue Service form 2106 filed
by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.



      (13)   GENERIC FORM.  An electronic or paper form that is not
prescribed by a particular municipal corporation and that is designed for
reporting taxes withheld by an employer, agent of an employer, or other
payer, estimated municipal income taxes, or annual municipal income tax
liability, including a request for refund.



      (14)   INCOME.



         (a)   1.   For residents, all income, salaries,
qualifying wages, commissions, and other compensation from whatever source
earned or received by the resident, including the resident's distributive
share of the net profit of pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly
by the resident and any net profit of the resident, except as provided in
division (C)(23)(d) of this section.



            2.   For the purposes of division (C)(14)(a)1. of
this section:



               a.   Any net operating loss of the resident
incurred in the taxable year and the resident's distributive share of any net
operating loss generated in the same taxable year and attributable to the
resident's ownership interest in a pass-through entity shall be allowed as a
deduction, for that taxable year and the following five taxable years,
against any other net profit of the resident or the resident's distributive
share of any net profit attributable to the resident's ownership interest in
a pass-through entity until fully utilized, subject to division (C)(14)(a)4.
of this section;



               b.   The resident's distributive share of
the net profit of each pass-through entity owned directly or indirectly by
the resident shall be calculated without regard to any net operating loss
that is carried forward by that entity from a prior taxable year and applied
to reduce the entity's net profit for the current taxable year.



            3.   Division (C)(14)(a)2. of this section does
not apply with respect to any net profit or net operating loss attributable
to an ownership interest in an S corporation.



            4.   Any amount of a net operating loss used to
reduce a taxpayer's net profit for a taxable year shall reduce the amount of
net operating loss that may be carried forward to any subsequent year for use
by that taxpayer. In no event shall the cumulative deductions for all taxable
years with respect to a taxpayer's net operating loss exceed the original
amount of that net operating loss available to that taxpayer.



         (b)   In the case of nonresidents, all income, salaries,
qualifying wages, commissions, and other compensation from whatever source
earned or received by the nonresident for work done, services performed or
rendered, or activities conducted in the municipality, including any net
profit of the nonresident, but excluding the nonresident's distributive share
of the net profit or loss of only pass-through entities owned directly or
indirectly by the nonresident.



         (c)   For taxpayers that are not individuals, net profit
of the taxpayer;



         (d)   Lottery, sweepstakes, gambling and sports
winnings, winnings from games of chance, and prizes and awards. If the
taxpayer is a professional gambler for federal income tax purposes, the
taxpayer may deduct related wagering losses and expenses to the extent
authorized under the Internal Revenue Code and claimed against such winnings.
Credit for tax withheld or paid to another municipal corporation on such
winnings paid to the municipal corporation where winnings occur is limited to
the credit as specified in § 44.1.081.



      (15)   INTANGIBLE INCOME.  Income of any of the following
types: income yield, interest, capital gains, dividends, or other income
arising from the ownership, sale, exchange, or other disposition of
intangible property including, but not limited to, investments, deposits,
money, or credits as those terms are defined in R.C. Chapter 5701, and
patents, copyrights, trademarks, trade names, investments in real estate
investment trusts, investments in regulated investment companies, and
appreciation on deferred compensation. INTANGIBLE INCOME does not include
prizes, awards, or other income associated with any lottery winnings,
gambling winnings, or other similar games of chance.



      (16)   INTERNAL REVENUE CODE.  The "Internal Revenue Code of
1986," 100 Sta. 2085, 26 U.S.C.A. 1, as amended.



      (17)   LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY.  A limited liability
company formed under R.C. Chapter 1705 or under the laws of another state.



      (18)   BOARD OF TAX REVIEW and BOARD OF TAX REVIEW.  The
entity created under § 44.1.18.



      (19)   MUNICIPAL CORPORATION.  In general terms, a status
conferred upon a local government unit, by state law giving the unit certain
autonomous operating authority such as the power of taxation, power of
eminent domain, police power and regulatory power, and includes a joint
economic development district or joint economic development zone that levies
an income tax under R.C. § 715.691, 715.70, 715.71, or 715.74.



      (20)   (a)   MUNICIPAL TAXABLE INCOME.



            1.   For a person other than an individual, income
reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income and then,
as applicable, apportioned or sitused to the municipality under § 44.1.062,
and further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward available
to the person for the municipality.



            2.   a.   For an individual who is a resident
of a municipality other than a qualified municipal corporation, income
reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income, then
reduced as provided in division (C)(20)(b) of this section, and further
reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward available to the
individual for the municipality.



               b.   For an individual who is a resident of
a qualified municipal corporation, Ohio adjusted gross income reduced by
income exempted, and increased by deductions excluded, by the qualified
municipal corporation from the qualified municipal corporation's tax on or
before December 31, 2013. If a qualified municipal corporation, on or before
December 31, 2013, exempts income earned by individuals who are not residents
of the qualified municipal corporation and net profit of persons that are not
wholly located within the qualified municipal corporation, such individual or
person shall have no municipal taxable income for the purposes of the tax
levied by the qualified municipal corporation and may be exempted by the
qualified municipal corporation from the requirements of R.C. § 718.03.



            3.   For an individual who is a nonresident of the
municipality, income reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise
included in income and then, as applicable, apportioned or sitused to the
municipality under § 44.1.062, then reduced as provided in division
(C)(20)(b) of this section, and further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating
loss carryforward available to the individual for the municipality.



         (b)   In computing the municipal taxable income of a
taxpayer who is an individual, the taxpayer may subtract, as provided in
division (C)(20)(a)2.a. or 3. of this section, the amount of the individual's
employee business expenses reported on the individual's form 2106 that the
individual deducted for federal income tax purposes for the taxable year,
subject to the limitation imposed by section 67 of the Internal Revenue Code.
For the municipal corporation in which the taxpayer is a resident, the
taxpayer may deduct all such expenses allowed for federal income tax
purposes. For a municipal corporation in which the taxpayer is not a
resident, the taxpayer may deduct such expenses only to the extent the
expenses are related to the taxpayer's performance of personal services in
that nonresident municipal corporation.



      (21)   MUNICIPALITY.  The City of Montgomery, Ohio.



      (22)   NET OPERATING LOSS.  A loss incurred by a person in
the operation of a trade or business.  NET OPERATING LOSS does not include
unutilized losses resulting from basis limitations, at-risk limitations, or
passive activity loss limitations.



      (23)   (a)   NET PROFIT.  For a person other than an
individual means adjusted federal taxable income.



         (b)   NET PROFIT for a person who is an individual means
the individual's net profit required to be reported on schedule C, schedule
E, or schedule F reduced by any net operating loss carried forward. For the
purposes of this division, the net operating loss carried forward shall be
calculated and deducted in the same manner as provided in division (C)(1)(h)
of this section.



         (c)   For the purposes of this chapter, and
notwithstanding division (C)(23)(a) of this section, net profit of a
disregarded entity shall not be taxable as against that disregarded entity,
but shall instead be included in the net profit of the owner of the
disregarded entity.



         (d)   1.   For purposes of this chapter, PUBLICLY
TRADED PARTNERSHIP means any partnership, an interest in which is regularly
traded on an established securities market. A publicly traded partnership may
have any number of partners.



            2.   For the purposes of this chapter, and not
withstanding any other provision of this chapter, the net profit of a
publicly traded partnership that makes the election described in division
(C)(23)(d) of this section shall be taxed as if the partnership were a C
corporation, and shall not be treated as the net profit or income of any
owner of the partnership.



            3.   A publicly traded partnership that is treated
as a partnership for federal income tax purposes and that is subject to tax
on its net profits in one or more municipal corporations in this state may
elect to be treated as a C corporation for municipal income tax purposes. The
publicly traded partnership shall make the election in every municipal
corporation in which the partnership is subject to taxation on its net
profits. The election shall be made on the annual tax return filed in each
such municipal corporation. Once the election is made, the election is
binding for a five-year period beginning with the first taxable year of the
initial election. The election continues to be binding for each subsequent
five-year period unless the taxpayer elects to discontinue filing municipal
income tax returns as a C corporation for municipal purposes under division
(C)(23)(d)4. of this section.



            4.   An election to discontinue filing as a C
corporation must be made in the first year following the last year of a
five-year election period in effect under division (C)(23)(d)3. of this
section. The election to discontinue filing as a C corporation is binding for
a five-year period beginning with the first taxable year of the election and
continues to be binding for each subsequent five-year period unless the
taxpayer elects to discontinue filing municipal income tax returns as a
partnership for municipal purposes. An election to discontinue filing as a
partnership must be made in the first year following the last year of a
five-year election period.



            5.   The publicly traded partnership shall not be
required to file the election with any municipal corporation in which the
partnership is not subject to taxation on its net profits, but division
(C)(23)(d) of this section applies to all municipal corporations in which an
individual owner of the partnership resides.



            6.   The individual owners of the partnership not
filing as a C corporation shall be required to file with their municipal
corporation of residence, and report partnership distribution of net profit.



      (24)   NONRESIDENT.  An individual that is not a resident of
the municipality.



      (25)   OHIO BUSINESS GATEWAY.  The online computer network
system, created under R.C. § 125.30, that allows persons to electronically
file business reply forms with state agencies and includes any successor
electronic filing and payment system.



      (26)   OTHER PAYER.  Any person, other than an individual's
employer or the employer's agent, that pays an individual any amount included
in the federal gross income of the individual.  OTHER PAYER includes casino
operators and video lottery terminal sales agents.



      (27)   PASS-THROUGH ENTITY.  A partnership not treated as an
association taxable as a C corporation for federal income tax purposes, a
limited liability company not treated as an association taxable as a C
corporation for federal income tax purposes, an S corporation, or any other
class of entity from which the income or profits of the entity are given
pass-through treatment for federal income tax purposes. PASS-THROUGH ENTITY
does not include a trust, estate, grantor of a grantor trust, or disregarded
entity.



      (28)   PENSION.  Any amount paid to an employee or former
employee that is reported to the recipient on an IRS form 1099-R, or
successor form. Pension does not include deferred compensation, or amounts
attributable to nonqualified deferred compensation plans, reported as
FICA/Medicare wages on an IRS form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement, or successor
form.



      (29)   PERSON.  Includes individuals, firms, companies, joint
stock companies, business trusts, estates, trusts, partnerships, limited
liability partnerships, limited liability companies, associations, C
corporations, S corporations, governmental entities, and any other entity.



      (30)   POSTAL SERVICE.  The United States Postal Service, or
private delivery service delivering documents and packages within an agreed
upon delivery schedule, or any other carrier service delivering the item.



      (31)   POSTMARK DATE, DATE OF POSTMARK, and similar terms
include the date recorded and marked by a delivery service and recorded
electronically to a database kept in the regular course if its business and
marked on the cover in which the payment or document is enclosed, the date on
which the payment or document was given to the delivery service for delivery.



      (32)   (a)   PRE-2017 NET OPERATING LOSS CARRYFORWARD. 
Any net operating loss incurred in a taxable year beginning before January 1,
2017, to the extent such loss was permitted, by a resolution or ordinance of
the municipality that was adopted by the municipality before January 1, 2016,
to be carried forward and utilized to offset income or net profit generated
in such municipality in future taxable years.



         (b)   For the purpose of calculating municipal taxable
income, any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward may be carried forward
to any taxable year, including taxable years beginning in 2017 or thereafter,
for the number of taxable years provided in the resolution or ordinance or
until fully utilized, whichever is earlier.



      (33)   QUALIFIED MUNICIPAL CORPORATION.  A municipal
corporation that, by resolution or ordinance adopted on or before December
31, 2011, adopted Ohio adjusted gross income, as defined by R.C. § 5747.01,
as the income subject to tax for the purposes of imposing a municipal income
tax.



      (34)   QUALIFYING WAGES.  Wages, as defined in section
3121(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, without regard to any wage limitations,
adjusted as follows:



         (a)   Deduct the following amounts:



            1.   Any amount included in wages if the amount
constitutes compensation attributable to a plan or program described in
section 125 of the Internal Revenue Code.



            2.   Any amount included in wages if the amount
constitutes payment on account of a disability related to sickness or an
accident paid by a party unrelated to the employer, agent of an employer, or
other payer.



            3.    Intentionally left blank



            4.    Intentionally left blank



            5.   Any amount included in wages that is exempt
income.



         (b)   Add the following amounts:



            1.   Any amount not included in wages solely
because the employee was employed by the employer before April 1, 1986.



            2.   Any amount not included in wages because the
amount arises from the sale, exchange, or other disposition of a stock
option, the exercise of a stock option, or the sale, exchange, or other
disposition of stock purchased under a stock option.  Division (C)(34)(b)2.
of this section applies only to those amounts constituting ordinary income.



            3.   Any amount not included in wages if the
amount is an amount described in section 401(k), 403(b), or 457 of the
Internal Revenue Code. Division (C)(34)(b)3. of this section applies only to
employee contributions and employee deferrals.



            4.   Any amount that is supplemental unemployment
compensation benefits described in section 3402(o)(2) of the Internal Revenue
Code and not included in wages.



            5.   Any amount received that is treated as
self-employment income for federal tax purposes in accordance with section
1402(a)(8) of the Internal Revenue Code.



            6.   Any amount not included in wages if all of
the following apply:



               a.   For the taxable year the amount is
employee compensation that is earned outside of the United States and that
either is included in the taxpayer's gross income for federal income tax
purposes or would have been included in the taxpayer's gross income for such
purposes if the taxpayer did not elect to exclude the income under section
911 of the Internal Revenue Code;



               b.   For no preceding taxable year did the
amount constitute wages as defined in section 3121(a) of the Internal Revenue
Code;



               c.   For no succeeding taxable year will the
amount constitute wages; and



               d.   For any taxable year the amount has not
otherwise been added to wages pursuant to either division (C)(34)(b) of this
section or R.C. § 718.03, as that section existed before the effective date
of H.B. 5 of the 130th General Assembly, March 23, 2015.



      (35)   RELATED ENTITY.



         (a)   An individual stockholder, or a member of the
stockholder's family enumerated in section 318 of the Internal Revenue Code,
if the stockholder and the members of the stockholder's family own directly,
indirectly, beneficially, or constructively, in the aggregate, at least 50%
of the value of the taxpayer's outstanding stock;



         (b)   A stockholder, or a stockholder's partnership,
estate, trust, or corporation, if the stockholder and the stockholder's
partnerships, estates, trusts, or corporations own directly, indirectly,
beneficially, or constructively, in the aggregate, at least 50% of the value
of the taxpayer's outstanding stock;



         (c)   A corporation, or a party related to the
corporation in a manner that would require an attribution of stock from the
corporation to the party or from the party to the corporation under division
(C)(35)(d) of this section, provided the taxpayer owns directly, indirectly,
beneficially, or constructively, at least 50% of the value of the
corporation's outstanding stock;



         (d)   The attribution rules described in section 318 of
the Internal Revenue Code apply for the purpose of determining whether the
ownership requirements in divisions (C)(35)(a) to (c) of this section have
been met.



      (36)   RELATED MEMBER.  A person that, with respect to the
taxpayer during all or any portion of the taxable year, is either a related
entity, a component member as defined in section 1563(b) of the Internal
Revenue Code, or a person to or from whom there is attribution of stock
ownership in accordance with section 1563(e) of the Internal Revenue Code
except, for purposes of determining whether a person is a related member
under this division, "twenty per cent" shall be substituted for "5 percent"
wherever "5 percent" appears in section 1563(e) of the Internal Revenue Code.



      (37)   RESIDENT.  An individual who is domiciled in the
municipality as determined under § 44.1.042.



      (38)   S CORPORATION.  A person that has made an election
under subchapter S of Chapter 1 of Subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code
for its taxable year.



      (39)   SCHEDULE C.  Internal Revenue Service schedule C (form
1040) filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.



      (40)   SCHEDULE E.  Internal Revenue Service schedule E (form
1040) filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.



      (41)   SCHEDULE F.  Internal Revenue Service schedule F (form
1040) filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.



      (42)   SINGLE MEMBER LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY.  A limited
liability company that has one direct member.



      (43)   SMALL EMPLOYER.  Any employer that had total revenue
of less than $500,000 during the preceding taxable year. For purposes of this
division, TOTAL REVENUE means receipts of any type or kind, including, but
not limited to, sales receipts; payments; rents; profits; gains, dividends,
and other investment income; commissions; premiums; money; property; grants;
contributions; donations; gifts; program service revenue; patient service
revenue; premiums; fees, including premium fees and service fees; tuition
payments; unrelated business revenue; reimbursements; any type of payment
from a governmental unit, including grants and other allocations; and any
other similar receipts reported for federal income tax purposes or under
generally accepted accounting principles. SMALL EMPLOYER does not include the
federal government; any state government, including any state agency or
instrumentality; any political subdivision; or any entity treated as a
government for financial accounting and reporting purposes.



      (44)   TAX ADMINISTRATOR.  The Tax Commissioner of the City
of Montgomery who is charged with direct responsibility for administration of
an income tax levied by the city in accordance with this chapter, and also
includes the following:



         (a)   A municipal corporation acting as the agent of
another municipal corporation;



         (b)   A person retained by a municipal corporation to
administer a tax levied by the municipal corporation, but only if the
municipal corporation does not compensate the person in whole or in part on a
contingency basis;



         (c)   The Central Collection Agency (CCA) or the
Regional Income Tax Agency (RITA) or their successors in interest, or another
entity organized to perform functions similar to those performed by the
Central Collection Agency and the Regional Income Tax Agency.



      (45)   TAX RETURN PREPARER.  Any individual described in
section 7701(a)(36) of the Internal Revenue Code and 26 C.F.R. 301.7701-15.



      (46)   TAXABLE YEAR.  The corresponding tax reporting period
as prescribed for the taxpayer under the Internal Revenue Code.



      (47)   (a)   TAXPAYER.  A person subject to a tax levied
on income by a municipal corporation in accordance with this chapter. 
TAXPAYER does not include a grantor trust or, except as provided in division
(C)(47)(b)1. of this section, a disregarded entity.



         (b)   1.   A single member limited liability company
that is a disregarded entity for federal tax purposes may be a separate
taxpayer from its single member in all Ohio municipal corporations in which
it either filed as a separate taxpayer or did not file for its taxable year
ending in 2003, if all of the following conditions are met:



               a.   The limited liability company's single
member is also a limited liability company.



               b.   The limited liability company and its
single member were formed and doing business in one or more Ohio municipal
corporations for at least five years before January 1, 2004.



               c.   Not later than December 31, 2004, the
limited liability company and its single member each made an election to be
treated as a separate taxpayer under division (L) of R.C. § 718.01 as this
section existed on December 31, 2004.



               d.   The limited liability company was not
formed for the purpose of evading or reducing Ohio municipal corporation
income tax liability of the limited liability company or its single member.



               e.   The Ohio municipal corporation that was
the primary place of business of the sole member of the limited liability
company consented to the election.



            2.   For purposes of division (C)(47)(b)1.e. of
this section, a municipal corporation was the primary place of business of a
limited liability company if, for the limited liability company's taxable
year ending in 2003, its income tax liability was greater in that municipal
corporation than in any other municipal corporation in Ohio, and that tax
liability to that municipal corporation for its taxable year ending in 2003
was at least $400,000.



      (48)   TAXPAYERS' RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES.  The rights
provided to taxpayers in R.C. §§ 718.11, 718.12, 718.19, 718.23, 718.36,
718.37, 718.38, 5717.011, and 5717.03 and any corresponding ordinances of the
municipality, and the responsibilities of taxpayers to file, report,
withhold, remit, and pay municipal income tax and otherwise comply with R.C.
Chapter 718 and resolutions, ordinances, and rules adopted by a municipal
corporation for the imposition and administration of a municipal income tax.



      (49)   VIDEO LOTTERY TERMINAL.  Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 3770.21.



      (50)   VIDEO LOTTERY TERMINAL SALES AGENT.  A lottery sales
agent licensed under R.C. Chapter 3770 to conduct video lottery terminals on
behalf of the state pursuant to R.C. § 3770.21.



(Ord. 8-2015, passed 11-4-15)



Statutory reference:



   Related definitions, see R.C. 718.01



§ 44.1.04  INCOME SUBJECT TO TAX FOR INDIVIDUALS



§ 44.1.041  DETERMINING MUNICIPAL TAXABLE INCOME FOR INDIVIDUALS.



   (A)   Municipal taxable income for a resident of the municipality is
calculated as follows:



      (1)   Income reduced by exempt income to the extent such
exempt income is otherwise included in income, reduced by allowable employee
business expense deduction as found in § 44.1.03(C)(20)(b), further reduced
by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward equals municipal taxable
income.



         (a)   INCOME is defined in § 44.1.03(C)(14).



            1.   QUALIFYING WAGES is defined in §
44.1.03(C)(34).



            2.   NET PROFIT is included in income, and is
defined in § 44.1.03(C)(23).  This section also provides that the net
operating loss carryforward shall be calculated and deducted in the same
manner as provided in § 44.1.03(C)(1)(h). Treatment of net profits received
by an individual taxpayer from rental real estate is provided in §
44.1.062(E).



            3.   Section 44.1.03(C)(14) provides the
following: offsetting and net operating loss carryforward treatment in §
44.1.03(C)(14)(a)2.a.; resident's distributive share of net profit from pass
through entity treatment in § 44.1.03(C)(14)(a)2.b.; treatment of S
corporation distributive share of net profit in the hands of the shareholder
in § 44.1.03(C)(14)(a)3.; restriction of amount of loss permitted to be
carried forward for use by taxpayer in a subsequent taxable year in §
44.1.03(C)(14)(a)4.



            4.   PASS THROUGH ENTITY is defined in §
44.1.03(C)(27).



         (b)   EXEMPT INCOME is defined in § 44.1.03(C)(11).



         (c)   Allowable employee business expense deduction is
described in § 44.1.03(C)(20)(b), and is subject to the limitations provided
in that section.



         (d)   PRE-2017 NET OPERATING LOSS CARRYFORWARD is
defined in § 44.1.03(C)(32).



   (B)   Municipal taxable income for a nonresident of the municipality
is calculated as follows:



      (1)   Income reduced by exempt income to the extent such
exempt income is otherwise included in income, as applicable, apportioned or
sitused to the municipality as provided in § 44.1.062, reduced by allowable
employee business expense deduction as found in § 44.1.03(C)(20)(b), further
reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward equals municipal
taxable income.



         (a)   INCOME is defined in § 44.1.03(C)(14).



            1.   QUALIFYING WAGES is defined in §
44.1.03(C)(34).



            2.   NET PROFIT is included in income, and is
defined in § 44.1.03(C)(23).  This section also provides that the net
operating loss carryforward shall be calculated and deducted in the same
manner as provided in § 44.1.03(C)(1)(h).  NET PROFIT for a nonresident
individual includes any net profit of the nonresident, but excludes the
distributive share of net profit or loss of only pass through entity owned
directly or indirectly by the nonresident.



            3.   PASS THROUGH ENTITY is defined in §
44.1.03(C)(27).



         (b)   EXEMPT INCOME is defined in § 44.1.03(C)(11).



         (c)   APPORTIONED OR SITUSED TO THE MUNICIPALITY AS
PROVIDED IN SECTION 44.1.062 OF THIS CHAPTER includes the apportionment of
net profit income attributable to work done or services performed in the
municipality. Treatment of net profits received by an individual taxpayer
from rental real estate is provided in § 44.1.062(E).



         (d)   ALLOWABLE EMPLOYEE BUSINESS EXPENSE DEDUCTION as
described in § 44.1.03(C)(20)(b), is subject to the limitations provided in
that section. For a nonresident of the municipality, the deduction is limited
to the extent the expenses are related to the performance of personal
services by the nonresident in the municipality.



         (e)   PRE-2017 NET OPERATING LOSS CARRYFORWARD is
defined in § 44.1.03(C)(32).



(Ord. 8-2015, passed 11-4-15)



§ 44.1.042  DOMICILE.



   (A)   As used in this section:



      (1)   DOMICILE means the true, fixed and permanent home of the
taxpayer to which whenever absent, the taxpayer intends to return.



      (2)   An individual is presumed to be domiciled in the
municipality for all or part of a taxable year if the individual was
domiciled in the municipality on the last day of the immediately preceding
taxable year or if the Tax Administrator reasonably concludes that the
individual is domiciled in the municipality for all or part of the taxable
year.



      (3)   An individual may rebut the presumption of domicile
described in division (A)(1) of this section if the individual establishes by
a preponderance of the evidence that the individual was not domiciled in the
municipality for all or part of the taxable year.



   (B)   For the purpose of determining whether an individual is
domiciled in the municipality for all or part of a taxable year, factors that
may be considered include, but are not limited to, the following:



      (1)   The individual's domicile in other taxable years;



      (2)   The location at which the individual is registered to
vote;



      (3)   The address on the individual's driver's license;



      (4)   The location of real estate for which the individual
claimed a property tax exemption or reduction allowed on the basis of the
individual's residence or domicile;



      (5)   The location and value of abodes owned or leased by the
individual;



      (6)   Declarations, written or oral, made by the individual
regarding the individual's residency;



      (7)   The primary location at which the individual is employed;



      (8)   The location of educational institutions attended by the
individual's dependents as defined in section 152 of the Internal Revenue
Code, to the extent that tuition paid to such educational institution is
based on the residency of the individual or the individual's spouse in the
municipal corporation or state where the educational institution is located;



      (9)   The number of contact periods the individual has with
the municipality. For the purposes of this division, an individual has one
"contact period" with the municipality if the individual is away overnight
from the individual's abode located outside of the municipality and while
away overnight from that abode spends at least some portion, however minimal,
of each of two consecutive days in the municipality. For purposes of this
section, the state's contact period test or bright-line test and resulting
determination have no bearing on municipal residency or domicile.



   (C)   All applicable factors are provided in R.C. § 718.012.



(Ord. 8-2015, passed 11-4-15)



Statutory reference:



   Domicile, see R.C. § 718.012



§ 44.1.043  EXEMPTION FOR MEMBER OR EMPLOYEE OF GENERAL ASSEMBLY AND
CERTAIN JUDGES.



   (A)   Only the municipal corporation of residence shall be permitted
to levy a tax on the income of any member or employee of the Ohio General
Assembly, including the Lieutenant Governor, whose income is received as a
result of services rendered as such member or employee and is paid from
appropriated funds of this state.



   (B)   Only the municipal corporation of residence and the City of
Columbus shall levy a tax on the income of the Chief Justice or a justice of
the Supreme Court received as a result of services rendered as the Chief
Justice or justice. Only the municipal corporation of residence shall levy a
tax on the income of a judge sitting by assignment of the Chief Justice or on
the income of a district court of appeals judge sitting in multiple locations
within the district, received as a result of services rendered as a judge.



(Ord. 8-2015, passed 11-4-15)



Statutory reference:



   Exclusion of General Assembly employee or member and certain judges
from tax, see R.C. § 718.50



§ 44.1.05  COLLECTION AT SOURCE



§ 44.1.051  COLLECTION AT SOURCE; WITHHOLDING FROM QUALIFYING WAGES.



   (A)   (1)   Each employer, agent of an employer, or other payer
located or doing business in the municipality shall withhold from each
employee an amount equal to the qualifying wages of the employee earned by
the employee in the municipality multiplied by the applicable rate of the
municipality's income tax, except for qualifying wages for which withholding
is not required under § 44.1.052 or division (D) or (F) of this section. An
employer, agent of an employer, or other payer shall deduct and withhold the
tax from qualifying wages on the date that the employer, agent, or other
payer directly, indirectly, or constructively pays the qualifying wages to.
or credits the qualifying wages to the benefit of, the employee.



      (2)   In addition to withholding the amounts required under
division (A)(1) of this section, an employer, agent of an employer, or other
payer may also deduct and withhold, on the request of an employee, taxes for
the municipal corporation in which the employee is a resident.



   (B)   (1)   An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer
shall remit to the Tax Administrator of the municipality the greater of the
income taxes deducted and withheld or the income taxes required to be
deducted and withheld by the employer, agent, or other payer, along with any
report required by the Tax Administrator to accompany such payment, according
to the following schedule:



         (a)   Any employer, agent of an employer, or other payer
not required to make payments under division (B)(1)(b) of this section of
taxes required to be deducted and withheld shall make quarterly payments to
the Tax Administrator not later than the 15th day of the month following the
end of each calendar quarter.



         (b)   Taxes required to be deducted and withheld shall
be remitted monthly to the Tax Administrator if the total taxes deducted and
withheld or required to be deducted and withheld by the employer, agent, or
other payer on behalf of the municipal corporation in the preceding calendar
year exceeded $2,399, or if the total amount of taxes deducted and withheld
or required to be deducted and withheld on behalf of the municipality in any
month of the preceding calendar quarter exceeded $200. Payment under division
(B)(1)(b) of this section shall be made so that the payment is received by
the Tax Administrator not later than 15 days after the last day of each month.



   (C)   An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer shall make
and file a return showing the amount of tax withheld by the employer, agent,
or other payer from the qualifying wages of each employee and remitted to the
Tax Administrator. A return filed by an employer, agent, or other payer under
this division shall be accepted by the municipality as the return required of
an employee whose sole income subject to the tax under this chapter is the
qualifying wages reported by the employee's employer, agent of an employer,
or other payer, unless the municipality requires all resident individual
taxpayers to file a tax return under § 44.1.091.



   (D)   An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer is not
required to withhold municipal income tax with respect to an individual's
disqualifying disposition of an incentive stock option if, at the time of the
disqualifying disposition, the individual is not an employee of either the
corporation with respect to whose stock the option has been issued or of such
corporation's successor entity.



   (E)   (1)   An employee is not relieved from liability for a tax
by the failure of the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer to
withhold the tax as required under this chapter or by the employer's,
agent's, or other payer's exemption from the requirement to withhold the tax.



      (2)   The failure of an employer, agent of an employer, or
other payer to remit to the municipality the tax withheld relieves the
employee from liability for that tax unless the employee colluded with the
employer, agent, or other payer in connection with the failure to remit the
tax withheld.



   (F)   Compensation deferred before June 26, 2003, is not subject to
any municipal corporation income tax or municipal income tax withholding
requirement to the extent the deferred compensation does not constitute
qualifying wages at the time the deferred compensation is paid or distributed.



   (G)   Each employer, agent of an employer, or other payer required
to withhold taxes is liable for the payment of that amount required to be
withheld, whether or not such taxes have been withheld, and such amount shall
be deemed to be held in trust for the municipality until such time as the
withheld amount is remitted to the Tax Administrator.



   (H)   On or before the last day of February of each year, an
employer shall file a withholding reconciliation return with the Tax
Administrator listing the names, addresses, and Social Security numbers of
all employees from whose qualifying wages tax was withheld or should have
been withheld for the municipality during the preceding calendar year, the
amount of tax withheld, if any, from each such employee's qualifying wage,
the total amount of qualifying wages paid to such employee during the
preceding calendar year, the name of every other municipal corporation for
which tax was withheld or should have been withheld from such employee during
the preceding calendar year, any other information required for federal
income tax reporting purposes on Internal Revenue Service form W-2 or its
equivalent form with respect to such employee, and other information as may
be required by the Tax Administrator.



   (I)   The officer or the employee of the employer, agent of an
employer, or other payer with control or direct supervision of or charged
with the responsibility for withholding the tax or filing the reports and
making payments as required by this section, shall be personally liable for a
failure to file a report or pay the tax due as required by this section. The
dissolution of an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer does not
discharge the officer's or employee's liability for a failure of the
employer, agent of an employer, or other payer to file returns or pay any tax
due.



   (J)   An employer is required to deduct and withhold municipal
income tax on tips and gratuities received by the employer's employees and
constituting qualifying wages only to the extent that the tips and gratuities
are under the employer's control. For the purposes of this division, a tip or
gratuity is under the employer's control if the tip or gratuity is paid by
the customer to the employer for subsequent remittance to the employee, or if
the customer pays the tip or gratuity by credit card, debit card, or other
electronic means.



   (K)   A Tax Administrator shall consider any tax withheld by an
employer at the request of an employee when such tax is not otherwise
required to be withheld by this chapter to be tax required to be withheld and
remitted for the purposes of this section.



(Ord. 8-2015, passed 11-4-15)



Statutory reference:



   Withholding from qualifying wages, see R.C. § 718.03



§ 44.1.052  COLLECTION AT SOURCE; OCCASIONAL ENTRANT.



   (A)   The following terms as used in this section:



      (1)   EMPLOYER includes a person that is a related member to
or of an employer.



      (2)   PROFESSIONAL ATHLETE means an athlete who performs
services in a professional athletic event for wages or other remuneration.



      (3)   PROFESSIONAL ENTERTAINER means a person who performs
services in the professional performing arts for wages or other remuneration
on a per-event basis.



      (4)   PUBLIC FIGURE means a person of prominence who performs
services at discrete events, such as speeches, public appearances, or similar
events, for wages or other remuneration on a per-event basis.



      (5)   FIXED LOCATION means a permanent place of doing business
in this state, such as an office, warehouse, storefront, or similar location
owned or controlled by an employer.



      (6)   WORKSITE LOCATION means a construction site or other
temporary worksite in this state at which the employer provides services for
more than 20 days during the calendar year. WORKSITE LOCATION" does not
include the home of an employee.



      (7)   PRINCIPAL PLACE OF WORK means the fixed location to
which an employee is required to report for employment duties on a regular
and ordinary basis. If the employee is not required to report for employment
duties on a regular and ordinary basis to a fixed location, PRINCIPAL PLACE
OF WORK means the worksite location in this state to which the employee is
required to report for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis. If
the employee is not required to report for employment duties on a regular and
ordinary basis to a fixed location or worksite location, PRINCIPAL PLACE OF
WORK means the location in this state at which the employee spends the
greatest number of days in a calendar year performing services for or on
behalf of the employee's employer.



         If there is not a single municipal corporation in which the
employee spent the greatest number of days in a calendar year performing
services for or on behalf of the employer, but instead there are two or more
municipal corporations in which the employee spent an identical number of
days that is greater than the number of days the employee spent in any other
municipal corporation, the employer shall allocate any of the employee's
qualifying wages subject to division (B)(1)(a) of this section among those
two or more municipal corporations. The allocation shall be made using any
fair and reasonable method, including, but not limited to, an equal
allocation among such municipal corporations or an allocation based upon the
time spent or sales made by the employee in each such municipal corporation.
A municipal corporation to which qualifying wages are allocated under this
division shall be the employee's "principal place of work" with respect to
those qualifying wages for the purposes of this section.



         For the purposes of this division, the location at which an
employee spends a particular day shall be deemed in accordance with division
(B)(2) of this section, except that "location" shall be substituted for
"municipal corporation" wherever "municipal corporation" appears in that
division.



   (B)   (1)   Subject to divisions (C), (E), (F), and (G) of this
section, an employer is not required to withhold municipal income tax on
qualifying wages paid to an employee for the performance of personal services
in a municipal corporation that imposes such a tax if the employee performed
such services in the municipal corporation on 20 or fewer days in a calendar
year, unless one of the following conditions applies:



         (a)   The employee's principal place of work is located
in the municipality.



         (b)   The employee performed services at one or more
presumed worksite locations in the municipality. For the purposes of this
division, PRESUMED WORKSITE LOCATION means a construction site or other
temporary worksite in this state at which the employer provides services that
can reasonably be expected by the employer to last more than 20 days in a
calendar year. Services can reasonably be expected by the employer to last
more than 20 days if either of the following applies at the time the services
commence:



            1.   The nature of the services are such that it
will require more than 20 days of actual services to complete the services;



            2.   The agreement between the employer and its
customer to perform services at a location requires the employer to perform
actual services at the location for more than 20 days.



         (c)   The employee is a resident of the municipality and
has requested that the employer withhold tax from the employee's qualifying
wages as provided in § 44.1.051.



         (d)   The employee is a professional athlete,
professional entertainer, or public figure, and the qualifying wages are paid
for the performance of services in the employee's capacity as a professional
athlete, professional entertainer, or public figure within the municipality.



      (2)   For the purposes of division (B)(1) of this section, an
employee shall be considered to have spent a day performing services in a
municipal corporation only if the employee spent more time performing
services for or on behalf of the employer in that municipal corporation than
in any other municipal corporation on that day. For the purposes of
determining the amount of time an employee spent in a particular location,
the time spent performing one or more of the following activities shall be
considered to have been spent at the employee's principal place of work:



         (a)   Traveling to the location at which the employee
will first perform services for the employer for the day;



         (b)   Traveling from a location at which the employee
was performing services for the employer to any other location;



         (c)   Traveling from any location to another location in
order to pick up or load, for the purpose of transportation or delivery,
property that has been purchased, sold, assembled, fabricated, repaired,
refurbished, processed, remanufactured, or improved by the employee's
employer;



         (d)   Transporting or delivering property described in
division (B)(2)(c) of this section, provided that, upon delivery of the
property, the employee does not temporarily or permanently affix the property
to real estate owned, used, or controlled by a person other than the
employee's employer;



         (e)   Traveling from the location at which the employee
makes the employee's final delivery or pick-up for the day to either the
employee's principal place of work or a location at which the employee will
not perform services for the employer.



   (C)   If the principal place of work of an employee is located in a
municipal corporation that imposes an income tax in accordance with this
chapter, the exception from withholding requirements described in division
(B)(1) of this section shall apply only if, with respect to the employee's
qualifying wages described in that division, the employer withholds and
remits tax on such qualifying wages to the municipal corporation in which the
employee's principal place of work is located.



   (D)   (1)   Except as provided in division (D)(2) of this
section, if, during a calendar year, the number of days an employee spends
performing personal services in a municipal corporation exceeds the 20-day
threshold described in division (B)(1) of this section, the employer shall
withhold and remit tax to that municipal corporation for any subsequent days
in that calendar year on which the employer pays qualifying wages to the
employee for personal services performed in that municipal corporation.



      (2)   An employer required to begin withholding tax for a
municipal corporation under division (D)(1) of this section may elect to
withhold tax for that municipal corporation for the first 20 days on which
the employer paid qualifying wages to the employee for personal services
performed in that municipal corporation.



      (3)   If an employer makes the election described in division
(D)(2) of this section, the taxes withheld and paid by such an employer
during those first 20 days to the municipal corporation in which the
employee's principal place of work is located are refundable to the employee.



   (E)   Without regard to the number of days in a calendar year on
which an employee performs personal services in any municipal corporation, an
employer shall withhold municipal income tax on all of the employee's
qualifying wages for a taxable year and remit that tax only to the municipal
corporation in which the employer's fixed location is located if the employer
qualifies as a small employer as defined in § 44.1.03.  To determine
whether an employer qualifies as a small employer for a taxable year, a Tax
Administrator may require the employer to provide the Tax Administrator with
the employer's federal income tax return for the preceding taxable year.



   (F)   Divisions (B)(1) and (D) of this section shall not apply to
the extent that a Tax Administrator and an employer enter into an agreement
regarding the manner in which the employer shall comply with the requirements
of § 44.1.051.



(Ord. 8-2015, passed 11-4-15)



Statutory reference:



   Definitions, see R.C. § 718.01



   Occasional entrant, personal services; withholding, see R.C. § 718.011



§ 44.1.053  INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK



§ 44.1.06  INCOME SUBJECT TO NET PROFIT TAX



§ 44.1.061  DETERMINING MUNICIPAL TAXABLE INCOME FOR TAXPAYERS WHO ARE NOT
INDIVIDUALS.



   Municipal taxable income for a taxpayer who is not an individual for
the municipality is calculated as follows:



   (A)   Income reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise
included in income, multiplied by apportionment, further reduced by any
pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward equals municipal taxable income.



      (1)   Income for a taxpayer that is not an individual means
the net profit of the taxpayer.



         (a)   NET PROFIT for a person other than an individual
is defined in § 44.1.03(C)(23).



         (b)   ADJUSTED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME is defined in §
44.1.03(C)(1).



      (2)   EXEMPT INCOME is defined in § 44.1.03(C)(11).



      (3)   APPORTIONMENT means the apportionment as determined by
§ 44.1.062.



      (4)   PRE-2017 NET OPERATING LOSS CARRYFORWARD is defined in
§ 44.1.03(C)(32).



(Ord. 8-2015, passed 11-4-15)



Statutory reference:



   Definitions, see R.C. 718.01



§ 44.1.062  NET PROFIT; INCOME SUBJECT TO NET PROFIT TAX; ALTERNATIVE
APPORTIONMENT.



   This section applies to any taxpayer engaged in a business or
profession in the municipality unless the taxpayer is an individual who
resides in the municipality or the taxpayer is an electric company, combined
company, or telephone company that is subject to and required to file reports
under R.C. Chapter 5745.



   (A)   Net profit from a business or profession conducted both within
and without the boundaries of the municipality shall be considered as having
a taxable situs in the municipality for purposes of municipal income taxation
in the same proportion as the average ratio of the following:



      (1)   The average original cost of the real property and
tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or
profession in the municipality during the taxable period to the average
original cost of all of the real and tangible personal property owned or used
by the taxpayer in the business or profession during the same period,
wherever situated.



         As used in the preceding paragraph, tangible personal or
real property shall include property rented or leased by the taxpayer and the
value of such property shall be determined by multiplying the annual rental
thereon by eight;



      (2)   Wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during the
taxable period to individuals employed in the business or profession for
services performed in the municipality to wages, salaries, and other
compensation paid during the same period to individuals employed in the
business or profession, wherever the individual's services are performed,
excluding compensation from which taxes are not required to be withheld under
§ 44.1.052;



      (3)   Total gross receipts of the business or profession from
sales and rentals made and services performed during the taxable period in
the municipality to total gross receipts of the business or profession during
the same period from sales, rentals, and services, wherever made or performed.



   (B)   (1)   If the apportionment factors described in division
(A) of this section do not fairly represent the extent of a taxpayer's
business activity in the municipality, the taxpayer may request, or the Tax
Administrator may require, that the taxpayer use, with respect to all or any
portion of the income of the taxpayer, an alternative apportionment method
involving one or more of the following:



         (a)   Separate accounting;



         (b)   The exclusion of one or more of the factors;



         (c)   The inclusion of one or more additional factors
that would provide for a more fair apportionment of the income of the
taxpayer to the municipality;



         (d)   A modification of one or more of the factors.



      (2)   A taxpayer request to use an alternative apportionment
method shall be in writing and shall accompany a tax return, timely filed
appeal of an assessment, or timely filed amended tax return. The taxpayer may
use the requested alternative method unless the Tax Administrator denies the
request in an assessment issued within the period prescribed by § 44.1.19(A).



      (3)   A Tax Administrator may require a taxpayer to use an
alternative apportionment method as described in division (B)(1) of this
section only by issuing an assessment to the taxpayer within the period
prescribed by § 44.1.19(A).



      (4)   Nothing in division (B) of this section nullifies or
otherwise affects any alternative apportionment arrangement approved by a Tax
Administrator or otherwise agreed upon by both the Tax Administrator and
taxpayer before January 1, 2016.



   (C)   As used in division (A)(2) of this section, wages, salaries,
and other compensation includes only wages, salaries, or other compensation
paid to an employee for services performed at any of the following locations:



      (1)   A location that is owned, controlled, or used by, rented
to, or under the possession of one of the following:



         (a)   The employer;



         (b)   A vendor, customer, client, or patient of the
employer, or a related member of such a vendor, customer, client, or patient;



         (c)   A vendor, customer, client, or patient of a person
described in division (C)(1)(b) of this section, or a related member of such
a vendor, customer, client, or patient.



      (2)   Any location at which a trial, appeal, hearing,
investigation, inquiry, review, court-martial, or similar administrative,
judicial, or legislative matter or proceeding is being conducted, provided
that the compensation is paid for services performed for, or on behalf of,
the employer or that the employee's presence at the location directly or
indirectly benefits the employer;



      (3)   Any other location, if the Tax Administrator determines
that the employer directed the employee to perform the services at the other
location in lieu of a location described in division (C)(1) or (C)(2) of this
section solely in order to avoid or reduce the employer's municipal income
tax liability. If a Tax Administrator makes such a determination, the
employer may dispute the determination by establishing, by a preponderance of
the evidence, that the Tax Administrator's determination was unreasonable.



   (D)   For the purposes of division (A)(3) of this section, receipts
from sales and rentals made and services performed shall be sitused to a
municipal corporation as follows:



      (1)   Gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal
property shall be sitused to the municipal corporation in which the sale
originated. For the purposes of this division, a sale of property originates
in a municipal corporation if, regardless of where title passes, the property
meets any of the following criteria:



         (a)   The property is shipped to or delivered within the
municipal corporation from a stock of goods located within the municipal
corporation.



         (b)   The property is delivered within the municipal
corporation from a location outside the municipal corporation, provided the
taxpayer is regularly engaged through its own employees in the solicitation
or promotion of sales within such municipal corporation and the sales result
from such solicitation or promotion.



         (c)   The property is shipped from a place within the
municipal corporation to purchasers outside the municipal corporation,
provided that the taxpayer is not, through its own employees, regularly
engaged in the solicitation or promotion of sales at the place where delivery
is made.



      (2)   Gross receipts from the sale of services shall be
sitused to the municipal corporation to the extent that such services are
performed in the municipal corporation.



      (3)   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from
the sale of real property located in the municipal corporation shall be
sitused to the municipal corporation.



      (4)   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from
rents and royalties from real property located in the municipal corporation
shall be sitused to the municipal corporation.



      (5)   Gross receipts from rents and royalties from tangible
personal property shall be sitused to the municipal corporation based upon
the extent to which the tangible personal property is used in the municipal
corporation.



   (E)   The net profit received by an individual taxpayer from the
rental of real estate owned directly by the individual or by a disregarded
entity owned by the individual shall be subject to tax only by the municipal
corporation in which the property generating the net profit is located and
the municipal corporation in which the individual taxpayer that receives the
net profit resides.



      A municipal corporation shall allow such taxpayers to elect to
use separate accounting for the purpose of calculating net profit sitused
under this division to the municipal corporation in which the property is
located.



   (F)   (1)   Except as provided in division (F)(2) of this
section, commissions received by a real estate agent or broker relating to
the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate shall be sitused to the municipal
corporation in which the real estate is located. Net profit reported by the
real estate agent or broker shall be allocated to a municipal corporation
based upon the ratio of the commissions the agent or broker received from the
sale, purchase, or lease of real estate located in the municipal corporation
to the commissions received from the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate
everywhere in the taxable year.



      (2)   An individual who is a resident of a municipal
corporation that imposes a municipal income tax shall report the individual's
net profit from all real estate activity on the individual's annual tax
return for that municipal corporation. The individual may claim a credit for
taxes the individual paid on such net profit to another municipal corporation
to the extent that such credit is allowed under § 44.1.081.



   (G)   If, in computing a taxpayer's adjusted federal taxable income,
the taxpayer deducted any amount with respect to a stock option granted to an
employee, and if the employee is not required to include in the employee's
income any such amount or a portion thereof because it is exempted from
taxation under § 44.1.03(C)(11)(l) and (C)(34)(a)4., by a municipal
corporation to which the taxpayer has apportioned a portion of its net
profit, the taxpayer shall add the amount that is exempt from taxation to the
taxpayer's net profit that was apportioned to that municipal corporation. In
no case shall a taxpayer be required to add to its net profit that was
apportioned to that municipal corporation any amount other than the amount
upon which the employee would be required to pay tax were the amount related
to the stock option not exempted from taxation.



      This division applies solely for the purpose of making an
adjustment to the amount of a taxpayer's net profit that was apportioned to a
municipal corporation under this section.



   (H)   When calculating the ratios described in division (A) of this
section for the purposes of that division or division (B) of this section,
the owner of a disregarded entity shall include in the owner's ratios the
property, payroll, and gross receipts of such disregarded entity.



(Ord. 8-2015, passed 11-4-15)



Statutory reference:



   Income subject to tax, see R.C. § 718.02



§ 44.1.063  CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL INCOME TAX RETURN.



   (A)   As used in this section:



      (1)   AFFILIATED GROUP OF CORPORATIONS means an affiliated
group as defined in section 1504 of the Internal Revenue Code, except that,
if such a group includes at least one incumbent local exchange carrier that
is primarily engaged in the business of providing local exchange telephone
service in this state, the affiliated group shall not include any incumbent
local exchange carrier that would otherwise be included in the group.



      (2)   CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL INCOME TAX RETURN means a
consolidated return filed for federal income tax purposes pursuant to section
1501 of the Internal Revenue Code.



      (3)   CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME means the
consolidated taxable income of an affiliated group of corporations, as
computed for the purposes of filing a consolidated federal income tax return,
before consideration of net operating losses or special deductions.



CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME does not include income or loss of an
incumbent local exchange carrier that is excluded from the affiliated group
under division (A)(1) of this section.



      (4)   INCUMBENT LOCAL EXCHANGE CARRIER has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 4927.01.



      (5)   LOCAL EXCHANGE TELEPHONE SERVICE has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 5727.01.



   (B)   (1)   For taxable years beginning on or after January 1,
2016, a taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations may
elect to file a consolidated municipal income tax return for a taxable year
if at least one member of the affiliated group of corporations is subject to
the municipal income tax in that taxable year and if the affiliated group of
corporations filed a consolidated federal income tax return with respect to
that taxable year.



         (a)   The election is binding for a five-year period
beginning with the first taxable year of the initial election unless a change
in the reporting method is required under federal law.



         (b)   The election continues to be binding for each
subsequent five-year period unless the taxpayer elects to discontinue filing
consolidated municipal income tax returns under division (B)(2) of this
section; or



         (c)   A taxpayer receives permission from the Tax
Administrator. The Tax Administrator shall approve such a request for good
cause shown.



      (2)   An election to discontinue filing consolidated municipal
income tax returns under this section must be made in the first year
following the last year of a five-year consolidated municipal income tax
return election period in effect under division (B)(1) of this section. The
election to discontinue filing a consolidated municipal income tax return is
binding for a five-year period beginning with the first taxable year of the
election.



      (3)   An election made under division (B)(1) or (B)(2) of this
section is binding on all members of the affiliated group of corporations
subject to a municipal income tax.



   (C)   A taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of
corporations that filed a consolidated federal income tax return for a
taxable year shall file a consolidated municipal income tax return for that
taxable year if the Tax Administrator determines, by a preponderance of the
evidence, that intercompany transactions have not been conducted at arm's
length and that there has been a distortive shifting of income or expenses
with regard to allocation of net profits to the municipal corporation. A
taxpayer that is required to file a consolidated municipal income tax return
for a taxable year shall file a consolidated municipal income tax return for
all subsequent taxable years unless the taxpayer requests and receives
written permission from the Tax Administrator to file a separate return or a
taxpayer has experienced a change in circumstances.



   (D)   A taxpayer shall prepare a consolidated municipal income tax
return in the same manner as is required under the United States Department
of Treasury regulations that prescribe procedures for the preparation of the
consolidated federal income tax return required to be filed by the common
parent of the affiliated group of which the taxpayer is a member.



   (E)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (E)(2),
(E)(3), and (E)(4) of this section, corporations that file a consolidated
municipal income tax return shall compute adjusted federal taxable income, as
defined in § 44.1.03(C)(1), by substituting "consolidated federal taxable
income" for "federal taxable income" wherever "federal taxable income"
appears in that division and by substituting "an affiliated group of
corporation's" for "a C corporation's" wherever "a C corporation's" appears
in that division.



      (2)   No corporation filing a consolidated municipal income
tax return shall make any adjustment otherwise required under §
44.1.03(C)(1) to the extent that the item of income or deduction otherwise
subject to the adjustment has been eliminated or consolidated in the
computation of consolidated federal taxable income.



      (3)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity
having at least 80% of the value of its ownership interest owned or
controlled, directly or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is
included in that affiliated group's consolidated federal taxable income for a
taxable year, the corporation filing a consolidated municipal income tax
return shall do one of the following with respect to that pass-through
entity's net profit or loss for that taxable year:



         (a)   Exclude the pass-through entity's net profit or
loss from the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group
and, for the purpose of making the computations required in § 44.1.062,
exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-through entity
in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit sitused to a
municipal corporation. If the entity's net profit or loss is so excluded, the
entity shall be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of
the entity's net profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated
federal taxable income of the affiliated group.



         (b)   Include the pass-through entity's net profit or
loss in the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and,
for the purpose of making the computations required in § 44.1.062, include
the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-through entity in the
computation of the affiliated group's net profit sitused to a municipal
corporation. If the entity's net profit or loss is so included, the entity
shall not be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of the
entity's net profits that are included in the consolidated federal taxable
income of the affiliated group.



      (4)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity
having less than 80% of the value of its ownership interest owned or
controlled, directly or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is
included in that affiliated group's consolidated federal taxable income for a
taxable year, all of the following shall apply:



         (a)   The corporation filing the consolidated municipal
income tax return shall exclude the pass-through entity's net profit or loss
from the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for
the purposes of making the computations required in § 44.1.062, exclude the
property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-through entity in the
computation of the affiliated group's net profit sitused to a municipal
corporation;



         (b)   The pass-through entity shall be subject to
municipal income taxation as a separate taxpayer in accordance with this
chapter on the basis of the entity's net profits that would otherwise be
included in the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group.



   (F)   Corporations filing a consolidated municipal income tax return
shall make the computations required under § 44.1.062 by substituting
"consolidated federal taxable income attributable to" for "net profit from"
wherever "net profit from" appears in that section and by substituting
"affiliated group of corporations" for "taxpayer" wherever "taxpayer" appears
in that section.



   (G)   Each corporation filing a consolidated municipal income tax
return is jointly and severally liable for any tax, interest, penalties,
fines, charges, or other amounts imposed by a municipal corporation in
accordance with this chapter on the corporation, an affiliated group of which
the corporation is a member for any portion of the taxable year, or any one
or more members of such an affiliated group.



   (H)   Corporations and their affiliates that made an election or
entered into an agreement with a municipal corporation before January 1,
2016, to file a consolidated or combined tax return with such municipal
corporation may continue to file consolidated or combined tax returns in
accordance with such election or agreement for taxable years beginning on and
after January 1, 2016.



(Ord. 8-2015, passed 11-4-15)



Statutory reference:



   Consolidated municipal tax return, see R.C. § 718.06



§ 44.1.064  TAX CREDIT FOR BUSINESSES THAT FOSTER NEW JOBS IN OHIO.



   The municipality, by ordinance, may grant a refundable or nonrefundable
credit against its tax on income to a taxpayer to foster job creation in the
municipality. If a credit is granted under this section, it shall be measured
as a percentage of the new income tax revenue the municipality derives from
new employees of the taxpayer and shall be for a term not exceeding 15 years.
Before the municipality passes an ordinance granting a credit, the
municipality and the taxpayer shall enter into an agreement specifying all
the conditions of the credit.



(Ord. 8-2015, passed 11-4-15)



Statutory reference:



   Fostering new jobs; tax credits, see R.C. § 718.15



§ 44.1.065  TAX CREDITS TO FOSTER JOB RETENTION.



   The municipality, by ordinance, may grant a refundable or nonrefundable
credit against its tax on income to a taxpayer for the purpose of fostering
job retention in the municipality. If a credit is granted under this section,
it shall be measured as a percentage of the income tax revenue the
municipality derives from the retained employees of the taxpayer, and shall
be for a term not exceeding 15 years. Before the municipality passes an
ordinance allowing such a credit, the municipality and the taxpayer shall
enter into an agreement specifying all the conditions of the credit.



(Ord. 8-2015, passed 11-4-15)



Statutory reference:



   Fostering job retention; tax credits, see R.C. § 718.151



§ 44.1.07  DECLARATION OF ESTIMATED TAX.



   (A)   As used in this section:



      (1)   ESTIMATED TAXES means the amount that the taxpayer
reasonably estimates to be the taxpayer's tax liability for a municipal
corporation's income tax for the current taxable year.



      (2)   TAX LIABILITY means the total taxes due to a municipal
corporation for the taxable year, after allowing any credit to which the
taxpayer is entitled, and after applying any estimated tax payment,
withholding payment, or credit from another taxable year.



   (B)   (1)   Every taxpayer shall make a declaration of estimated
taxes for the current taxable year, on the form prescribed by the Tax
Administrator, if the amount payable as estimated taxes is at least $200. 
For the purposes of this section:



         (a)   Taxes withheld from qualifying wages shall be
considered as paid to the municipal corporation for which the taxes were
withheld in equal amounts on each payment date. If the taxpayer establishes
the dates on which all amounts were actually withheld, the amounts withheld
shall be considered as paid on the dates on which the amounts were actually
withheld.



         (b)   An overpayment of tax applied as a credit to a
subsequent taxable year is deemed to be paid on the date of the postmark
stamped on the cover in which the payment is mailed or, if the payment is
made by electronic funds transfer, the date the payment is submitted. As used
in this division, DATE OF THE POSTMARK means, in the event there is more than
one date on the cover, the earliest date imprinted on the cover by the postal
service.



         (c)   A taxpayer having a taxable year of less than 12
months shall make a declaration under rules prescribed by the Tax
Administrator.



         (d)   Taxes withheld by a casino operator or by a
lottery sales agent under R.C. § 718.031 are deemed to be paid to the
municipal corporation for which the taxes were withheld on the date the taxes
are withheld from the taxpayer's winnings.



      (2)   Taxpayers filing joint returns shall file joint
declarations of estimated taxes.



      (3)   The declaration of estimated taxes shall be filed on or
before the date prescribed for the filing of municipal income tax returns
under § 44.1.091(G) or on or before the 15th day of the fourth month of the
first taxable year after the taxpayer becomes subject to tax for the first
time.



      (4)   Taxpayers reporting on a fiscal year basis shall file a
declaration on or before the 15th day of the fourth month after the beginning
of each fiscal year or period.



      (5)   The original declaration or any subsequent amendment may
be increased or decreased on or before any subsequent quarterly payment day
as provided in this section.



   (C)   (1)   The required portion of the tax liability for the
taxable year that shall be paid through estimated taxes made payable to the
municipality or Tax Administrator, including the application of tax refunds
to estimated taxes and withholding on or before the applicable payment date,
shall be as follows:



         (a)   On or before the 15th day of the fourth month
after the beginning of the taxable year, 22.5% of the tax liability for the
taxable year;



         (b)   On or before the 15th day of the sixth month after
the beginning of the taxable year, 45% of the tax liability for the taxable
year;



         (c)   On or before the 15th day of the ninth month after
the beginning of the taxable year, 67.5% of the tax liability for the taxable
year;



         (d)   On or before the 15th day of the 12th month of the
taxable year, 90% of the tax liability for the taxable year.



      (2)   A taxpayer may amend a declaration under rules
prescribed by the Tax Administrator. When an amended declaration has been
filed, the unpaid balance shown due on the amended declaration shall be paid
in equal installments on or before the remaining payment dates. The amended
declaration must be filed on the next applicable due date as outlined in
divisions (C)(1)(a) through (C)(1)(d) of this section.



      (3)   On or before the 15th day of the fourth month of the
year following that for which the declaration or amended declaration was
filed, an annual return shall be filed and any balance which may be due shall
be paid with the return in accordance with § 44.1.091.



         (a)   For taxpayers who are individuals, or who are not
individuals and are reporting and filing on a calendar year basis, the annual
tax return is due on the same date as the filing of the federal tax return,
unless extended pursuant to division (G) of R.C. § 5747.08.



         (b)   For taxpayers who are not individuals, and are
reporting and filing on a fiscal year basis or any period other than a
calendar year, the annual return is due on the 15th day of the fourth month
following the end of the taxable year or period.



      (4)   An amended declaration is required whenever the
taxpayer's estimated tax liability changes during the taxable year. A change
in estimated tax liability may either increase or decrease the estimated tax
liability for the taxable year.



   (D)   (1)   In the case of any underpayment of any portion of a
tax liability, penalty and interest may be imposed pursuant to § 44.1.10
upon the amount of underpayment for the period of underpayment, unless the
underpayment is due to reasonable cause as described in division (E) of this
section. The amount of the underpayment shall be determined as follows:



         (a)   For the first payment of estimated taxes each
year, 22.5% of the tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date
prescribed for that payment;



         (b)   For the second payment of estimated taxes each
year, 45% of the tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date
prescribed for that payment;



         (c)   For the third payment of estimated taxes each
year, 67.5% of the tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date
prescribed for that payment;



         (d)   For the fourth payment of estimated taxes each
year, 90% of the tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date
prescribed for that payment.



      (2)   The period of the underpayment shall run from the day
the estimated payment was required to be made to the date on which the
payment is made. For purposes of this section, a payment of estimated taxes
on or before any payment date shall be considered a payment of any previous
underpayment only to the extent the payment of estimated taxes exceeds the
amount of the payment presently required to be paid to avoid any penalty.



   (E)   An underpayment of any portion of tax liability determined
under division (D) of this section shall be due to reasonable cause and the
penalty imposed by this section shall not be added to the taxes for the
taxable year if any of the following apply:



      (1)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at
least 90% of the tax liability for the current taxable year, determined by
annualizing the income received during the year up to the end of the month
immediately preceding the month in which the payment is due.



      (2)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at
least 100% of the tax liability shown on the return of the taxpayer for the
preceding taxable year, provided that the immediately preceding taxable year
reflected a period of 12 months and the taxpayer filed a return with the
municipal corporation under § 44.1.091 for that year.



      (3)   The taxpayer is an individual who resides in the
municipality but was not domiciled there on the first day of January of the
calendar year that includes the first day of the taxable year.



   (F)   A Tax Administrator may waive the requirement for filing a
declaration of estimated taxes for any class of taxpayers after finding that
the waiver is reasonable and proper in view of administrative costs and other
factors.



(Ord. 8-2015, passed 11-4-15)



Statutory reference:



   Estimated taxes, see R.C. § 718.08



§ 44.1.08  CREDIT FOR TAX PAID



§ 44.1.081  CREDIT FOR TAX PAID TO ANOTHER MUNICIPALITY.



   (A)   Limitation on amount paid.  Every individual taxpayer who
resides in the city and who receives salaries, wages, commissions, or other
compensation or net profits from sales made, work done or services performed
or rendered outside of the city, if it be made to appear that he has paid a
municipal income tax on such income, taxable under this chapter, to another
municipality, shall be allowed a credit for such tax paid, against the tax
imposed by this chapter in an amount not to exceed the tax due the city under
this chapter.



   (B)   Credits and limitations thereof. Notwithstanding the
provisions contained in § 44.1.084, or any other provisions inconsistent
herewith, a claim for refund or credit under this section shall be made in
such manner as the Tax Commissioner may by regulation provide. No such claim
for refund or credit shall be allowed unless made on or before the date of
filing the taxpayer's final return unless such taxpayer's employer files with
the Tax Commissioner a list showing the tax withheld from taxpayer's wages,
salaries, or commissions for other municipalities.



(Ord. 8-2015, passed 11-4-15)



§ 44.1.082  REFUNDABLE CREDIT FOR QUALIFYING LOSS.



   (A)   As used in this section:



      (1)   NONQUALIFIED DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN means a
compensation plan described in section 3121(v)(2)(C) of the Internal Revenue
Code.



      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (A)(2)(b) of
this section, QUALIFYING LOSS means the excess, if any, of the total amount
of compensation the payment of which is deferred pursuant to a nonqualified
deferred compensation plan over the total amount of income the taxpayer has
recognized for federal income tax purposes for all taxable years on a
cumulative basis as compensation with respect to the taxpayer's receipt of
money and property attributable to distributions in connection with the
nonqualified deferred compensation plan.



         (b)   If, for one or more taxable years, the taxpayer
has not paid to one or more municipal corporations income tax imposed on the
entire amount of compensation the payment of which is deferred pursuant to a
nonqualified deferred compensation plan, then the "qualifying loss" is the
product of the amount resulting from the calculation described in division
(A)(2)(a) of this section computed without regard to division (A)(2)(b) of
this section and a fraction the numerator of which is the portion of such
compensation on which the taxpayer has paid income tax to one or more
municipal corporations and the denominator of which is the total amount of
compensation the payment of which is deferred pursuant to a nonqualified
deferred compensation plan.



         (c)   With respect to a nonqualified deferred
compensation plan, the taxpayer sustains a qualifying loss only in the
taxable year in which the taxpayer receives the final distribution of money
and property pursuant to that nonqualified deferred compensation plan.



      (3)   QUALIFYING TAX RATE means the applicable tax rate for
the taxable year for which the taxpayer paid income tax to a municipal
corporation with respect to any portion of the total amount of compensation
the payment of which is deferred pursuant to a nonqualified deferred
compensation plan. If different tax rates applied for different taxable
years, then the "qualifying tax rate" is a weighted average of those
different tax rates. The weighted average shall be based upon the tax paid to
the municipal corporation each year with respect to the nonqualified deferred
compensation plan.



   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (D) of this section, a
refundable credit shall be allowed against the income tax imposed by a
municipal corporation for each qualifying loss sustained by a taxpayer during
the taxable year. The amount of the credit shall be equal to the product of
the qualifying loss and the qualifying tax rate.



      (2)   A taxpayer shall claim the credit allowed under this
section from each municipal corporation to which the taxpayer paid municipal
income tax with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan in one
or more taxable years.



      (3)   If a taxpayer has paid tax to more than one municipal
corporation with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan, the
amount of the credit that a taxpayer may claim from each municipal
corporation shall be calculated on the basis of each municipal corporation's
proportionate share of the total municipal corporation income tax paid by the
taxpayer to all municipal corporations with respect to the nonqualified
deferred compensation plan.



      (4)   In no case shall the amount of the credit allowed under
this section exceed the cumulative income tax that a taxpayer has paid to a
municipal corporation for all taxable years with respect to the nonqualified
deferred compensation plan.



   (C)   (1)   For purposes of this section, municipal corporation
income tax that has been withheld with respect to a nonqualified deferred
compensation plan shall be considered to have been paid by the taxpayer with
respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan.



      (2)   Any municipal income tax that has been refunded or
otherwise credited for the benefit of the taxpayer with respect to a
nonqualified deferred compensation plan shall not be considered to have been
paid to the municipal corporation by the taxpayer.



   (D)   The credit allowed under this section is allowed only to the
extent the taxpayer's qualifying loss is attributable to:



      (1)   The insolvency or bankruptcy of the employer who had
established the nonqualified deferred compensation plan; or



      (2)   The employee's failure or inability to satisfy all of
the employer's terms and conditions necessary to receive the nonqualified
deferred compensation.



(Ord. 8-2015, passed 11-4-15)



Statutory reference:



   Qualifying loss; refundable credit, see R.C. § 718.021



§ 44.1.083  CREDIT FOR PERSON WORKING IN JOINT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
DISTRICT OR ZONE.



   A municipality shall grant a credit against its tax on income to a
resident of the municipality who works in a joint economic development zone
created under R.C. § 715.691 or a joint economic development district
created under R.C. § 715.70, 715.71, or 715.72 to the same extent that it
grants a credit against its tax on income to its residents who are employed
in another municipal corporation, pursuant to § 44.1.081.



(Ord. 8-2015, passed 11-4-15)



Statutory reference:



   Worker in joint economic development zone or district, see R.C. §
718.16



§ 44.1.084  CREDIT FOR TAX BEYOND STATUTE FOR OBTAINING REFUND.



   (A)   Income tax that has been deposited or paid to the
municipality, but should have been deposited or paid to another municipal
corporation, is allowable by the municipality as a refund, but is subject to
the three-year limitation on refunds as provided in § 44.1.096.



   (B)   Income tax that should have been deposited or paid to the
municipality, but was deposited or paid to another municipal corporation,
shall be subject to collection and recovery by the municipality. To the
extent a refund of such tax or withholding is barred by the limitation on
refunds as provided in § 44.1.096, the municipality will allow a
non-refundable credit equal to the tax or withholding paid to the other
municipality against the income tax the municipality claims is due. If the
municipality's tax rate is higher, the tax representing the net difference of
the tax rates is also subject to collection by the municipality, along with
any penalty and interest accruing during the period of nonpayment.



   (C)   No carryforward of credit will be permitted when the
overpayment is beyond the three-year limitation for refunding of same as
provided in § 44.1.096.



   (D)   Nothing in this section requires a municipality to allow
credit for tax paid to another municipal corporation if the municipality has
reduced credit for tax paid to another municipal corporation. Section
44.1.081 regarding any limitation on credit shall prevail.



(Ord. 8-2015, passed 11-4-15)



Statutory reference:



   Second municipality imposing tax after time period for refund, see R.C.
§ 718.121



§ 44.1.09  ANNUAL RETURN



§ 44.1.091  RETURN AND PAYMENT OF TAX.



   (A)   (1)   An annual return with respect to the income tax
levied on municipal taxable income by the municipality shall be completed and
filed by every taxpayer for any taxable year for which the taxpayer is
subject to the tax, regardless of whether or not income tax is due. Provided,
however, for residents who are fully retired whose income is exempt, the Tax
Administrator, in writing to the taxpayer, may exempt the taxpayer from the
continuing obligation to file an annual return when there is no other taxable
income.



      (2)   The Tax Administrator shall accept on behalf of all
nonresident individual taxpayers a return filed by an employer, agent of an
employer, or other payer located in the municipality under § 44.1.051(C)
when the nonresident individual taxpayer's sole income subject to the tax is
the qualifying wages reported by the employer, agent of an employer, or other
payer, and no additional tax is due to the municipality.



      (3)   All resident individual taxpayers shall file an annual
municipal income tax return with the municipality, regardless of income or
liability.



   (B)   If an individual is deceased, any return or notice required of
that individual shall be completed and filed by that decedent's executor,
administrator, or other person charged with the property of that decedent.



   (C)   If an individual is unable to complete and file a return or
notice required by the municipality in accordance with this chapter, the
return or notice required of that individual shall be completed and filed by
the individual's duly authorized agent, guardian, conservator, fiduciary, or
other person charged with the care of the person or property of that
individual. Such duly authorized agent, guardian, conservator, fiduciary, or
other person charged with the care of the person or property of that
individual shall provide, with the filing of the return, appropriate
documentation to support that they are authorized to file a return or notice
on behalf of the taxpayer. This notice shall include any legally binding
authorizations, and contact information including name, address, and phone
number of the duly authorized agent, guardian, conservator, fiduciary, or
other person.



   (D)   Returns or notices required of an estate or a trust shall be
completed and filed by the fiduciary of the estate or trust. Such fiduciary
shall provide, with the filing of the return, appropriate documentation to
support that they are authorized to file a return or notice on behalf of the
taxpayer. This notice shall include any legally binding authorizations, and
contact information including name, address, and phone number of the
fiduciary.



   (E)   No municipal corporation shall deny spouses the ability to
file a joint return.



   (F)   (1)   Each return required to be filed under this section
shall contain the signature of the taxpayer or the taxpayer's duly authorized
agent and of the person who prepared the return for the taxpayer, and shall
include the taxpayer's Social Security number or taxpayer identification
number. Each return shall be verified by a declaration under penalty of
perjury.



      (2)   A taxpayer who is an individual is required to include,
with each annual return, amended return, or request for refund required under
this section, copies of only the following documents: all of the taxpayer's
Internal Revenue Service form W-2, "Wage and Tax Statements," including all
information reported on the taxpayer's federal W-2, as well as taxable wages
reported or withheld for any municipal corporation; the taxpayer's Internal
Revenue Service form 1040 and, with respect to an amended tax return or
refund request, any other documentation necessary to support the refund
request or the adjustments made in the amended return. An individual taxpayer
who files the annual return required by this section electronically is not
required to provide paper copies of any of the foregoing to the Tax
Administrator unless the Tax Administrator requests such copies after the
return has been filed.



      (3)   A taxpayer that is not an individual is required to
include, with each annual net profit return, amended net profit return, or
request for refund required under this section, copies of only the following
documents: the taxpayer's Internal Revenue Service form 1041, form 1065, form
1120, form 1120-REIT, form 1120F, or form 1120S, and, with respect to an
amended tax return or refund request, any other documentation necessary to
support the refund request or the adjustments made in the amended return.



      (4)   A taxpayer that is not an individual and that files an
annual net profit return electronically through the Ohio Business Gateway or
in some other manner shall either mail the documents required under this
division to the Tax Administrator at the time of filing or, if electronic
submission is available, submit the documents electronically through the Ohio
Business Gateway or a portal provided by municipality. The Department of
Taxation shall publish a method of electronically submitting the documents
required under this division through the Ohio Business Gateway on or before
January 1, 2016. The Department shall transmit all documents submitted
electronically under this division to the appropriate Tax Administrator.



      (5)   After a taxpayer files a tax return, the Tax
Administrator shall request, and the taxpayer shall provide, any information,
statements, or documents required by the municipality to determine and verify
the taxpayer's municipal income tax liability. The requirements imposed under
division (F) of this section apply regardless of whether the taxpayer files
on a generic form or on a form prescribed by the Tax Administrator.



      (6)   Any other documentation, including schedules, other
municipal income tax returns, or other supporting documentation necessary to
verify credits, income, losses, or other pertinent factors on the return
shall also be included to avoid delay in processing, or disallowance by the
Tax Administrator of undocumented credits or losses.



   (G)   (1)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this
chapter, each individual income tax return required to be filed under this
section shall be completed and filed as required by the Tax Administrator on
or before the date prescribed for the filing of state individual income tax
returns under division (G) of R.C. § 5747.08.  The taxpayer shall complete
and file the return or notice on forms prescribed by the Tax Administrator or
on generic forms, together with remittance made payable to the Municipality
or Tax Administrator.



         (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each
annual net profit income tax return required to be filed under this section
by a taxpayer that is not an individual shall be completed and filed as
required by the Tax Administrator on or before the 15th day of the fourth
month following the end of the taxpayer's taxable year or period. The
taxpayer shall complete and file the return or notice on forms prescribed by
the Tax Administrator or on generic forms, together with remittance made
payable to the municipality or Tax Administrator.



         (c)   In the case of individual income tax return
required to be filed by an individual, and net profit income tax return
required to be filed by a taxpayer who is not an individual, no remittance is
required if the amount shown to be due is $10 or less.



      (2)   If the Tax Administrator considers it necessary in order
to ensure the payment of the tax imposed by the municipality in accordance
with this chapter, the Tax Administrator may require taxpayers to file
returns and make payments otherwise than as provided in this section,
including taxpayers not otherwise required to file annual returns.



      (3)   With respect to taxpayers to whom § 44.1.092 applies,
to the extent that any provision in this division conflicts with any
provision in § 44.1.092, the provision in § 44.1.092 prevails.



   (H)   (1)   For taxable years beginning after 2015, the
municipality shall not require a taxpayer to remit tax with respect to net
profits if the amount due is $10 or less.



      (2)   Any taxpayer not required to remit tax to the
municipality for a taxable year pursuant to division (H)(1) of this section
shall file with the municipality an annual net profit return under division
(F)(3) and (F)(4) of this section.



   (I)   This division shall not apply to payments required to be made
under § 44.1.051(B)(1)(b).



      (1)   If any report, claim, statement, or other document
required to be filed, or any payment required to be made, within a prescribed
period or on or before a prescribed date under this chapter is delivered
after that period or that to the Tax Administrator or other municipal
official with which the report, claim, statement, or other document is
required to be filed, or to which the payment is required to be made, the
date of the postmark stamped on the cover in which the report, claim,
statement, or other document, or payment is mailed shall be deemed to be the
date of delivery or the date of payment. THE DATE OF POSTMARK means, in the
event there is more than one date on the cover, the earliest date imprinted
on the cover by the postal service.



      (2)   If a payment is required to be made by electronic funds
transfer, the payment is considered to be made when the payment is credited
to an account designated by the Tax Administrator for the receipt of tax
payments, except that, when a payment made by electronic funds transfer is
delayed due to circumstances not under the control of the taxpayer, the
payment is considered to be made when the taxpayer submitted the payment. For
purposes of this section, SUBMITTED THE PAYMENT means the date which the
taxpayer has designated for the delivery of payment, which may or may not be
the same date as the date the payment was initiated by the taxpayer.



   (J)   The amounts withheld for the municipality by an employer, the
agent of an employer, or other payer as described in § 44.1.051 shall be
allowed to the recipient of the compensation as credits against payment of
the tax imposed on the recipient unless the amounts withheld were not
remitted to the municipality and the recipient colluded with the employer,
agent, or other payer in connection with the failure to remit the amounts
withheld.



   (K)   Each return required by the municipality to be filed in
accordance with this section shall include a box that the taxpayer may check
to authorize another person, including a tax return preparer who prepared the
return, to communicate with the Tax Administrator about matters pertaining to
the return. The return or instructions accompanying the return shall indicate
that by checking the box the taxpayer authorizes the Tax Administrator to
contact the preparer or other person concerning questions that arise during
the examination or other review of the return and authorizes the preparer or
other person only to provide the Tax Administrator with information that is
missing from the return, to contact the Tax Administrator for information
about the examination or other review of the return or the status of the
taxpayer's refund or payments, and to respond to notices about mathematical
errors, offsets, or return preparation that the taxpayer has received from
the Tax Administrator and has shown to the preparer or other person.
Authorization by the taxpayer of another person to communicate with the Tax
Administrator about matters pertaining to the return does not preclude the
Tax Administrator from contacting the taxpayer regarding such matters.



   (L)   The Tax Administrator of the municipality shall accept for
filing a generic form of any income tax return, report, or document required
by the municipality in accordance with this chapter, provided that the
generic form, once completed and filed, contains all of the information
required by ordinances, resolutions, or rules adopted by the municipality or
Tax Administrator, and provided that the taxpayer or tax return preparer
filing the generic form otherwise complies with the provisions of this
chapter and of the municipality's ordinance or resolution governing the
filing of returns, reports, or documents.



   (M)   When income tax returns, reports, or other documents require
the signature of a tax return preparer, the Tax Administrator shall accept a
facsimile of such a signature in lieu of a manual signature.



   (N)   (1)   As used in this division, WORKSITE LOCATION has the
same meaning as in § 44.1.052.



      (2)   A person may notify a Tax Administrator that the person
does not expect to be a taxpayer with respect to the municipal corporation
for a taxable year if both of the following conditions apply:



         (a)   The person was required to file a tax return with
the municipal corporation for the immediately preceding taxable year because
the person performed services at a worksite location within the municipal
corporation, and the person has filed all appropriate and required returns
and remitted all applicable income tax and withholding payments as provided
by this chapter. The Tax Administrator is not required to accept an affidavit
from a taxpayer who has not complied with the provisions of this chapter.



         (b)   The person no longer provides services in the
municipal corporation, and does not expect to be subject to the municipal
corporation's income tax for the taxable year.



            The person shall provide the notice in a signed
affidavit that briefly explains the person's circumstances, including the
location of the previous worksite location and the last date on which the
person performed services or made any sales within the municipal corporation.
The affidavit also shall include the following statement:  "The affiant has
no plans to perform any services within the municipal corporation, make any
sales in the municipal corporation, or otherwise become subject to the tax
levied by the municipal corporation during the taxable year. If the affiant
does become subject to the tax levied by the municipal corporation for the
taxable year, the affiant agrees to be considered a taxpayer and to properly
register as a taxpayer with the municipal corporation, if such a registration
is required by the municipal corporation's resolutions, ordinances, or
rules." The person shall sign the affidavit under penalty of perjury.



         (c)   If a person submits an affidavit described in
division (N)(2) of this section, the Tax Administrator shall not require the
person to file any tax return for the taxable year unless the Tax
Administrator possesses information that conflicts with the affidavit or if
the circumstances described in the affidavit change, or the taxpayer has
engaged in activity which results in work being performed, services provided,
sales made, or other activity that results in municipal taxable income
reportable to the municipality in the taxable year. It shall be the
responsibility of the taxpayer to comply with the provisions of this chapter
relating to the reporting and filing of municipal taxable income on an annual
municipal income tax return, even if an affidavit has been filed with the Tax
Administrator for the taxable year. Nothing in division (N) of this section
prohibits the Tax Administrator from performing an audit of the person.



(Ord. 8-2015, passed 11-4-15)



Statutory reference:



   Annual return; filing; extensions, see R.C. § 718.05



§ 44.1.092  RETURN AND PAYMENT OF TAX; INDIVIDUALS SERVING IN COMBAT ZONE.



   (A)   Each member of the national guard of any state and each member
of a reserve component of the Armed Forces of the United States called to
active duty pursuant to an executive order issued by the President of the
United States or an act of the Congress of the United States, and each
civilian serving as support personnel in a combat zone or contingency
operation in support of the Armed Forces, may apply to the Tax Administrator
of the municipality for both an extension of time for filing of the return
and an extension of time for payment of taxes required by the municipality in
accordance with this chapter during the period of the member's or civilian's
duty service and for 180 days thereafter. The application shall be filed on
or before the 180th day after the member's or civilian's duty terminates. An
applicant shall provide such evidence as the Tax Administrator considers
necessary to demonstrate eligibility for the extension.



   (B)   (1)   If the Tax Administrator ascertains that an applicant
is qualified for an extension under this section, the Tax Administrator shall
enter into a contract with the applicant for the payment of the tax in
installments that begin on the 181st day after the applicant's active duty or
service terminates. Except as provided in division (B)(3) of this section,
the Tax Administrator may prescribe such contract terms as the Tax
Administrator considers appropriate.



      (2)   If the Tax Administrator ascertains that an applicant is
qualified for an extension under this section, the applicant shall neither be
required to file any return, report, or other tax document nor be required to
pay any tax otherwise due to the municipality before the 181st day after the
applicant's active duty or service terminates.



      (3)   Taxes paid pursuant to a contract entered into under
division (B)(1) of this section are not delinquent. The Tax Administrator
shall not require any payments of penalties or interest in connection with
those taxes for the extension period.



   (C)   (1)   Nothing in this division denies to any person
described in this division the application of divisions (A) and (B) of this
section.



      (2)   (a)   A qualifying taxpayer who is eligible for an
extension under the Internal Revenue Code shall receive both an extension of
time in which to file any return, report, or other tax document and an
extension of time in which to make any payment of taxes required by the
municipality in accordance with this chapter. The length of any extension
granted under division (C)(2)(a) of this section shall be equal to the length
of the corresponding extension that the taxpayer receives under the Internal
Revenue Code. As used in this section, QUALIFYING TAXPAYER means a member of
the national guard or a member of a reserve component of the Armed Forces of
the United States called to active duty pursuant to either an executive order
issued by the President of the United States or an act of the Congress of the
United States, or a civilian serving as support personnel in a combat zone or
contingency operation in support of the Armed Forces.



         (b)   Taxes the payment of which is extended in
accordance with division (C)(2)(a) of this section are not delinquent during
the extension period. Such taxes become delinquent on the first day after the
expiration of the extension period if the taxes are not paid prior to that
date. The Tax Administrator shall not require any payment of penalties or
interest in connection with those taxes for the extension period. The Tax
Administrator shall not include any period of extension granted under
division (C)(2)(a) of this section in calculating the penalty or interest due
on any unpaid tax.



   (D)   For each taxable year to which division (A), (B), or (C) of
this section applies to a taxpayer, the provisions of divisions (B)(2) and
(B)(3) or (C) of this section, as applicable, apply to the spouse of that
taxpayer if the filing status of the spouse and the taxpayer is married
filing jointly for that year.



(Ord. 8-2015, passed 11-4-15)



Statutory reference:



   Filing extension for certain Armed Forces services, see R.C. § 718.052



§ 44.1.093  USE OF OHIO BUSINESS GATEWAY; TYPES OF FILINGS AUTHORIZED.



   (A)   Any taxpayer subject to municipal income taxation with respect
to the taxpayer's net profit from a business or profession may file any
municipal income tax return or, estimated municipal income tax return, or
extension for filing a municipal income tax return, and may make payment of
amounts shown to be due on such returns, by using the Ohio Business Gateway.



   (B)   Any employer, agent of an employer, or other payer may report
the amount of municipal income tax withheld from qualifying wages, and may
make remittance of such amounts, by using the Ohio Business Gateway.



   (C)   Nothing in this section affects the due dates for filing
employer withholding tax returns or deposit of any required tax.



   (D)   The use of the Ohio Business Gateway by municipal
corporations, taxpayers, or other persons does not affect the legal rights of
municipalities or taxpayers as otherwise permitted by law. The State of Ohio
shall not be a party to the administration of municipal income taxes or to an
appeal of a municipal income tax matter, except as otherwise specifically
provided by law.



   (E)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting or
removing the authority of any municipal corporation to administer, audit, and
enforce the provisions of its municipal income tax.



(Ord. 8-2015, passed 11-4-15)



Statutory reference:



   Use of Ohio Business Gateway, see R.C. § 718.051



§ 44.1.094  EXTENSION OF TIME TO FILE.



   (A)   Any taxpayer that has duly requested an automatic six-month
extension for filing the taxpayer's federal income tax return shall
automatically receive an extension for the filing of a municipal income tax
return. The extended due date of the municipal income tax return shall be the
15th day of the tenth month after the last day of the taxable year to which
the return relates.



   (B)   Any taxpayer that qualifies for an automatic federal extension
for a period other than six-months for filing the taxpayer's federal income
tax return shall automatically receive an extension for the filing of a
municipal income tax return. The extended due date of the municipal income
tax return shall be the same as that of the extended federal income tax
return.



   (C)   A taxpayer that has not requested or received a six-month
extension for filing the taxpayer's federal income tax return may request
that the Tax Administrator grant the taxpayer a six-month extension of the
date for filing the taxpayer's municipal income tax return. If the request is
received by the Tax Administrator on or before the date the municipal income
tax return is due, the Tax Administrator shall grant the taxpayer's requested
extension.



   (D)   An extension of time to file under this chapter is not an
extension of the time to pay any tax due unless the Tax Administrator grants
an extension of that date.



   (E)   If the State Tax Commissioner extends for all taxpayers the
date for filing state income tax returns under division (G) of R.C. §
5747.08, a taxpayer shall automatically receive an extension for the filing
of a municipal income tax return. The extended due date of the municipal
income tax return shall be the same as the extended due date of the state
income tax return.



(Ord. 8-2015, passed 11-4-15)



Statutory reference:



   Annual return; filing; extensions, see R.C. § 718.05



§ 44.1.095  AMENDED RETURNS.



   (A)   (1)   A taxpayer shall file an amended return with the Tax
Administrator in such form as the Tax Administrator requires if any of the
facts, figures, computations, or attachments required in the taxpayer's
annual return to determine the tax due levied by the municipality in
accordance with this chapter must be altered.



      (2)   Within 60 days after the final determination of any
federal or state tax liability affecting the taxpayer's municipal tax
liability, that taxpayer shall make and file an amended municipal return
showing income subject to the municipal income tax based upon such final
determination of federal or state tax liability, and pay any additional
municipal income tax shown due thereon or make a claim for refund of any
overpayment, unless the tax or overpayment is $10 or less.



      (3)   If a taxpayer intends to file an amended consolidated
municipal income tax return, or to amend its type of return from a separate
return to a consolidated return, based on the taxpayer's consolidated federal
income tax return, the taxpayer shall notify the Tax Administrator before
filing the amended return.



   (B)   (1)   In the case of an underpayment, the amended return
shall be accompanied by payment of any combined additional tax due together
with any penalty and interest thereon. If the combined tax shown to be due is
$10 or less, such amount need not accompany the amended return. Except as
provided under division (B)(2) of this section, the amended return shall not
reopen those facts, figures, computations, or attachments from a previously
filed return that are not affected, either directly or indirectly, by the
adjustment to the taxpayer's federal or state income tax return unless the
applicable statute of limitations for civil actions or prosecutions under §
44.1.19 has not expired for a previously filed return.



      (2)   The additional tax to be paid shall not exceed the
amount of tax that would be due if all facts, figures, computations, and
attachments were reopened.



   (C)   (1)   In the case of an overpayment, a request for refund
may be filed under this division within the period prescribed by division
(A)(2) of this section for filing the amended return even if it is filed
beyond the period prescribed in that division if it otherwise conforms to the
requirements of that division. If the amount of the refund is $10 or less, no
refund need be paid by the municipality to the taxpayer. Except as set forth
in division (C)(2) of this section, a request filed under this division shall
claim refund of overpayments resulting from alterations to only, those facts,
figures, computations, or attachments required in the taxpayer's annual
return that are affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to
the taxpayer's federal or state income tax return unless it is also filed
within the time prescribed in § 44.1.096.  Except as set forth in division
(C)(2) of this section, the request shall not reopen those facts, figures,
computations, or attachments that are not affected, either directly or
indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer's federal or state income tax
return.



      (2)   The amount to be refunded shall not exceed the amount of
refund that would be due if all facts, figures, computations, and attachments
were reopened.



(Ord. 8-2015, passed 11-4-15)



Statutory reference:



   Limitations, see R.C. § 718.12



   Amended returns, see R.C. § 718.41



§ 44.1.096  REFUNDS.



   (A)   Upon receipt of a request for a refund, the Tax Administrator
of the municipality, in accordance with this section, shall refund to
employers, agents of employers, other payers, or taxpayers, with respect to
any income or withholding tax levied by the municipality:



      (1)   Overpayments of more than $10;



      (2)   Amounts paid erroneously if the refund requested exceeds
$10.



   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, returns
setting forth a request for refund shall be filed with the Tax Administrator,
within three years after the tax was due or paid, whichever is later. Any
documentation that substantiates the taxpayer's claim for a refund must be
included with the return filing. Failure to remit all documentation,
including schedules, other municipal income tax returns, or other supporting
documentation necessary to verify credits, income, losses or other pertinent
factors on the return will cause delay in processing, and/or disallowance of
undocumented credits or losses.



      (2)   On filing of the refund request, the Tax Administrator
shall determine the amount of refund due and certify such amount to the
appropriate municipal corporation official for payment. Except as provided in
division (B)(3) of this section, the Administrator shall issue an assessment
to any taxpayer whose request for refund is fully or partially denied. The
assessment shall state the amount of the refund that was denied, the reasons
for the denial, and instructions for appealing the assessment.



      (3)   If a Tax Administrator denies in whole or in part a
refund request included within the taxpayer's originally filed annual income
tax return, the Tax Administrator shall notify the taxpayer, in writing, of
the amount of the refund that was denied, the reasons for the denial, and
instructions for requesting an assessment that may be appealed under §
44.1.18.



   (C)   A request for a refund that is received after the last day for
filing specified in division (B) of this section shall be considered to have
been filed in a timely manner if any of the following situations exist:



      (1)   The request is delivered by the postal service, and the
earliest postal service postmark on the cover in which the request is
enclosed is not later than the last day for filing the request.



      (2)   The request is delivered by the postal service, the only
postmark on the cover in which the request is enclosed was affixed by a
private postal meter, the date of that postmark is not later than the last
day for filing the request, and the request is received within seven days of
such last day.



      (3)   The request is delivered by the postal service, no
postmark date was affixed to the cover in which the request is enclosed or
the date of the postmark so affixed is not legible, and the request is
received within seven days of the last day for making the request.



   (D)   Interest shall be allowed and paid on any overpayment by a
taxpayer of any municipal income tax obligation from the date of the
overpayment until the date of the refund of the overpayment, except that if
any overpayment is refunded within 90 days after the final filing date of the
annual return or 90 days after the completed return is filed, whichever is
later, no interest shall be allowed on the refund. For the purpose of
computing the payment of interest on amounts overpaid, no amount of tax for
any taxable year shall be considered to have been paid before the date on
which the return on which the tax is reported is due, without regard to any
extension of time for filing that return. Interest shall be paid at the
interest rate described in § 44.1.10(A)(4).



   (E)   As used in this section, WITHHOLDING TAX has the same meaning
as in § 44.1.10.



(Ord. 8-2015, passed 11-4-15)



Statutory reference:



   Requests for refunds, see R.C. § 718.19



§ 44.1.10  PENALTY, INTEREST, FEES, AND CHARGES.



   (A)   As used in this section:



      (1)   APPLICABLE LAW means this chapter, the resolutions,
ordinances, codes, directives, instructions, and rules adopted by the
municipality provided such resolutions, ordinances, codes, directives,
instructions, and rules impose or directly or indirectly address the levy,
payment, remittance, or filing requirements of a municipal income tax.



      (2)   FEDERAL SHORT-TERM RATE means the rate of the average
market yield on outstanding marketable obligations of the United States with
remaining periods to maturity of three years or less, as determined under
section 1274 of the Internal Revenue Code, for July of the current year.



      (3)   INCOME TAX, ESTIMATED INCOME TAX, and WITHHOLDING TAX
mean any income tax, estimated income tax, and withholding tax imposed by a
municipal corporation pursuant to applicable law, including at any time
before January 1, 2016.



      (4)   INTEREST RATE AS DESCRIBED IN DIVISION (A) OF THIS
SECTION means the federal short-term rate, rounded to the nearest whole
number percent, plus 5%.  The rate shall apply for the calendar year next
following the July of the year in which the federal short-term rate is
determined in accordance with division (A)(2) of this section.



      (5)   RETURN includes any tax return, report, reconciliation,
schedule, and other document required to be filed with a Tax Administrator or
municipal corporation by a taxpayer, employer, any agent of the employer, or
any other payer pursuant to applicable law, including at any time before
January 1, 2016.



      (6)   UNPAID ESTIMATED INCOME TAX means estimated income tax
due but not paid by the date the tax is required to be paid under applicable
law.



      (7)   UNPAID INCOME TAX means income tax due but not paid by
the date the income tax is required to be paid under applicable law.



      (8)   UNPAID WITHHOLDING TAX means withholding tax due but not
paid by the date the withholding tax is required to be paid under applicable
law.



      (9)   WITHHOLDING TAX includes amounts an employer, any agent
of an employer or any other payer did not withhold in whole or in part from
an employee's qualifying wages, but that, under applicable law, the employer,
agent, or other payer is required to withhold from an employee's qualifying
wages.



   (B)   (1)   This section shall apply to the following:



         (a)   Any return required to be filed under applicable
law for taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2016;



         (b)   Income tax, estimated income tax, and withholding
tax required to be paid or remitted to the municipality on or after January
1, 2016 for taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2016.



      (2)   This section does not apply to returns required to be
filed or payments required to be made before January 1, 2016, regardless of
the filing or payment date. Returns required to be filed or payments required
to be made before January 1, 2016, but filed or paid after that date shall be
subject to the ordinances or rules, as adopted from time to time before
January 1, 2016 of this municipality.



   (C)   The municipality shall impose on a taxpayer, employer, any
agent of the employer, and any other payer, and will attempt to collect, the
interest amounts and penalties prescribed in this section when the taxpayer,
employer, any agent of the employer, or any other payer for any reason fails,
in whole or in part, to make to the municipality timely and full payment or
remittance of income tax, estimated income tax, or withholding tax or to file
timely with the municipality any return required to be filed.



      (1)   Interest shall be imposed at the rate defined as
INTEREST RATE AS DESCRIBED IN DIVISION (A) OF THIS SECTION, per annum, on all
unpaid income tax, unpaid estimated income tax, and unpaid withholding tax.
This imposition of interest shall be assessed per month, or fraction of a
month.



      (2)   With respect to unpaid income tax and unpaid estimated
income tax, a penalty equal to 15% of the amount not timely paid shall be
imposed.



      (3)   With respect to any unpaid withholding tax, a penalty
equal to 50% of the amount not timely paid shall be imposed.



      (4)   With respect to returns other than estimated income tax
returns, the municipality shall impose a monthly penalty of $25 for each
failure to timely file each return, regardless of the liability shown thereon
for each month, or any fraction thereof, during which the return remains
unfiled regardless of the liability shown thereon. The penalty shall not
exceed a total of $150 in assessed penalty for each failure to timely file a
return.



   (D)   With respect to income taxes, estimated income taxes,
withholding taxes, and returns, the municipality shall not impose, seek to
collect, or collect any penalty, amount of interest, charges or additional
fees not described in this section.



   (E)   With respect to income taxes, estimated income taxes,
withholding taxes, and returns, the municipality shall not refund or credit
any penalty, amount of interest, charges, or additional fees that were
properly imposed or collected before January 1, 2016.



   (F)   The Tax Administrator may, in the Tax Administrator's sole
discretion, abate or partially abate penalties or interest imposed under this
section when the Tax Administrator deems such abatement or partial abatement
to be appropriate. Such abatement or partial abatement shall be properly
documented and maintained on the record of the taxpayer who received benefit
of such abatement or partial abatement.



   (G)   The municipality shall impose on the taxpayer, employer, any
agent of the employer, or any other payer the municipality's post-judgment
collection costs and fees, including attorney's fees.



(Ord. 8-2015, passed 11-4-15)



Statutory reference:



   Interest and penalties, see R.C. § 718.27



§ 44.1.11  AUDIT.



   (A)   At or before the commencement of an audit, as defined in §
44.1.03(C)(3), the Tax Administrator shall provide to the taxpayer a written
description of the roles of the Tax Administrator and of the taxpayer during
an audit and a statement of the taxpayer's rights, including any right to
obtain a refund of an overpayment of tax. At or before the commencement of an
audit, the Tax Administrator shall inform the taxpayer when the audit is
considered to have commenced.



   (B)   Except in cases involving suspected criminal activity, the Tax
Administrator shall conduct an audit of a taxpayer during regular business
hours and after providing reasonable notice to the taxpayer. A taxpayer who
is unable to comply with a proposed time for an audit on the grounds that the
proposed time would cause inconvenience or hardship must offer reasonable
alternative dates for the audit.



   (C)   At all stages of an audit by the Tax Administrator, a taxpayer
is entitled to be assisted or represented by an attorney, accountant,
bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner. The Tax Administrator shall prescribe
a form by which a taxpayer may designate such a person to assist or represent
the taxpayer in the conduct of any proceedings resulting from actions by the
Tax Administrator. If a taxpayer has not submitted such a form, the Tax
Administrator may accept other evidence, as the Tax Administrator considers
appropriate, that a person is the authorized representative of a taxpayer.



      A taxpayer may refuse to answer any questions asked by the person
conducting an audit until the taxpayer has an opportunity to consult with the
taxpayer's attorney, accountant, bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner. This
division does not authorize the practice of law by a person who is not an
attorney.



   (D)   A taxpayer may record, electronically or otherwise, the audit
examination.



   (E)   The failure of the Tax Administrator to comply with a
provision of this section shall neither excuse a taxpayer from payment of any
taxes owed by the taxpayer nor cure any procedural defect in a taxpayer's
case.



   (F)   If the Tax Administrator fails to substantially comply with
the provisions of this section, the Tax Administrator, upon application by
the taxpayer, shall excuse the taxpayer from penalties and interest arising
from the audit.



(Ord. 8-2015, passed 11-4-15)



Statutory reference:



   Audits, see R.C. § 718.36



§ 44.1.12  ROUNDING.



   A person may round to the nearest whole dollar all amounts the person
is required to enter on any return, report, voucher, or other document
required under this chapter. Any fractional part of a dollar that equals or
exceeds $.50 shall be rounded to the next whole dollar, and any fractional
part of a dollar that is less than $.50 shall be dropped, rounding down to
the nearest whole dollar. If a person chooses to round amounts entered on a
document, the person shall round all amounts entered on the document.



(Ord. 8-2015, passed 11-4-15)



Statutory reference:



   Rounding of amounts, see R.C. § 718.25



§ 44.1.13  AUTHORITY AND POWERS OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR



§ 44.1.131  AUTHORITY OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR; ADMINISTRATIVE POWERS OF THE
TAX ADMINISTRATOR.



   The Tax Administrator has the authority to perform all duties and
functions necessary and appropriate to implement the provisions of this
chapter, including without limitation:



   (A)   Exercise all powers whatsoever of an inquisitorial nature as
provided by law, including, the right to inspect books, accounts, records,
memorandums, and federal and state income tax returns, to examine persons
under oath, to issue orders or subpoenas for the production of books,
accounts, papers, records, documents, and testimony, to take depositions, to
apply to a court for attachment proceedings as for contempt, to approve
vouchers for the fees of officers and witnesses, and to administer oaths;
provided that the powers referred to in this division of this section shall
be exercised by the Tax Administrator only in connection with the performance
of the duties respectively assigned to the Tax Administrator under a
municipal corporation income tax ordinance or resolution adopted in
accordance with this chapter;



   (B)   Appoint agents and prescribe their powers and duties;



   (C)   Confer and meet with officers of other municipal corporations
and states and officers of the United States on any matters pertaining to
their respective official duties as provided by law;



   (D)   Exercise the authority provided by law, including orders from
bankruptcy courts, relative to remitting or refunding taxes, including
penalties and interest thereon, illegally or erroneously imposed or
collected, or for any other reason overpaid, and, in addition, the Tax
Administrator may investigate any claim of overpayment and make a written
statement of the Tax Administrator's findings, and, if the Tax Administrator
finds that there has been an overpayment, approve and issue a refund payable
to the taxpayer, the taxpayer's assigns, or legal representative as provided
in this chapter;



   (E)   Exercise the authority provided by law relative to consenting
to the compromise and settlement of tax claims;



   (F)   Exercise the authority provided by law relative to the use of
alternative apportionment methods by taxpayers in accordance with § 44.1.062;



   (G)   Make all tax findings, determinations, computations,
assessments and orders the Tax Administrator is by law authorized and
required to make and, pursuant to time limitations provided by law, on the
Tax Administrator's own motion, review, redetermine, or correct any tax
findings, determinations, computations, assessments or orders the Tax
Administrator has made, but the Tax Administrator shall not review,
redetermine, or correct any tax finding, determination, computation,
assessment or order which the Tax Administrator has made for which an appeal
has been filed with the Board of Tax Review or other appropriate tribunal,
unless such appeal or application is withdrawn by the appellant or applicant,
is dismissed, or is otherwise final;



   (H)   Destroy any or all returns or other tax documents in the
manner authorized by law;



   (I)   Enter into an agreement with a taxpayer to simplify the
withholding obligations described in § 44.1.051.



(Ord. 8-2015, passed 11-4-15)



Statutory reference:



   Authority of Tax Administrator, see R.C. § 718.24



§ 44.1.132  AUTHORITY OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR; COMPROMISE OF CLAIM AND PAYMENT
OVER TIME.



   (A)   As used in this section, CLAIM means a claim for an amount
payable to the municipality that arises pursuant to the municipal income tax
imposed in accordance with this chapter.



   (B)   The Tax Administrator may do either of the following if such
action is in the best interests of the municipality:



      (1)   Compromise a claim consistent with guidelines
established by the Board of Tax Review;



      (2)   Extend for a reasonable period the time for payment of a
claim by agreeing to accept monthly or other periodic payments, upon such
terms and conditions as the Tax Administrator may require.



   (C)   The Tax Administrator's rejection of a compromise or
payment-over-time agreement proposed by a person with respect to a claim
shall not be appealable.



   (D)   A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with respect to a
claim shall be binding upon and shall inure to the benefit of only the
parties to the compromise or agreement, and shall not extinguish or otherwise
affect the liability of any other person.



   (E)   (1)   A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with
respect to a claim shall be void if the taxpayer defaults under the
compromise or agreement or if the compromise or agreement was obtained by
fraud or by misrepresentation of a material fact. Any amount that was due
before the compromise or agreement and that is unpaid shall remain due, and
any penalties or interest that would have accrued in the absence of the
compromise or agreement shall continue to accrue and be due.



      (2)   The Tax Administrator shall have sole discretion to
determine whether or not penalty, interest, charges or applicable fees will
be assessed through the duration of any compromise or payment-over-time
agreement.



   (F)   The Tax Administrator may require that the taxpayer provide
detailed financial documentation and information, in order to determine
whether or not a payment-over-time agreement will be authorized. The
taxpayer's failure to provide the necessary and required information by the
Tax Administrator shall preclude consideration of a payment-over-time
agreement.



(Ord. 8-2015, passed 11-4-15)



Statutory reference:



   Administration of claims, see R.C. § 718.28



§ 44.1.133  AUTHORITY OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR; RIGHT TO EXAMINE.



   (A)   The Tax Administrator, or any authorized agent or employee
thereof may examine the books, papers, records, and federal and state income
tax returns of any employer, taxpayer, or other person that is subject to, or
that the Tax Administrator believes is subject to, the provisions of this
chapter for the purpose of verifying the accuracy of any return made or, if
no return was filed, to ascertain the tax due under this chapter. Upon
written request by the Tax Administrator or a duly authorized agent or
employee thereof, every employer, taxpayer, or other person subject to this
section is required to furnish the opportunity for the Tax Administrator,
authorized agent, or employee to investigate and examine such books, papers,
records, and federal and state income tax returns at a reasonable time and
place designated in the request.



   (B)   The records and other documents of any taxpayer, employer, or
other person that is subject to, or that a Tax Administrator believes is
subject to, the provisions of this chapter shall be open to the Tax
Administrator's inspection during business hours and shall be preserved for a
period of six years following the end of the taxable year to which the
records or documents relate, unless the Tax Administrator, in writing,
consents to their destruction within that period, or by order requires that
they be kept longer. The Tax Administrator of a municipal corporation may
require any person, by notice served on that person, to keep such records as
the Tax Administrator determines necessary to show whether or not that person
is liable, and the extent of such liability, for the income tax levied by the
municipality or for the withholding of such tax.



   (C)   The Tax Administrator may examine under oath any person that
the Tax Administrator reasonably believes has knowledge concerning any income
that was or would have been returned for taxation or any transaction tending
to affect such income. The Tax Administrator may, for this purpose, compel
any such person to attend a hearing or examination and to produce any books,
papers, records, and federal and state income tax returns in such person's
possession or control. The person may be assisted or represented by an
attorney, accountant, bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner at any such
hearing or examination. This division does not authorize the practice of law
by a person who is not an attorney.



   (D)   No person issued written notice by the Tax Administrator
compelling attendance at a hearing or examination or the production of books,
papers, records, or federal and state income tax returns under this section
shall fail to comply.



(Ord. 8-2015, passed 11-4-15)



Statutory reference:



   Accuracy of returns; verification, see R.C. § 718.23



§ 44.1.134  AUTHORITY OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR; REQUIRING IDENTIFYING
INFORMATION.



   (A)   The Tax Administrator may require any person filing a tax
document with the Tax Administrator to provide identifying information, which
may include the person's Social Security number, federal employer
identification number, or other identification number requested by the Tax
Administrator. A person required by the Tax Administrator to provide
identifying information that has experienced any change with respect to that
information shall notify the Tax Administrator of the change before, or upon,
filing the next tax document requiring the identifying information.



   (B)   (1)   If the Tax Administrator makes a request for
identifying information and the Tax Administrator does not receive valid
identifying information within 30 days of making the request, nothing in this
chapter prohibits the Tax Administrator from imposing a penalty upon the
person to whom the request was directed pursuant to § 44.1.10, in addition
to any applicable penalty described in § 44.1.99.



      (2)   If a person required by the Tax Administrator to provide
identifying information does not notify the Tax Administrator of a change
with respect to that information as required under division (A) of this
section within 30 days after filing the next tax document requiring such
identifying information, nothing in this chapter prohibits the Tax
Administrator from imposing a penalty pursuant to § 44.1.10.



      (3)   The penalties provided for under divisions (B)(1) and
(B)(2) of this section may be billed and imposed in the same manner as the
tax or fee with respect to which the identifying information is sought and
are in addition to any applicable criminal penalties described in § 44.1.99
for a violation of § 44.1.15 and any other penalties that may be imposed by
the Tax Administrator by law.



(Ord. 8-2015, passed 11-4-15)



Statutory reference:



   Identification information, see R.C. § 718.26



§ 44.1.14  CONFIDENTIALITY.



   (A)   Any information gained as a result of returns, investigations,
hearings, or verifications required or authorized by R.C. Chapter 718 or by
the charter or ordinance of the municipality is confidential, and no person
shall access or disclose such information except in accordance with a proper
judicial order or in connection with the performance of that person's
official duties or the official business of the municipality as authorized by
R.C. Chapter 718 or the charter or ordinance authorizing the levy. The Tax
Administrator of the municipality or a designee thereof may furnish copies of
returns filed or otherwise received under this chapter and other related tax
information to the Internal Revenue Service, the State Tax Commissioner, and
Tax Administrators of other municipal corporations.



   (B)   This section does not prohibit the municipality from
publishing or disclosing statistics in a form that does not disclose
information with respect to particular taxpayers.



(Ord. 8-2015, passed 11-4-15)



Statutory reference:



   Tax information confidential, see R.C. § 718.13



§ 44.1.15  FRAUD.



   No person shall knowingly make, present, aid, or assist in the
preparation or presentation of a false or fraudulent report, return,
schedule, statement, claim, or document authorized or required by municipal
corporation ordinance or state law to be filed with the Tax Administrator, or
knowingly procure, counsel, or advise the preparation or presentation of such
report, return, schedule, statement, claim, or document, or knowingly change,
alter, or amend, or knowingly procure, counsel or advise such change,
alteration, or amendment of the records upon which such report, return,
schedule, statement, claim, or document is based with intent to defraud the
municipality or the Tax Administrator.



(Ord. 8-2015, passed 11-4-15)



Statutory reference:



   Fraud, see R.C. § 718.35



§ 44.1.16  OPINION OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   An OPINION OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR means an opinion issued
under this section with respect to prospective municipal income tax
liability. It does not include ordinary correspondence of the Tax
Administrator.



   (B)   A taxpayer may submit a written request for an opinion of the
Tax Administrator as to whether or how certain income, source of income, or a
certain activity or transaction will be taxed. The written response of the
Tax Administrator shall be an opinion of the Tax Administrator and shall bind
the Tax Administrator, in accordance with divisions (C), (G), and (H) of this
section, provided all of the following conditions are satisfied:



      (1)   The taxpayer's request fully and  accurately describes
the specific facts or circumstances relevant to a determination of the
taxability of the income, source of income, activity, or transaction, and, if
an activity or transaction, all parties involved in the activity or
transaction are clearly identified by name, location, or other pertinent
facts.



      (2)   The request relates to a tax imposed by the municipality
in accordance with this chapter.



      (3)   The Tax Administrator's response is signed by the Tax
Administrator and designated as an "opinion of the Tax Administrator."



   (C)   An opinion of the Tax Administrator shall remain in effect and
shall protect the taxpayer for whom the opinion was prepared and who
reasonably relies on it from liability for any taxes, penalty, or interest
otherwise chargeable on the activity or transaction specifically held by the
Tax Administrator's opinion to be taxable in a particular manner or not to be
subject to taxation for any taxable years that may be specified in the
opinion, or until the earliest of the following dates:



      (1)   The effective date of a written revocation by the Tax
Administrator sent to the taxpayer by certified mail, return receipt
requested. The effective date of the revocation shall be the taxpayer's date
of receipt or one year after the issuance of the opinion, whichever is later;



      (2)   The effective date of any amendment or enactment of a
relevant section of the Ohio Revised Code, uncodified state law, or the
municipality's income tax ordinance that would substantially change the
analysis and conclusion of the opinion of the Tax Administrator;



      (3)   The date on which a court issues an opinion establishing
or changing relevant case law with respect to the Ohio Revised Code,
uncodified state law, or the municipality's income tax ordinance;



      (4)   If the opinion of the Tax Administrator was based on the
interpretation of federal law, the effective date of any change in the
relevant federal statutes or regulations, or the date on which a court issues
an opinion establishing or changing relevant case law with respect to federal
statutes or regulations;



      (5)   The effective date of any change in the taxpayer's
material facts or circumstances;



      (6)   The effective date of the expiration of the opinion, if
specified in the opinion.



   (D)   (1)   A taxpayer is not relieved of tax liability for any
activity or transaction related to a request for an opinion that contained
any misrepresentation or omission of one or more material facts.



      (2)   If the taxpayer knowingly has misrepresented the
pertinent facts or omitted material facts with intent to defraud the
municipality in order to obtain a more favorable opinion, the taxpayer may be
in violation of § 44.1.15.



   (E)   If a Tax Administrator provides written advice under this
section, the opinion shall include a statement that:



      (1)   The tax consequences stated in the opinion may be
subject to change for any of the reasons stated in division (C) of this
section;



      (2)   It is the duty of the taxpayer to be aware of such
changes.



   (F)   A Tax Administrator may refuse to offer an opinion on any
request received under this section.



   (G)   This section binds a Tax Administrator only with respect to
opinions of the Tax Administrator issued on or after January 1, 2016.



   (H)   An opinion of a Tax Administrator binds that Tax Administrator
only with respect to the taxpayer for whom the opinion was prepared and does
not bind the Tax Administrator of any other municipal corporation.



   (I)   A Tax Administrator shall make available the text of all
opinions issued under this section, except those opinions prepared for a
taxpayer who has requested that the text of the opinion remain confidential.
In no event shall the text of an opinion be made available until the Tax
Administrator has removed all information that identifies the taxpayer and
any other parties involved in the activity or transaction.



   (J)   An opinion of the Tax Administrator issued under this section
or a refusal to offer an opinion under division (F) of this section may not
be appealed.



(Ord. 8-2015, passed 11-4-15)



Statutory reference:



   Opinion of Tax Commissioner; request, see R.C. § 718.38



§ 44.1.17  ASSESSMENT; APPEAL BASED ON PRESUMPTION OF DELIVERY.



   (A)   (1)   The Tax Administrator shall serve an assessment
either by personal service, by certified mail, or by a delivery service
authorized under R.C. § 5703.056.



      (2)   The Tax Administrator may deliver the assessment through
alternative means as provided in this section, including, but not limited to,
delivery by secure electronic mail. Such alternative delivery method must be
authorized by the person subject to the assessment.



      (3)   Once service of the assessment has been made by the Tax
Administrator or other municipal official, or the designee of either, the
person to whom the assessment is directed may protest the ruling of that
assessment by filing an appeal with the Board of Tax Review within 60 days
after the receipt of service. The delivery of an assessment of the Tax
Administrator as prescribed in R.C. § 718.18 is prima facie evidence that
delivery is complete and that the assessment is served.



   (B)   (1)   A person may challenge the presumption of delivery
and service as set forth in this division. A person disputing the presumption
of delivery and service under this section bears the burden of proving by a
preponderance of the evidence that the address to which the assessment was
sent was not an address with which the person was associated at the time the
Tax Administrator originally mailed the assessment by certified mail. For the
purposes of this section, a person is associated with an address at the time
the Tax Administrator originally mailed the assessment if, at that time, the
person was residing, receiving legal documents, or conducting business at the
address; or if, before that time, the person had conducted business at the
address and, when the assessment was mailed, the person's agent or the
person's affiliate was conducting business at the address. For the purposes
of this section, a person's affiliate is any other person that, at the time
the assessment was mailed, owned or controlled at least 20%, as determined by
voting rights, of the addressee's business.



      (2)   If a person elects to appeal an assessment on the basis
described in division (B)(1) of this section, and if that assessment is
subject to collection and is not otherwise appealable, the person must do so
within 60 days after the initial contact by the Tax Administrator or other
municipal official, or the designee of either, with the person. Nothing in
this division prevents the Tax Administrator or other official from entering
into a compromise with the person if the person does not actually file such
an appeal with the Board of Tax Review.



(Ord. 8-2015, passed 11-4-15)



Statutory reference:



   Service of assessment; presumption, see R.C. § 718.18



§ 44.1.18  BOARD OF TAX REVIEW; APPEAL TO BOARD OF TAX REVIEW.



   (A)   (1)   The legislative authority of the municipality shall
maintain a Board of Tax Review to hear appeals as provided in R.C. Chapter
718.



      (2)   The Board of Tax Review shall consist of three members.
The three members of the Board of Tax Review must be domiciled in the city.
Two members shall be appointed by the City Council, which may also appoint an
alternate to serve as provided herein when there may be a conflict, illness,
temporary absence or similar reason. The Council appointees may not be
employees, elected officials, or contractors with the city at any time during
their term or in the five years immediately preceding the date of
appointment. One member shall be appointed by the City Manager. This member
may be an employee of the municipality, but may not be the director of
finance or equivalent officer, or the Tax Administrator or other similar
official or an employee directly involved in municipal tax matters, or any
direct subordinate thereof.



      (3)   The term for members of the Board of Tax Review
appointed by the City Council shall be two years. There is no limit on the
number of terms that a member may serve should the member be reappointed by
the City Council. The Board member appointed by the City Manager shall serve
at the discretion of the City Manager.



      (4)   Members of the Board of Tax Review appointed by the City
Council may be removed by the City Council as set forth in R.C. §
718.11(A)(4).



      (5)   A member of the Board who, for any reason, ceases to
meet the qualifications for the position prescribed by this section shall
resign immediately by operation of law.



      (6)   A vacancy in an unexpired term shall be filled in the
same manner as the original appointment within 60 days of when the vacancy
was created. Any member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior to the
expiration of the term for which the member's predecessor was appointed shall
hold office for the remainder of such term. No vacancy on the Board shall
impair the power and authority of the remaining members to exercise all the
powers of the Board.



      (7)   If a member is temporarily unable to serve on the Board
due to a conflict of interest, illness, absence, or similar reason, the
alternate designated by City Council temporarily shall serve in the place of
a Council appointed member's absence. The City Manager shall appoint another
individual to temporarily serve on the Board in the member's place if the
City Manager appointed member is absent. This appointment shall be subject to
the same requirements and limitations as are applicable to the appointment of
the member temporarily unable to serve.



   (B)   Whenever a Tax Administrator issues an assessment, the Tax
Administrator shall notify the taxpayer in writing at the same time of the
taxpayer's right to appeal the assessment, the manner in which the taxpayer
may appeal the assessment, and the address to which the appeal should be
directed, and to whom the appeal should be directed.



   (C)   Any person who has been issued an assessment may appeal the
assessment to the Board by filing a request with the Board. The request shall
be in writing, shall specify the reason or reasons why the assessment should
be deemed incorrect or unlawful, and shall be filed within 60 days after the
taxpayer receives the assessment.



   (D)   The Board of Tax Review shall schedule a hearing to be held
within 60 days after receiving an appeal of an assessment under division (C)
of this section, unless the taxpayer requests additional time to prepare or
waives a hearing. If the taxpayer does not waive the hearing, the taxpayer
may appear before the Board and/or may be represented by an attorney at law,
certified public accountant, or other representative. The Board may allow a
hearing to be continued as jointly agreed to by the parties. In such a case,
the hearing must be completed within 120 days after the first day of the
hearing unless the parties agree otherwise.



   (E)   The Board may affirm, reverse, or modify the Tax
Administrator's assessment or any part of that assessment. The Board shall
issue a final determination on the appeal within 90 days after the Board's
final hearing on the appeal, and send a copy of its final determination by
ordinary mail to all of the parties to the appeal within 15 days after
issuing the final determination. The taxpayer or the Tax Administrator may
appeal the Board's final determination as provided in R.C. § 5717.011.



   (F)   The Board of Tax Review created pursuant to this section shall
adopt rules governing its procedures, including a schedule of related costs,
and shall keep a record of its transactions. The rules governing the Board of
Tax Review procedures shall be in writing, and may be amended as needed by
the Board of Tax Review. Such records are not public records available for
inspection under R.C. § 149.43.  For this reason, any documentation, copies
of returns or reports, final determinations, or working papers for each case
must be securely maintained under the control of the Tax Administrator.
Hearings requested by a taxpayer before a Board of Tax Review created
pursuant to this section are not meetings of a public body subject to R.C. §
121.22.  For this reason, such hearings shall not be open to the public, and
only those parties to the case may be present during the hearing.



(Ord. 8-2015, passed 11-4-15)



Statutory reference:



   Local Board of Tax Review, see R.C. § 718.11



§ 44.1.19  ACTIONS TO RECOVER; STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.



   (A)   (1)   (a)   Civil actions to recover municipal income
taxes and penalties and interest on municipal income taxes shall be brought
within the latter of:



            1.   Three years after the tax was due or the
return was filed, whichever is later; or



            2.   One year after the conclusion of the
qualifying deferral period, if any.



         (b)   The time limit described in division (A)(1)(a) of
this section may be extended at any time if both the Tax Administrator and
the employer, agent of the employer, other payer, or taxpayer consent in
writing to the extension. Any extension shall also extend for the same period
of time the time limit described in division (C) of this section.



      (2)   As used in this section, QUALIFYING DEFERRAL PERIOD
means a period of time beginning and ending as follows:



         (a)   Beginning on the date a person who is aggrieved by
an assessment files with a Board of Tax Review the request described in §
44.1,18.  That date shall not be affected by any subsequent decision,
finding, or holding by any administrative body or court that the Board of Tax
Review with which the aggrieved person filed the request did not have
jurisdiction to affirm, reverse, or modify the assessment or any part of that
assessment.



         (b)   Ending the later of the 60th day after the date on
which the final determination of the Local Board of Tax Review becomes final
or, if any party appeals from the determination of the Local Board of Tax
Review, the 60th day after the date on which the final determination of the
Local Board of Tax Review is either ultimately affirmed in whole or in part
or ultimately reversed and no further appeal of either that affirmation, in
whole or in part, or that reversal is available or taken.



   (B)   Prosecutions for an offense made punishable under a resolution
or ordinance imposing an income tax shall be commenced within three years
after the commission of the offense, provided that in the case of fraud,
failure to file a return, or the omission of 25% or more of income required
to be reported, prosecutions may be commenced within six years after the
commission of the offense.



   (C)   A claim for a refund of municipal income taxes shall be
brought within the time limitation provided in § 44.1.096.



   (D)   (1)   Notwithstanding the fact that an appeal is pending,
the petitioner may pay all or a portion of the assessment that is the subject
of the appeal. The acceptance of a payment by the municipality does not
prejudice any claim for refund upon final determination of the appeal.



      (2)   If upon final determination of the appeal an error in
the assessment is corrected by the Tax Administrator, upon an appeal so filed
or pursuant to a final determination of the Board of Tax Review created under
§ 44.1.18, of the Ohio Board of Tax Appeals, or any court to which the
decision of the Ohio Board of Tax Appeals has been appealed, so that the
amount due from the party assessed under the corrected assessment is less
than the amount paid, there shall be issued to the appellant or to the
appellant's assigns or legal representative a refund in the amount of the
overpayment as provided by § 44.1.096, with interest on that amount as
provided by division (D) of this section.



   (E)   No civil action to recover municipal income tax or related
penalties or interest shall be brought during either of the following time
periods:



      (1)   The period during which a taxpayer has a right to appeal
the imposition of that tax or interest or those penalties;



      (2)   The period during which an appeal related to the
imposition of that tax or interest or those penalties is pending.



(Ord. 8-2015, passed 11-4-15)



Statutory reference:



   Statute of limitations, see R.C. § 718.12



§ 44.1.20  ADOPTION OF RULES.



   (A)   Pursuant to R.C. § 718.30, the City Council may adopt rules
to administer the income tax imposed by the municipality.



   (B)   All rules adopted under this section shall be published and
posted on the internet.



(Ord. 8-2015, passed 11-4-15)



Statutory reference:



   Adoption or rules, see R.C. § 718.30



§ 44.1.30  INFORMATION REQUIRED TO BE GIVEN BY LANDLORD.



   (A)   Landlord information required. Every landlord who owns or
controls rental property located within the city, and who rents to tenants
who occupy the property for 30 days or more, shall, within 30 days after a
new tenant occupies the rental property, file with the Tax Commissioner a
report showing the name, address and telephone number, if available, of each
such tenant.



   (B)   Termination of tenancy. Within 30 days after a tenant vacates
an apartment, room or other rental unit located within the city, the property
owner of such unit shall file with the Tax Commissioner a report showing the
name of that person, the property address, the date of vacation of the rental
property and a forwarding address, if available.



   (C)   Annually, with the filing of a return due under this chapter,
every landlord who owns or controls rental property located within the city,
shall file a report listing the current tenants who occupy the rental
property, showing the name, address and telephone number, if available, of
each such tenant.



   (D)   Penalty. A willful violation of this section shall be an
offense punishable by a fine not to exceed $150.



(Ord. 8-2015, passed 11-4-15)



§ 44.1.97  COLLECTION AFTER TERMINATION OF CHAPTER.



   (A)   This chapter shall continue in full force and effect insofar
as the levy of taxes is concerned until repealed, and insofar as the
collection of taxes levied hereunder and actions and proceedings for
collecting any tax so levied or enforcing any provisions of this chapter are
concerned, it shall continue in full force and effect until all of the taxes
levied in the aforesaid period are fully paid and any and all suits and
prosecutions for the collection of taxes or for the punishment of violations
of this chapter have been fully terminated, subject to the limitations
contained in § 44.1.19.



   (B)   Annual returns due for all or any part of the last effective
year of this chapter shall be due on the date provided in § 44.1.091 as
though the same were continuing.



(Ord. 8-2015, passed 11-4-15)



§ 44.1.98  SAVINGS CLAUSE.



   If any sentence, clause, section or part of this chapter, or any tax
imposed against, or exemption from tax granted to, any taxpayer or forms of
income specified herein is found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid,
such unconstitutionality, illegality, or invalidity shall affect only such
clause, sentence, section or part of this chapter so found and shall not
affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses,
sections or other parts of this chapter. It is hereby declared to be the
intention of the legislative authority of the municipality that this chapter
would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid
sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been included in this chapter.



(Ord. 8-2015, passed 11-4-15)



§ 44.1.99  VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, whoever
violates § 44.1.051, 44.1.14(A), or 44.1.15 by failing to remit municipal
income taxes deducted and withheld from an employee, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be subject to a fine of not more
than $1,000 or imprisonment for a term of up to six months, or both. In
addition, the violation is punishable by dismissal from office or discharge
from employment, or both.



   (B)   Any person who discloses information received from the
Internal Revenue Service in violation of section 7213(a), 7213A, or 7431 of
the Internal Revenue Code shall be guilty of a felony of the fifth degree and
shall be subject to a fine of not more than $5,000 plus the costs of
prosecution, or imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years, or both. In
addition, the violation is punishable by dismissal from office or discharge
from employment, or both.



   (C)   Each instance of access or disclosure in violation of §
44.1.14(A) constitutes a separate offense.



   (D)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which
violation no penalty is otherwise provided, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after
the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree;
on each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the
person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree. By way of an
illustrative enumeration, violations of this chapter shall include but not be
limited to the following acts, conduct, and/or omissions:



      (1)   Fail, neglect or refuse to make any return or
declaration required by this chapter;



      (2)   Knowingly make any incomplete return;



      (3)   Willfully fail, neglect, or refuse to pay the tax,
penalties, and interest, or any combination thereof, imposed by this chapter;



      (4)   Cause to not be remitted the city income tax withheld
from qualifying wages of employees to the municipal corporation as required
by § 44.1.051;



      (5)   Neglect or refuse to withhold or remit municipal income
tax from employees;



      (6)   Refuse to permit the Tax Administrator or any duly
authorized agent or employee to examine his or her books, records, papers,
federal and state income tax returns, or any documentation relating to the
income or net profits of a taxpayer;



      (7)   Fail to appear before the Tax Administrator and to
produce his or her books, records, papers, federal and state income tax
returns, or any documentation relating to the income or net profits of a
taxpayer upon order or subpoena of the Tax Administrator;



      (8)   Refuse to disclose to the Tax Administrator any
information with respect to such person's income or net profits, or in the
case of a person responsible for maintaining information relating to his or
her employers' income or net profits, such person's employer's income or net
profits;



      (9)   Fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter or
any order or subpoena of the Tax Administrator;



      (10)   To avoid imposition or collection of municipal income
tax, willfully give to an employer or prospective employer false information
as to his or her true name, correct Social Security number and residence
address, or willfully fail to promptly notify an employer or a prospective
employer of any change in residence address and date thereof;



      (11)   Fail, as an employer, agent of an employer, or other
payer, to maintain proper records of employees residence addresses, total
qualifying wages paid and municipal tax withheld, or to knowingly give the
Tax Administrator false information;



      (12)   Willfully fail, neglect, or refuse to make any payment
of estimated municipal income tax for any taxable year or any part of any
taxable year in accordance with this chapter;



      (13)   Attempt to do anything whatsoever to avoid the payment
of the whole or any part of the tax, penalties or interest imposed by this
chapter.



      (14)   For purposes of this section, any violation that does
not specify a culpable mental state or intent, shall be one of strict
liability and no culpable mental state or intent shall be required for a
person to be guilty of that violation.



      (15)   For purposes of this section, the term PERSON shall, in
addition to the meaning prescribed in § 44.1.03, include in the case of a
corporation, association, pass-through entity or unincorporated business
entity not having any resident owner or officer within the city, any employee
or agent of such corporation, association, pass-through entity or
unincorporated business entity who has control or supervision over or is
charged with the responsibility of filing the municipal income tax returns
and making the payments of the municipal income tax as required by this
chapter.



   (E)   If a person is charged in a criminal complaint with a
violation of this chapter, except a violation of § 44.1.14 or 44.1.15, R.C
§ 2935.36 shall apply to the offense permitting a diversion program in lieu
of conviction, except that a person is ineligible for diversion under that
section if the person previously has been diverted from conviction pursuant
to this division (E) or any similar section under state law or another
municipal code. If the person completes the diversion program to the
satisfaction of the court, the court shall dismiss the complaint and order
the record in the case sealed under R.C. § 2953.52. If the person fails to
satisfactorily complete the diversion program, the court shall proceed with
the complaint. The Court is authorized to establish an appropriate
administrative fee to be paid to the court to offset the costs of prosecution
and administering the program. This fee shall be in addition to any other
penalties, fees or interest which may be due upon such delinquent tax
obligation.



(Ord. 8-2015, passed 11-4-15)



Statutory reference:



   Violations; penalties, see R.C. § 718.99



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS AND PROPERTIES



      Chapter




         50.   MUNICIPAL REAL ESTATE





         51.   COMPREHENSIVE RIGHTS-OF-WAY REGULATIONS




CHAPTER 50:  MUNICIPAL REAL ESTATE



Section



   50.01   Restraints upon the sale of certain municipal real estate



   50.02   Procedures for the sale of municipally owned real estate and
personal property and providing for the exchange of municipally owned real
estate



§ 50.01  RESTRAINTS UPON THE SALE OF CERTAIN MUNICIPAL REAL ESTATE.



   (A)   The city shall not convey, transfer, or lease for a period
exceeding one year any municipal park and recreation areas, greenbelts,
nature preserves, parkways, buffers and separators, or public buildings and
structures employed for recreational purposes, which the municipality owns or
in which it has an interest by easement, reversion, remainder, contract, or
leasehold, except upon the passage of an ordinance authorizing the same,
passed with the affirmative vote of five members of the Council.  In
considering such legislation the Council shall not suspend the rule requiring
three readings, and such legislation shall not be passed as an emergency
measure.



   (B)   The restrictions set forth in this section shall not apply to
the public right-of-way (except to green area medians), to land owned or
improved primarily for the purpose of accommodating the flow of surface
waters, or to land acquired for and devoted to administrative uses or to the
storage of municipal equipment or supplies.



   (C)   The city shall not permit any municipal park or recreation
area, greenbelt, nature preserve, parkway, buffer or separator, or any of its
public buildings or structures employed for recreational purposes, to be
developed or converted to uses inconsistent with their original character,
except upon the passage of legislation in the manner provided in division (A)
of this section.



   (D)   The City Manager shall maintain a map which identifies the
properties subject to the restraints established in this section.  The
nature of the city's interest in such property shall be indicated on the map.



   (E)   Any land or structures acquired by the city shall be defined
as to primary use by the City Council at the time of acquisition.



(Ord. 1983-21, passed 8-3-83)



§ 50.02  PROCEDURES FOR THE SALE OF MUNICIPALLY OWNED REAL ESTATE AND
PERSONAL PROPERTY AND PROVIDING FOR THE EXCHANGE OF MUNICIPALLY OWNED REAL
ESTATE.



   (A)   Other than as provided in § 50.01 or division (B) of this
section, the city is authorized to sell any municipally owned real estate by
following the procedures set forth below:



      (1)   In the event that the city determines to sell real
estate, then it shall publish a notice of an invitation to bid upon said
property for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in
the city.  The notice shall generally outline the terms and conditions of
the bid, and set a date upon which bids are to be submitted.



      (2)   Prior to the opening of the bids, the City Manager shall
have obtained an appraisal of the property by a competent, fully qualified
appraiser; provided, however, that if the city is in possession of such an
appraisal which is dated within 180 days from the date of the initial
publication of the notice, then no further appraisals shall be required. 
All bids for the property shall be opened in public at the city's
Administrative Offices.



      (3)   Once the City Manager has reviewed all of the bids, he
shall present the bids to City Council.  The Council may accept the best
bid, or they may reject any and all bids should the terms not be satisfactory
to the city.  The sale of the real property shall then be authorized only
upon resolution passed by a majority vote of all members of Council.



   (B)   The procedure set forth in division (A) of this section shall
not apply to real estate owned by the city which is acquired and transferred
or otherwise sold pursuant to an approved urban renewal/redevelopment plan or
to real estate acquired by the city and sold or otherwise transferred as
authorized under R.C. Chapter 1724 to the city's designated community
improvement corporation.  Any disposition of real estate pursuant to an
urban renewal/redevelopment plan or through the designated community
improvement corporation shall be governed by the procedures set forth in this
code for urban renewal or urban redevelopment or as authorized pursuant to
R.C. Chapter 1724 or the bylaws and resolutions of the designated community
improvement corporation.



   (C)   The city recognizes that in certain instances it may be to its
advantage to exchange real property for other real property rather than to
simply offer the real property for sale through the bid process.  In the
event that the city wishes to exchange real property, then said exchange
shall be governed by the following procedures:



      (1)   The city shall obtain an appraisal of all properties
which are to be involved in the proposed exchange of municipally owned real
estate for real estate owned by any other person or entity. The appraisal
procedure to be followed shall be the same as is outlined in division (A)(2)
of this section.



      (2)   The city shall, by ordinance and upon the affirmative
vote of two-thirds of the members of Council, authorize the exchange of any
one parcel or multiple parcels of municipally owned real estate for other
real estate located either within or outside of the city. Such ordinance
shall specifically describe all property which is subject to the exchange,
shall specifically delineate whether or not there shall be any cash payable
to either party in the transaction and shall further set forth the appraised
value of all of the properties.



   (D)   The city recognizes that in certain instances it may be to its
advantage to exchange or "trade-in" personal property for other personal
property rather than to sell it as is outlined in this section.  In the
event that the city wishes to exchange or trade personal property, then the
following procedures shall be followed:



      (1)   In those instances when the city is advertising for bids
for the purchase of certain personal property, it may include as a condition
of the bid, or allow as an alternative to a cash only purchase, that the
personal property to be exchanged or traded be considered in the bid and
credited against the purchase price. In such a bid situation, no appraisal of
the personal property need be made and the city shall follow all of its other
bidding requirements.



      (2)   In those instances when the item to be exchanged or
traded is for another item wherein competitive bidding is not required by
Montgomery Charter or ordinance, then the City Manager will be authorized by
review and majority vote of the Government Affairs Committee of Council, to
complete the purchase, making such exchange or trade as he deems advisable,
and to thereafter report the results of the sale to City Council.



   (E)   No city employee nor his or her immediate family shall be
permitted to purchase any real or personal property from the city other than
by sealed bid or at a public auction. For purposes of this section, the
definition of immediate family shall be the spouse of the employee and any
children; for purposes of this section, employee shall be defined to be any
salaried or hourly employee of the city, whether full or part-time, and any
elected officials.



   (F)   Receipt and disposition of personal property.



      (1)   All personal property received by the city which is
either lost, abandoned, stolen, seized or forfeited shall be received through
the Police Department (hereinafter "Department").  All such property
received shall be logged by the Department with the description of the
property, the basis upon which it was received, the date of receipt, and the
name of the owner, if known.  Separate records shall be maintained for
stolen, forfeited or seized property, which log records shall also denote the
appropriate case reference if the matter involves a separate criminal charge.



      (2)   All such property shall be held until it is either no
longer required as evidence in any pending proceeding, or 90 days from the
date the property was received, after which such property may be disposed as
provided herein.  During such period of time the property is held by the
Department, it shall be appropriately stored with the exception of
inconsequential items of personal property such as personal clothing,
backpacks, carry bags or similar consumer goods which are found on municipal
property or delivered to the Department as lost property, which property
shall be made available in an appropriate lost and found for public
inspection and claiming.  This policy shall not obligate the Department to
receive and store damaged personal property which a reasonable person would
determine to be beyond repair or salvage and is waste; such property may be
appropriately disposed of without storage and without further record or
notice.



      (3)   During the period of time the property is in storage,
and before disposition of the property as provided herein, the Department
shall make a reasonable effort to locate the person entitled to the
possession of such property in its custody, to notify them of when and where
it may be claimed, and the potential for disposition of unclaimed property. 
In the absence of evidence identifying persons entitled to possession, it is
sufficient notice to advertise in a newspaper of general circulation in the
city, generally and briefly describing the nature of the property in custody
and inviting persons to view and establish their right to it.  This notice
need only be published one time, at least 30 days in advance of the
disposition of such property, and the notice may be combined with the notice
of sale as provided herein.



      (4)   Except as otherwise required by Ohio law, lost,
abandoned, stolen, seized or forfeited property which remains unclaimed or is
no longer necessary as evidence in any proceeding, and any personal property
owned by the city which is declared to be surplus, shall be disposed of by
the Department after the storage period provided above.  Surplus personal
property and consumer goods such as book bags, cell phones, shoes, umbrellas,
personal clothing, sporting equipment and the like, having a value of $250 or
less, may be donated by the Department to one or more political subdivisions,
public agencies or non-profit or charitable organizations servicing the
Montgomery community satisfying Section 501(c)(3) or (c)(19) of the Internal
Revenue Code.  Any property valued in excess of $250 may be donated to the
above entities if approved in advance by the Government Affairs Committee of
City Council, or its successor committee.  Personal property which is not
donated shall be sold as otherwise provided herein.  The proceeds of the
sale shall be paid to the Director of Finance, and shall be credited to the
general fund of the city, except to the extent as required by Ohio law that a
portion of such funds be donated to a citizen's reward program or alcohol and
drug addiction treatment programs.



      (5)   (a)   Personal property to be disposed of, valued in
excess of $250, which has not been donated as authorized herein may be sold
for a reasonable value to another political subdivision or agency of the
state, or shall be sold at public sale once such sale or other disposition
has been authorized by the Government Affairs Committee of City Council, or
its successor committee.  Upon recommendation of the Administration, public
sale may include any one or more of the following methods:



            1.   Internet auction;



            2.   Public auction with or without reserve
directed by the Department, which public auction may be contracted to a third
party and may include an off-site salvage auction; or



            3.   Public sale through advertisement for sealed
bids with sale to the lowest and best bidder.



         (b)   If property is to be sold by internet auction, the
Council shall adopt a resolution expressing its intent to sell property by
internet auction, which resolution shall include a description of how the
auction will be conducted and shall specify the number of days for bidding on
the property, which shall be no less than 15 days including Saturdays,
Sundays and legal holidays.  The resolution shall indicate whether the City
Administration will conduct the auction or whether the auction will be
contracted to a third party establishing the general terms and conditions of
such sale.  After adoption of the resolution, the Administration shall
publish in a newspaper of general circulation within the city, notice of its
intent to sell the personal property by internet auction.  The notice shall
include a summary of the information provided in the resolution and shall be
published not less than two nor more than four consecutive weeks with the
last notice appearing no less than 10 days prior to the date of the proposed
sale.  A similar notice shall be posted during the period of auction in the
offices of the Clerk of Council and through the city's website.  The
Government Affairs Committee of City Council may set a minimum price which
will be accepted for such items sold at internet auction and may establish
such other terms and conditions for sale including the requirement of
pick-up, delivery, method of payment and sales tax.



         (c)   If personal property is to be sold by public
auction or through public sale, other than a sale to another political
subdivision or agency of the state, a notice of such proposed sale shall be
published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city for not less
than two nor more than four consecutive weeks, with the last notice appearing
no less than 10 days prior to the date of the proposed sale.  The notice
shall provide a general description of the property to be sold and the terms
and conditions for such sale as may be established by the Government Affairs
Committee of City Council.



(Ord. 7-1993, passed 4-3-93; Am. Ord. 20-2006, passed 11-1-06; Am. Ord.
4-2007, passed 5-2-07; Am. Ord. 5-2007, passed 6-6-07)



CHAPTER 51: COMPREHENSIVE RIGHTS-OF-WAY REGULATIONS



Section



   51.01   Declaration of findings and purpose, scope, definitions



   51.02   Rights-of-way administration



   51.03   Discontinuance of operations, abandoned and unused facilities



   51.04   Nature of issuance



   51.05   Other approvals, permits and agreements



   51.06   Certificate of registration applications



   51.07   Reporting requirements



   51.08   Compensation for certificate of registration



   51.09   Oversight and regulation



   51.10   Registration term



   51.11   Adoption of rules and regulations



   51.12   Liquidated damages



   51.13   Termination of certificate of registration



   51.14   Unauthorized use of public rights-of-way



   51.15   PEG requirements for open video systems



   51.16   Assignment or transfer of ownership and renewal



   51.17   Construction permits



   51.18   Construction, relocation and restoration



   51.19   Minor maintenance permits



   51.20   Enforcement of permit obligation



   51.21   Construction and removal bonds



   51.22   Indemnification and liability



   51.23   General provisions



 



   51.99   Penalty



§ 51.01  DECLARATION OF FINDINGS AND PURPOSE, SCOPE, DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Findings and purpose.



      (1)   The City of Montgomery, Ohio (the "city") is vitally
concerned with the use of all rights-of-way in the city as such rights-of-way
are a valuable and limited resource which must be utilized to promote the
public health, safety, and welfare including the economic development of the
city.



      (2)   Changes in the public utilities and communication
industries have increased the demand and need for access to rights-of-way and
placement of facilities and structures therein.



      (3)   It is necessary to comprehensively plan and manage
access to, and structures and facilities in, the rights-of-way to promote
efficiency, discourage uneconomic duplication of facilities, lessen the
public inconvenience of uncoordinated work in the rights-of-way, and promote
the public health, safety, and welfare.



      (4)   The city has authority under the laws and Constitution
of the State of Ohio, including but not limited to Article 18, Sections 3, 4,
and 7, to regulate public and private entities which use the rights-of-way.



   (B)   Scope.  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all
users of the rights-of-way as provided herein except as provided in Chapter
94, Streets and Sidewalks.  To the extent that anything in this Chapter 51
conflicts with Chapter 94, then the provisions of this Chapter 51 shall
control.



   (C)   Definitions.  For the purposes of Chapter 51, the following
terms, phrases, words, and their derivations have the meanings set forth
herein.  When not inconsistent with the context, words in the present tense
include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular
number, and words in the singular number include the plural number.  The
words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive.  Words not
defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.  References
hereafter to "sections" are, unless otherwise specified, references to
sections in this chapter. Defined terms remain defined terms whether or not
capitalized.



   APPLICANT. Any person who seeks to obtain or renew a certificate of
registration or permit.



   APPLICATION. The process and format by which an applicant submits a
request to obtain a certificate of registration or permit.



   BANKRUPTCY ACT. The regulations promulgated by Title 11 of The United
States Code.



   BEST EFFORTS.  The best reasonable efforts under the circumstances,
taking into consideration, among other appropriate matters, all applicable
laws, regulations, safety, engineering and operational codes, available
technology, human resources, and cost.



   BOARD OF REVIEW.  The Board of Review of the City of Montgomery, Ohio
created by § 44.13. 



   CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.  The document issued to each provider and
its unique system to occupy the rights-of-way within the city and outlines
the terms of that occupancy of the rights-of-way.



   CITY.  The City of Montgomery, Ohio.



   CITY COUNCIL.  The legislative governing body of the city.



   CLERK OF COUNCIL.  The duly appointed Clerk on the City Council of
Montgomery, Ohio.



   CODIFIED ORDINANCES.  The Codified Ordinances of the City of
Montgomery, Ohio.



   CONFIDENTIAL/PROPRIETARY INFORMATION. All information that has been
either identified or clearly marked as confidential/proprietary by the
provider prior to any submission.  Upon receipt of such clearly marked
confidential/proprietary information from a provider, the city shall
endeavor, in accordance with the requirements of R.C. Chapter 149 (The Ohio
Public Records Act), to use all the same reasonable measures and exercise the
same degree of care that the city uses to protect its own information of such
a nature from disclosure to third parties.  In the event that the city
receives a request from a third party for disclosure of information a
provider has clearly marked as confidential/proprietary information, then the
city shall respond as required by R.C. Chapter 149, but will attempt to use
all reasonable means to notify the provider as soon as possible.



   CONSTRUCT.  Means, but shall not be limited to, dig, bore, tunnel,
trench, excavate, obstruct, install wires, install conduit, install pipes,
install transmission lines, install poles, install signs, or install
facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above,
within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. 
CONSTRUCT shall also include the act of opening and/or cutting into the
surface of any paved or improved surface that is any part of the right-of-way.



   CONSTRUCTION.  Means, but shall not be limited to, the act or process
of digging, boring, tunneling, trenching, excavating, obstructing, installing
wires, installing conduit, installing pipes, installing transmission lines,
installing poles, installing signs, or installing facilities, other than
landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below,
under, or through any part of the rights-of-way.  Construction shall also
include the act of opening and/or cutting into the surface of any paved or
improved surface that is part of the right-of-way.



   CONSTRUCTION BOND.  A bond posted to ensure proper and complete
construction, replacement and/or repair of a facility and/or the affected
rights-of-way pursuant to a permit.



   CONSTRUCTION AND MAJOR MAINTENANCE PLAN. A written plan including maps
of the expected location, design, other related equipment and facilities of a
provider which describes in full the construction intended to be accomplished
by the provider in the rights-of-way over the next calendar year.



   CONSTRUCTION PERMIT.  The permit as specified in §§ 51.17 et seq. of
the Codified Ordinances which must be obtained before a person may construct
in, locate in, occupy, maintain, move, or remove facilities from, in, or on a
rights-of-way.



   COUNTY.  Hamilton County, Ohio.



   CREDIBLE.  Worthy of being believed.



   DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS.  The Department of Public Works of the
city.



   DIRECTOR OF LAW.  The Director of Law of the City of Montgomery,
Ohio. 



   EMERGENCY. A condition that poses a clear and immediate danger to life,
health, or safety of a person, or of a significant loss of real or personal
property.



   FACILITIES.  Any tangible thing located in any rights-of-way within
the city; but shall not include mailboxes, boulevard plantings, ornamental
plantings, or gardens planted or maintained in the rights-of-way between a
person's property and the street edge of pavement.



   FCC.  The Federal Communications Commission, or any successor thereto.



   FULL.  Unable to accommodate any additional facilities in light of
applicable standards and using standard engineering practices as determined
by the Public Works Director; or, without negatively impacting public health
and safety; or, without violating any applicable laws or rules and
regulations.



   IN.  When used in conjunction with rights-of-way, means in, on, above,
within, over, below, under or through a rights-of-way.



   INSPECTOR.  Any person authorized by the Public Works Director to
carry out inspections related to the provisions of this chapter.



   LAW(S).  Any local, state, or federal legislative, judicial or
administrative order, certificate, decision, statute, constitution,
ordinance, resolution, regulation, rule, tariff, or other requirement in
effect either at the time of execution of this chapter or at any time during
the location of, and/or while a provider's facilities are located in the
public rights-of-way.



   MAJOR FACILITIES.  Those facilities defined as such in the rules and
regulations adopted by the Public Works Director pursuant to § 51.07(K)
herein. 



   MINOR MAINTENANCE PERMIT. A permit as specified in §§ 51.19 et seq.
which must be obtained before a person can perform minor maintenance, as set
forth in §§ 51.19 et seq., in or on the rights-of-way. 



   OHIO MANUAL OF UNIFORM TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.  The uniform system of
traffic control devices promulgated by the Ohio Department of Transportation
pursuant to R.C. § 4511.09.



   OHIO REVISED CODE orO.R.C. or R.C.  The Ohio Revised Code. 



   OHIO UTILITY PROTECTION SERVICE. The utility protection service as
defined in R.C. §§ 153.64 and 3781.26 or its statutory successor.



   OPEN VIDEO SERVICE.  Any video programming services provided by a
person through use of rights-of-way, which provider is certified by the FCC
to operate an Open Video System pursuant to §§ 651 et seq. of the
Telecommunications Act of 1996 (codified at 47 U.S.C. Title VI, Part V),
regardless of the facilities used.



   PERMIT.  A construction permit and/or a minor maintenance permit
unless otherwise specified.



   PERMIT COST(S).  As allowed by law, all costs borne by the city for
permit issuance



   PERMIT FEE(S).  Money paid to the city for a permit to construct and
do minor maintenance in the rights-of-way.



   PERMITTEE.  Any person to whom a construction permit and/or a minor
maintenance permit has been granted by the city and not revoked.



   PERSON.  Any natural or corporate person, business association, or
other business entity including, but not limited to, a partnership, a sole
proprietorship, a political subdivision, a public or private agency of any
kind, a utility, a successor or assign of any of the foregoing, or any other
legal entity, whether for profit or not for profit.



   PROVIDER. A person who owns or operates a system. The city or county,
and cable television operators operating pursuant to a valid cable franchise
shall also be considered providers. 



   PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR.  The Director of the Department of Public Works
of the City of Montgomery, Ohio, or his or her designee.



   PUCO.  The Public Utilities Commission of Ohio as defined in R.C. §
4901.02.



   REGISTRATION MAINTENANCE FEE.  The money paid to the city to maintain
a certificate of registration and compensate the city for costs associated
with rights-of-way management and administration.



   REMOVAL BOND.  A bond posted to ensure the availability of sufficient
funds to properly remove a provider's facilities upon abandonment, disuse, or
discontinuance of a provider's use or occupation of the rights-of-way.



   RESTORATION.  The process and the resultant effects by which
rights-of-way are returned to a condition at least as good, using the same
materials (or other similar materials approved by the Public Works Director),
as its condition immediately prior to construction.  Restoration shall occur
in accordance with the rules and regulations established by the Public Works
Director and as amended from time to time.



   RIGHT(S)-OF-WAY. The surface and space in, on, above, within, over,
below, under or through any real property in which the city has an interest
in law or equity, whether held in fee, or other estate or interest, or as a
trustee for the public, including, but not limited to any public street,
boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway,
river, tunnel, viaduct, bridge, conduit or any other place, area, or real
property owned by or under the legal or equitable control of the city, now or
hereafter, that consistent with the purposes for which it was dedicated, may
be used for the purposes of constructing, operating, repairing or replacing a
system.  Rights-of-way shall not include buildings, parks, or other public
property or easements that have not been dedicated to compatible uses, except
to the extent the use or occupation of such property is specifically granted
in a permit or by law. 



   RIGHT(S)-OF-WAY COST.  All direct, incidental and indirect costs borne
by the city for the management, administration and regulation of the
rights-of-way and this chapter.



   RULE(S) AND REGULATION(S).  Any rule and/or regulation adopted by the
Public Works Director pursuant to law.



   SERVICE(S).  The offering of any service or utility for a fee directly
to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available
directly to the public, or alternatively, the provision of any service or
utility between two or more points for a proprietary purpose to a class of
users other than the general public that in the opinion of the Public Works
Director constitutes a service.



   SERVICE AGREEMENT.  A valid service agreement, franchise agreement, or
operating agreement issued by the city pursuant to law and accepted by a
person, which allows such person to operate or provide utility service within
the geographic limits of the city.



   SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATION.  Any application made to construct on or in
more of the rights-of-way than previously allowed, or to extend, a permit
that had already been issued.



   SURETY FUND.  A formal pledge made to secure against loss, damage, or
default.



   SYSTEM.  Any system of conduit, ducts, cables, pipes, wires, lines,
towers, antennae wave guides, optic fiber, microwave, or laser beams, and any
associated converters, equipment, or facilities or utilities designed and
constructed for the purpose of producing, receiving, amplifying, delivering
or distributing service within the city.



   SYSTEM REPRESENTATIVE(S).  The specifically identified
agent(s)/employee(s) of a provider who are authorized to direct field
activities of that provider and serve as official notice agent(s) for system
related information.  Provider shall be required to make sure at least one
of its system representatives available at all times to receive notice of,
and immediately direct response to, system related emergencies or situations.



   TRANSFER. The disposal by the provider, directly or indirectly, by
gift, assignment, voluntary sale, merger, consolidation, or otherwise, of 51%
or more at one time of the ownership or controlling interest in the system,
or 51% cumulatively over the term of a certificate of registration of such
interests to a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust, or
association, or person or group of persons acting in concert.



   TRENCHLESS TECHNOLOGY.  Means, but shall not be limited to, the use of
directional boring, horizontal drilling, microtunneling and other techniques
in the construction of underground portions of facilities which result in the
least amount of disruption and damage to rights-of-way as possible.



   UNDERGROUND FACILITIES.  All lines, cables, conduits, pipes, posts,
tanks, vaults, wires and any other facilities which are located wholly or
partially underneath rights-of-way.



   UNUSED FACILITIES.  Facilities located in the rights-of-way which have
remained unused for 12 months or more and for which the provider is unable to
provide the city with a credible plan detailing the procedure by which the
provider intends to begin actively using such facilities within the next 12
months, or that it has a potential purchaser or user of the facilities who
will be actively using the facilities within the next 12 months, or, that the
availability of such facilities is required by the provider to adequately and
efficiently operate its system.



   UTILITY(IES).  Any water, sewer, gas, drainage, or culvert pipe and
any electric power, telecommunication, signal, communication, or cable
television conduit, fiber, wire,  cable, or operator thereof.



   UTILITY CORRIDOR(S).  Those specific areas of the rights-of-way
designated as such by the Director of Public Service pursuant to § 51.06(E)
herein.



   WORKING DAY. Any Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, or Friday
excluding legal holidays observed by the city.



(Ord. 10-2001, passed 9-5-01)



§ 51.02  RIGHTS-OF-WAY ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   Administration. The Public Works Director shall be the
principal city official responsible for the administration of this chapter
except as otherwise provided herein.  The Public Works Director may delegate
any or all of the duties hereunder to a designee of his or her choice.



   (B)   Rights-of-way occupancy.  Each person who occupies, uses, or
seeks to occupy or use the rights-of-way to operate a system located in the
rights-of-way, or who has or seeks to have, a system located in any
rights-of-way, unless specifically exempted by R.C. § 4939.02(D), shall
apply for and obtain a certificate of registration pursuant to this
chapter.  Any person owning, operating or maintaining a system without a
certificate of registration, including persons operating under a permit,
license or franchise issued by the city prior to the effective date of this
chapter, shall apply for and obtain a certificate of registration from the
city within six months of the effective date of this chapter, unless exempted
by § 51.02(D).  Applications will consist of providing the application
information set forth in §§ 51.06 et seq. and as reasonably required by the
Public Works Director.



   (C)   No construction without certificate of registration. 
Following the effective date of this chapter, no person shall construct or
perform any work, or use any system or any part thereof, located in, on,
above, within, over, below, under, or through any rights-of-way without first
obtaining a certificate of registration.  For the purposes of this section
only, a person with a system in place at the time of the effective date of
this chapter shall not be considered immediately in violation of this
section, but shall have up to six months from the effective date of this
chapter to obtain a certificate of registration. 



   (D)   Exceptions.  The following entities are not obligated to
obtain a certificate of registration: the city; the county; cable television
operators for the limited purpose of providing only cable television service
and operating pursuant to a valid cable television franchise; resellers of
services that do not own any system or facilities in the rights-of-way; a
person that possesses a valid service agreement (such exception for a service
agreement shall only be for the limited specific purpose and term provided
for in the service agreement document).



   (E)   Systems in place without a certificate of registration. 
Beginning one year after the effective date of this chapter, any system or
part of a system found in a rights-of-way for which a certificate of
registration has not been obtained, unless specifically exempted by R.C. §
4939.02(D) shall be deemed to be a nuisance and an unauthorized use of the
rights-of-way.  The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law
or in equity, including, but not limited to abating the nuisance; taking
possession of the facilities and/or non-complying portion of such system;
and/or prosecuting the violator.



   (F)   Future uses.  In allowing facilities to be placed in the
rights-of-way, the city is not liable for any damages caused thereby to any
provider's facilities that are already in place.  No provider is entitled to
rely on the provisions of this chapter as creating a special duty to any
provider.



(Ord. 10-2001, passed 9-5-01)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.03  DISCONTINUANCE OF OPERATIONS, ABANDONED AND UNUSED FACILITIES.



   (A)   A provider who has discontinued or is discontinuing operation
of any system in the city shall:



      (1)   Provide information satisfactory to the city that the
provider's obligations for its system in the rights-of-way under this chapter
and any other chapters in the Codified Ordinances or other laws have been
lawfully assumed by another applicant and/or provider; or



      (2)   Submit a written proposal to re-use its facilities in a
manner that promotes the city's goals of providing innovative and economic
solutions to efficiently and economically utilize limited rights-of-way
capacity.  Said proposal must be approved by the Public Works Director; or



      (3)   Submit a written proposal for abandonment of facilities
in place indicating why good engineering practice would support this type of
solution.  Said proposal must be approved by the Public Works Director; or



      (4)   Completely remove its entire system within a reasonable
amount of time and in a manner acceptable to the city; or



      (5)   submit to the City, in good faith and within a
reasonable amount of time, and in accordance with R.C. §§ 4905.20 and
4905.21, a proposal for transferring ownership of its facilities to the
city.  If a provider proceeds under this clause, the city may, at its option:



         (a)   Purchase the facilities; or



         (b)   Unless a valid removal bond has already been
provided pursuant to § 51.21(B), require the provider to post a bond in an
amount sufficient to reimburse the city for its reasonably anticipated costs
to be incurred in removing the facilities.



   (B)   Facilities of a provider who fails to comply with this section
and which remain unused facilities shall be deemed to be abandoned. 
Abandoned facilities are deemed to be a nuisance.  The city may exercise any
remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited
to:  abating the nuisance; or taking possession of the facilities and
restoring them to a useable condition subject to the finding of the PUCO
pursuant to the requirements of R.C. §§ 4905.20 and 4905.21; or requiring
removal of the facilities by the provider or by the provider's surety.  If
the city determines to require a provider to remove unused facilities in any
rights-of-way, the city shall use reasonable efforts to direct that this
removal occur in conjunction with other scheduled excavation of the
rights-of-way.  If the city abates the nuisance it may take all action
necessary to recover its costs to abate said nuisance, including but not
limited to, those methods set forth in R.C. § 715.261.



(Ord. 10-2001, passed 9-5-01)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.04  NATURE OF ISSUANCE.



   A certificate of registration shall not convey equitable or legal title
in the rights-of-way.  A certificate of registration is only the
nonexclusive, limited right to occupy rights-of-way in the city for the
limited purposes and for the limited period stated in the certificate of
registration and in accordance with Codified Ordinances Chapter 51 and all
laws including any rules and regulations adopted by the Public Works
Director.  The rights to locate facilities and/or a system in and the rights
to occupy the right-of-way itself may not be subdivided or subleased;
provided, however provider may sublease capacity (or other non-material
facility aspects) and two or more providers may collocate facilities in the
same area of the rights-of-way so long as each such provider complies with
the provisions of this chapter.  Collocating providers may file a joint
application for a construction permit.  A certificate of registration does
not excuse a provider from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment
agreements before collocating its facilities on facilities of others,
including the city's facilities.  A certificate of registration does not
prevent a provider from leasing space in or on the provider's system, so long
as the sharing of facilities does not cause a violation of law, including the
provisions of this chapter.  A certificate of registration does not excuse a
provider from complying with any provisions of this chapter or other
applicable law.



(Ord. 10-2001, passed 9-5-01)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.05  OTHER APPROVALS, PERMITS AND AGREEMENTS.



   In addition to a certificate of registration, providers shall obtain
any and all regulatory approvals, permits, authorizations, or licenses
necessary for the offering or provision of such services from the appropriate
federal, state and local authorities and upon the city's reasonable request,
shall provide copies of such documents to the city.  Further, a certificate
of registration issued pursuant to this chapter shall not entitle a provider
to use, alter, convert to, or interfere with, the facilities, easements,
poles, conduits, lines, pipelines, wires, fiber, cable, or any other real or
personal property of any kind whatsoever under the management or control of
the city.



(Ord. 10-2001, passed 9-5-01)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.06  CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Certificate of registration applications.  To obtain a
certificate of registration to construct, own, or maintain any system within
the city, an application must be filed with the City on the form adopted by
the Department of Public Works which is hereby incorporated by reference. 
All applications shall be accompanied by a non-refundable $2,000 application
fee which will pay for internal processing and administrative costs
associated with the application process. 



   (B)   Application information.  The applicant shall keep all of the
information required in this section current at all times, provided that
applicant or provider shall notify the city of any changes and/or additions
to the information required by § 51.06(B)(2)  within 15 days following the
date on which the applicant or provider has knowledge of any such change and
shall notify the city of any changes to other information required by §
51.06(B) et seq. within 30 days following the date on which the applicant or
provider has knowledge of such change.  The information provided to the city
at the time of application shall include, but not be limited to:



      (1)   Each applicant's name, legal status (i.e. partnership,
corporation, etc.), street address, and telephone and facsimile numbers.



      (2)   The name, street address, and telephone and facsimile
numbers of one or more system representative(s).  At least one system
representative shall be available at all times.  Current information
regarding how to contact the system representative(s) in an emergency shall
be provided at the time of application and shall be updated as necessary to
assure accurate contact information is available to the city at all times.



      (3)   A certificate of insurance shall be provided to meet the
requirements of this section that shall:



         (a)   Verify that an insurance policy has been issued to
the applicant by an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of
Ohio that carries a financial rating of not less than "A" in the most recent
addition of "Bests Key Rating Guide" published by AM Best (or its equivalent
successor);



         (b)   Verify that the applicant is insured on an
occurrence basis against claims for personal injury, including death, as well
as claims for property damage arising out of the:  use and occupancy of the
rights-of-way by the applicant, its officers, agents, employees and
contractors; and placement and use of facilities in the rights-of-way by the
applicant, its officers, agents, employees and contractors, including, but
not limited to, protection against liability arising from any and all
operations, damage of underground facilities, explosion, environmental
release, and collapse of property;



         (c)   Name the city, its elected officials, officers,
employees, agents and volunteers as additional insureds as to whom the
comprehensive general liability and completed operation and products
liability insurance required herein are in force and applicable and for whom
defense will be provided as to all such coverages;



         (d)   Require that the city be notified 30 days in
advance of cancellation of, or coverage changes in, the policy.  The
liability insurance policies required by this section shall contain the
following endorsement:  "It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy
may not be diminished in value, be canceled, nor the intention not to renew
be stated, until 30 days after receipt by the city, by registered mail,
return receipt requested, of a written notice addressed to the Public Works
Director or her/his designee of such intent to cancel, diminish, or not to
renew."  Within 30 days after receipt by the city of said notice, and in no
event later than five days prior to said cancellation, the provider (or
applicant) shall obtain and provide to the Public Works Director a
certificate of insurance evidencing appropriate replacement insurance
policies.



         (e)   Satisfy the requirements for comprehensive
liability coverage and umbrella coverage as follows:



            1.  Comprehensive general liability insurance:
Comprehensive general liability insurance to cover liability, bodily injury,
premises operation, and property damage must be maintained.  Coverage must
be written on an occurrence basis, with the following minimum limits of
liability and provisions, or their equivalent:



               A.   Bodily injury:



                  Each occurrence: $1,000,000



                  Annual aggregate: $3,000,000



               B.   Property damage:



                  Each occurrence: $1,000,000



                  Annual aggregate:  $3,000,000



               C.   Personal injury:



                  Annual aggregate: $3,000,000



               D.     State that completed operations and
products liability shall be maintained for six months after the termination
of or expiration of a certificate of registration.



               E.   Include coverage for property damage
liability insurance  for the following hazards: E - explosion, C - collapse,
U - underground.



      (4)   Comprehensive auto liability insurance:  Comprehensive
auto liability insurance to cover owned, hired, and non-owned vehicles must
be maintained.  Applicant may maintain comprehensive auto liability
insurance as part of applicant's comprehensive general liability insurance,
however, said insurance is subject to approval by the  Public Works Director
or her or his designee.  Coverage must be written on an occurrence basis,
with the following limits of liability and provisions, or their equivalent:



         (a)   Bodily injury:



            Each occurrence: $1,000,000



            Annual aggregate: $3,000,000



         (b)   Property damage:



            Each occurrence: $1,000,000



            Annual aggregate: $3,000,000



      (5)   Additional insurance:  The city reserves the right in
unusual or unique circumstances to require any other insurance coverage it
deems reasonably necessary after review of any proposal submitted by
applicant.



      (6)   Self-insurance: Those applicants maintaining a book
value in excess of $20,000,000 may submit a statement requesting to
self-insure.  If approval to self-insure is granted, applicant shall assure
the city that such self-insurance shall provide the city with no less than
would have been afforded to the city by a third party insurer providing
applicant with the types and amounts of coverage detailed in this section. 
This statement shall include:



         (a)   Audited financial statements for the previous
year; and



         (b)   A description of the applicant's self-insurance
program; and



         (c)   A listing of any and all actions against or claims
made against applicant for amounts over $1,000,000 or proof of available
excess umbrella liability coverage to satisfy all total current claim amounts
above $20,000,000.



      (7)   City's examination of, or failure to request or demand,
any evidence of insurance in accordance with this chapter, shall not
constitute a waiver of any requirement of this section and the existence of
any insurance shall not limit applicant's obligations under this chapter.



      (8)   Documentation that applicant or provider maintains
standard workers' compensation insurance as required by law.  Similarly,
provider shall require any subcontractor to provide workers' compensation
insurance in amounts required by law for all of the subcontractor's employees.



      (9)   If the person is a corporation, a copy of the
certificate of incorporation (or its legal equivalent), as recorded and
certified to by the secretary of state (or legal equivalent) in the state or
country in which incorporated.



      (10)   A copy of the person's certificate of authority (or
other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the PUCO and/or the
FCC and any other approvals, permits, or agreements as set out in § 51.05.



      (11)   Upon request of the city, a narrative (or if applicable
PUCO/FCC application information) describing applicant's proposed activities
in the city including credible information detailing applicant's financial,
managerial, and technical ability to fulfill applicant's obligations under
this chapter and carry on applicant's proposed activities.



   (C)   Criteria for issuance of a certificate of registration.  In
deciding whether to issue a certificate of registration, the city shall
consider:



      (1)   Whether the issuing of the certificate of registration
will contribute to the health, safety, and welfare of the city and its
citizens; and



      (2)   Whether issuing of the certificate of registration will
be consistent with this chapter; and



      (3)   Whether applicant has submitted a complete application
and has secured all certificates and other authorizations required by law in
order to construct and operate a system in the manner proposed by the
applicant; and



      (4)   Whether the applicant is delinquent on any taxes or
other obligations owed to the city or Hamilton County or State of Ohio; and



      (5)   Whether the applicant has the requisite financial,
managerial, and technical ability to fulfill all its obligations under this
chapter and the issuance of a certificate of registration; and



      (6)   Any other applicable law.



   (D)   Obligations of a provider upon receipt of a certificate of
registration.  In addition to the other requirements set forth herein and in
the rules and regulations each provider shall:



      (1)   Use its best efforts to cooperate with other providers
and users of the rights-of-way and the city for the best, most efficient, and
least obtrusive use of rights-of-way, consistent with safety, and to minimize
traffic and other disruptions including street cuts; and



      (2)   When possible, participate in joint planning,
construction and advance notification of rights-of-way work, as may be
required by the city; and



      (3)   Upon reasonable written notice, and at the direction of
the Public Works Director, promptly remove or rearrange facilities as
necessary for public safety; and



      (4)   Perform all work, construction, maintenance or removal
of facilities within the rights-of-way, including tree trimming consistent
with the Chapter 100 Tree Maintenance, in accordance with good engineering,
construction and arboricultural practice including any appropriate state
building codes, safety codes and Law and use best efforts to repair and
replace any street, curb or other portion of the rights-of-way, or facilities
located therein, to a condition to be determined by the Public Works Director
to be adequate under current standards and not less than materially
equivalent to its condition prior to such work and to do so in a manner which
minimizes any inconvenience to the public, the city and other providers, all
in accordance with all applicable provisions of this chapter, any rules and
regulations the city may adopt and the Codified Ordinances of the city; and



      (5)   Construct, install, operate and maintain its facilities
and system in a manner consistent with all laws, ordinances, construction
standards and governmental requirements including, but not limited to, The
National Electric Safety Code, National Electric Code and applicable FCC or
other Federal, State and local regulations; and



      (6)   Be on notice that removal of trees within the
rights-of-way of the city requires prior written approval by the City
Manager.  Any such tree that is removed without the City Manager's written
permission shall be replaced, at the sole expense of the responsible person,
with a healthy tree of like kind; and



      (7)   Warrant that all worker facilities, conditions and
procedures that are used during construction, installation, operation and
maintenance of the provider's facilities within the rights-of-way shall
comply with all applicable standards of the Federal Occupational Safety and
Health Administration; and



      (8)   Use its best efforts to cooperate with the city in any
emergency involving the rights-of-way; and



      (9)   Providers shall field identify their facilities in the
rights-of-way whenever providers are notified by the city that the city has
determined that such identification is reasonably necessary in order for the
city to begin planning for the construction, paving, maintenance, repairing,
relocating or in any way altering any street or area in the rights-of-way as
defined in this chapter.  The city shall notify the providers of the city's
date to begin the process at least 60 days prior to the commencement of said
activities; and



         (a)   Providers shall identify all facilities that are
within the affected rights-of-way using customary industry standards and
distinct identification.



         (b)   Facilities will be so marked as to identify the
provider responsible for said facility.



         (c)   Should any such marking interfere with the
facilities function, create a safety problem or violate any safety code,
alternative methods of marking the facilities may be approved by the Public
Works Director.



         (d)   Provider shall, weather permitting, remove all
graffiti within 14 calendar days of notice.  Provider shall remove any and
all graffiti on any of the provider's facilities located within the city
rights-of-way.  Should the provider fail to do so, the city may take
whatever action is necessary to remove the graffiti and bill the provider for
the cost thereof.



         (e)   All marking should be clearly readable from the
ground and include the provider's name or logo only.  No advertising will be
permitted.



   (E)   Establishment of utility corridors.



      (1)   The Public Works Director may assign specific corridors
within the rights-of-way, or any particular segment thereof as may be
necessary, for each type of facilities that are, or that the Public Works
Director expects, may someday be, located within the rights-of-way.



      (2)   Any provider whose facilities are in the rights-of-way
and are in a position at variance with utility corridors established by the
Public Works Director shall at the time of the next construction of the area,
excluding normal maintenance activities, move such facilities to their
assigned position within the rights-of-way.  This requirement may be waived
by the Public Works Director for good cause shown including, but not limited
to, consideration of such factors as: the remaining economic life or the
facilities, public safety, customer service needs, and hardship to the
provider.



      (3)   The Public Works Director shall make every good faith
attempt to accommodate all existing and potential users of the rights-of-way
as set forth in this chapter.



      (4)   Providers may enter into written agreements to use
existing poles and conduits with the owners of same and shall use best
efforts for installing their facilities within the rights-of-way.



      (5)   No facility placed in the rights-of-way shall be placed
in such a manner that interferes with normal travel on such rights-of-way.



      (6)   Unless otherwise stated in a certificate of registration
or permit, all facilities within the rights-of-way shall be constructed and
located in accordance with this chapter and with the following provisions:



         (a)   Whenever all existing facilities that have been
traditionally located overhead are located underground in a certain area
within the city, a provider who desires to place its facilities in the same
area must also locate its facilities underground;



         (b)   Whenever a provider is required to locate or
relocate facilities underground within a certain area of the city, every
provider with facilities within the same area of the city shall concurrently
relocate their facilities underground.



(Ord. 10-2001, passed 9-5-01)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.07  REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Reporting obligations of providers.  Each provider shall at
the time of initial application, and between January 1st and February 28th of
each following calendar year, meet with the Public Works Director to discuss
the providers upcoming construction activities and planned annual system
maintenance.  Following such meeting and upon the request of the Public
Works Director, the provider shall file a construction and major maintenance
plan with the Department of Public Works.  Such construction and major
maintenance plan shall be filed with the Department of Public Works within 60
days of the request of the Public Works Director shall be provided for all
geographical areas requested by the Public Works Director, up to and
including the entire geographical area of city.  It shall be submitted using
a format(s) mutually agreeable to the provider and the city and shall contain
the information determined by the Public Works Director to be necessary to
facilitate the coordination and reduction in the frequency of construction in
the rights-of-way.  The construction and major maintenance plan shall
include, but not be limited to, all currently scheduled and/or anticipated
construction or major maintenance projects for the next calendar year; if
none are scheduled or anticipated then the plan should so state.  All
confidential/proprietary information submitted herein shall be so labeled.



   (B)   Mapping data.



      (1)   Upon application for a certificate of registration, a
provider shall provide the city, upon the reasonable request of the Public
Works Director, with information regarding the location of its major
facilities in the right-of-way in a format that is readily available to the
provider.  Following that initial provision of information and upon the
reasonable request of the Public Works Director, which request shall not
occur more than once annually, every provider shall provide to the city, in a
format that is readily available to the provider, all location information
for all major facilities which it owns or over which it has control and which
are located in any rights-of-way.  All such information as described above
shall be provided for the geographical area (up to and including the entire
geographic area of the city), with the specificity as requested by the Public
Works Director and in a format(s) mutually acceptable to the provider and the
city.  Submission of this information is anticipated to be required
beginning January 1, 2002.  If the data required to be submitted in this
section is stored in an electronic format then the provider shall only be
required to provide such electronic data that is then currently capable of
being readily incorporated into the city's electronic database.  All
confidential/proprietary information submitted herein shall be so labeled.



      (2)   The Public Works Director may in the future adopt rules
and regulations and further define the mapping data requirement(s) under this
section.  In each instance a provider shall be served with a copy of the
specifications by regular U.S. Mail to the company representative identified
in § 51.06(B)(2) and in accordance with § 51.23(D); provided, however, that
failure to actually receive such notice shall not in any way affect the
validity or enforceability of said specifications.



(Ord. 10-2001, passed 9-5-01)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.08  COMPENSATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.



   (A)   Compensation.  As compensation for the city's costs to
administer this chapter and the rights-of-way and for each certificate of
registration issued pursuant to this chapter, every provider or any person
operating a system shall annually pay to the city registration maintenance
fees determined as follows:



      (1)   Providers utilizing less than ten miles of  the
rights-of-way within the city shall pay a fee of $2,000 per year.



      (2)   Providers utilizing equal to or greater than ten miles
of the rights-of-way within the city shall pay a fee of $4,000 per year.



      (3)   Cable companies operating under non-exclusive franchises
that are compensating the city under other mechanisms and any person that
possesses a service agreement shall not be required to contribute to the
recovery of rights-of-way costs as defined by this chapter with the exception
of permit fees.  Such non-contribution to the recovery of rights-of-way
costs shall be limited to the specific purpose and term provided for in the
person's non-exclusive franchise or service agreement.



   (B)   Timing.  Registration maintenance fees shall be paid in
advance by January 1st of each calendar year.  Registration maintenance fees
shall be paid in full for the first year of the registration as a condition
of the certificate of registration becoming effective.  Fees may be prorated
from the effective date of the certificate of registration to the end of the
calendar year if less than one full year.  Payment of any and all
registration maintenance fees shall be waived until July 1, 2002.



   (C)   Taxes and assessments.  To the extent taxes or other
assessments are imposed by taxing authorities on the use of city property as
a result of a provider's use or occupation of the rights-of-way, the provider
shall be responsible for payment of such taxes.  Such payments shall be in
addition to any other fees payable pursuant to this chapter and shall not be
considered an offset to, or in lieu of, the fees and charges listed in this
chapter.  The registration maintenance fee is not in lieu of any tax, fee,
or other assessment except as specifically provided in this chapter, or as
required by applicable law.  By way of example, and not limitation, permit
fees and fees to obtain space on city-owned poles are not waived and remain
applicable.



   (D)   Interest on late payments.  In the event that any
registration maintenance fee is not paid to the city by January 31, a monthly
late charge of 1% of the unpaid balance shall be paid by the provider for
each month or any portion thereof for which payment is not made.



   (E)   No accord and satisfaction.  No acceptance by the city of any
registration maintenance fee shall be construed as an accord that the amount
paid is in fact the correct amount, nor shall such acceptance of such
registration maintenance fee payment be construed as a release of any claim
the city may have for additional sums payable.



   (F)   Costs of publication.  A provider shall assume newspaper or
other appropriate publication costs of up to $1,000 associated with its
certificate of registration that may be required by law or that may otherwise
be required by its application for a certificate of registration or other
permit as provided for herein.



(Ord. 10-2001, passed 9-5-01)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.09  OVERSIGHT AND REGULATION.



   (A)   Reports.  Upon reasonable request of the Public Works
Director, a provider shall provide the city with a list of any and all
material communications, public reports, petitions, or other filings, either
received from or submitted to any municipal, county, state or federal agency
or official (and any response thereto submitted by or received by a
provider), and any other information or report reasonably related to a
provider's obligations under this chapter which in any way materially affects
the operation of the system or a provider's representations and warranties
set forth herein, but not including tax returns or other filings which are
confidential.  Upon request, a provider shall promptly, but in no case later
than 15 business days following the request, deliver to the city a complete
copy of any item on said list.  Upon the request of the city, a provider
shall promptly submit to the city any information or report reasonably
related to a provider's obligations under this chapter, its business and
operations with respect to the system or its operation, in such form and
containing such information as the city shall specify. Such information or
report shall be accurate and complete and supplied within 15 days.  All
confidential/proprietary information submitted herein shall be so labeled. 



   (B)   Confidentiality.  All information submitted to the city that
is considered trade secret and/or confidential/proprietary information must
be clearly marked as such when submitted. Pursuant to § 51.01(C)(11), the
city shall follow the requirements of R.C. § 149.43 regarding the disclosure
of trade secrets and/or confidential/proprietary information.



   (C)   Provider's expense. All reports and records required under
this chapter shall be furnished at the sole expense of a provider, except as
otherwise provided in this chapter.



   (D)   Right of inspection and audit.  If a provider asserts that
the compensation it is required to pay under § 51.08(A) for a certificate of
registration should be less than the city is requiring the provider to pay,
based upon the system usage requirements in § 51.08(A), or if the city
reasonably believes that such provider should be paying a greater amount of
compensation as required under § 51.08(A), then the city's designated
representatives shall have the right to inspect, examine, or audit during
normal business hours and upon reasonable notice to a provider under the
circumstances, all documents, records, or other information which pertain to
a provider and its operation of a system or its obligation under this
chapter. All such documents shall be made available during regular business
hours and within the city or in such other place that the city and the
provider may mutually agree upon in writing in order to facilitate said
inspection, examination, or audit, provided however, that if such documents
are located outside of the city, then a provider shall pay the reasonable
expenses incurred by the city's designated representatives in traveling to
and from such location.  Provider shall also reimburse the city for the
total cost incurred by the city if the city finds it necessary to utilize a
third party to assist with or conduct an investigation or audit.



(Ord. 10-2001, passed 9-5-01)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.10  REGISTRATION TERM.



   Each certificate of registration granted under this chapter shall be
valid from the date of issuance until such time as it is revoked, terminated,
has lapsed, or is properly amended.



(Ord. 10-2001, passed 9-5-01)



§ 51.11  ADOPTION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   In accordance with the provisions of this Chapter 51, the
Public Works Director may promulgate administrative rules and regulations, as
the Public Works Director deems appropriate, to carry out the express
purposes and intents of this chapter.



   (B)   Such rules and regulations shall not materially increase the
obligation of any provider hereunder, provided however that:



      (1)   The adoption of rules and regulations increasing fees; or



      (2)   The requiring of the placement of facilities in
designated portions of the rights-of-way, underground; or,



      (3)   The requiring of:



         (a)   The overbuilding of facilities; or,



         (b)   Joint builds shall not be construed as materially
increasing the obligation of a provider; and,



      (4)   The Public Works Director may develop and implement
rules and regulations by filing same with the Clerk of Council for
publication.  The Clerk shall file a copy of the proposed rules with the
Public Works Committee of Council.  The Clerk shall publish notice in a
newspaper of general circulation in the community one day each week for two
consecutive weeks, notifying the general public on the time, date and place
of the meeting of the Public Works Committee when such rules will be reviewed
and that a copy of such proposed rules is available for inspection at the
Office of the Clerk during regular business hours.  The first publication
shall occur no less than three weeks prior to the meeting of the Public Works
Committee when such rules will be considered.  The proposed rules shall then
become effective 30 days after approval by the Public Works Committee of
Council.



(Ord. 10-2001, passed 9-5-01)



§ 51.12  LIQUIDATED DAMAGES.



   In addition to any other penalties set forth in this chapter, and the
remedy of specific performance or other remedies, which may be enforced in a
court of competent jurisdiction, the Public Works Director may assess an
additional penalty of civil forfeiture for failure to comply with any
provision of this chapter.  Said penalty shall be a monetary sum, payable to
the city, in the amount of $500 per 24-hour day of violation and any
subsequent portion of a day less than 24 hours in length.  Prior to
assessing said penalty, the Public Works Director shall provide written
notice to the provider detailing the failure to comply with a specific
provision of this chapter.  Said notice shall indicate that said penalty
shall be assessed in 15 calendar days after service of the notice if
compliance is not achieved.  If a provider desires to challenge said
penalty, provider shall request a hearing before the Board of Review by
filing a request for appeal with the Office of the Clerk of Council within
ten days of service of the notice.  Said hearing shall be held within 30
days of the provider's request.  If provider requests such hearing before
the Board of Review, said penalty shall be temporarily suspended.  However,
if, after the hearing, the Board of Review determines that provider failed to
comply with the specific provision of this chapter referenced in the notice,
said penalty shall be assessed starting 15 calendar days after service of the
notice referenced in this section and continuing for each day thereafter
until compliance is achieved.  The determination of the Board of Review
shall be a final administrative decision appealable as provided in the Ohio
Revised Code for administrative decisions.



(Ord. 10-2001, passed 9-5-01)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.13  TERMINATION OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.



   (A)   The Public Works Director shall give written notice of default
to a provider if it is determined that a provider has:



      (1)   Violated any material provision or requirement of the
issuance or acceptance of a certificate of registration or any law of the
city, state, or federal government; or



      (2)   Attempted to evade any provision or requirement of the
issuance of a certificate of registration or the acceptance of it; or



      (3)   Practiced any fraud or deceit upon city; or



      (4)   Made a material misrepresentation of fact in its
application for a certificate of registration.



   (B)   If a provider fails to cure a default within 30 calendar days
after such notice is served by the city then such default shall be a material
breach and city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in
equity to terminate the certificate of registration.  If the Public Works
Director decides there is cause or reason to terminate, the following
procedure shall be followed:



      (1)   City shall serve a provider with a written notice of the
reason or cause for proposed termination and shall allow a provider a minimum
of  15 calendar days to cure its breach.



      (2)   If the provider fails to cure within 15 calendar days,
the Public Works Director may declare the certificate of registration
terminated.



      (3)   The provider shall have 15 calendar days to appeal the
termination to the Board of Review by filing a request for appeal with the
Office of the Clerk of Council.  All such appeals shall be in writing.  If
the Board of Review determines there was not a breach, then the Board of
Review shall overturn the decision of the Public Works Director.  Otherwise,
the Board of Review shall affirm the decision of the Public Works Director to
terminate. The determination of the Board of Review shall be a final
administrative decision appealable as provided in the Ohio Revised Code for
administrative decisions.



(Ord. 10-2001, passed 9-5-01)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.14  UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.



   (A)   No person shall use the rights-of-way to operate a system that
has not been authorized by the city in accordance with the terms of this
chapter and been issued a certificate of registration.



   (B)   No provider shall place or have placed any facilities in, on,
above, within, over, below, under, or through the rights-of-way, unless
allowed under this chapter or having been issued a certificate of
registration.



   (C)   Each and every unauthorized use shall be deemed to be a
violation and a distinct and separate offense.  Each and every day any
violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a distinct and separate
offense.



   (D)   No person shall fail to comply with the provisions of this
chapter. Each and every failure to comply shall be deemed a distinct and
separate offense.  Each and every day any violation of this chapter
continues shall constitute a distinct and separate offense.



(Ord. 10-2001, passed 9-5-01)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.15  PEG REQUIREMENTS FOR OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS.



   Any provider that receives a certificate from the FCC to provide open
video services in the city shall notify the city of such certification. Any
provider that operates an open video system shall comply with all applicable
laws and FCC rules and regulations including those regarding support for
public, educational, and governmental access ("PEG").



(Ord. 10-2001, passed 9-5-01)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.16  ASSIGNMENT OR TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP AND RENEWAL.



   (A)   Assignment of transfer approval required.  A certificate of
registration shall not be assigned or transferred, either in whole or in
part, without requesting the consent of the city through the Public Works
Director.  Upon the reasonable written request of the Public Works Director,
a provider requesting an assignment or transfer shall provide the city with a
completed copy of any application documents required by the PUCO and/or FCC
for such an assignment or transfer.  If the city should object to such
assignment or transfer without requesting such additional PUCO and/or FCC
documents, it shall serve the provider with notice of the objection within 30
days following receipt of the provider's initial request.  If the city
should object to such an assignment or transfer following the request of
additional PUCO and/or FCC documents then the city will serve the provider
with notice of any objection within 15 days following receipt of all copies
of the required PUCO and/or FCC application documents.  If no objection is
served upon the provider within 30 days of the city's receipt of the initial
assignment or transfer request and the city has not requested additional PUCO
and/or FCC documents, then the city shall be deemed to have provided its
consent to the requested assignment or transfer by operation of law.  If no
objection is served upon the provider within 15 days of the city's receipt of
all the required PUCO and/or FCC documents and the city has requested such
additional documents, then the city shall be deemed to have provided its
consent to the requested assignment or transfer by operation of law.



   (B)   Certificate of registration and assignee/ transferee signature
required.  In no event shall a transfer or assignment of ownership or
control be ultimately acceptable to the city without transferee or assignee
requesting and being issued a replacement certificate of registration with 90
days of transfer or assignment.



(Ord. 10-2001, passed 9-5-01)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.17  CONSTRUCTION PERMITS.



   (A)   Construction permit requirement.  Except as otherwise
provided in the Codified Ordinances, no person may construct in any
rights-of-way without first having obtained a construction permit as set
forth in this chapter.  This requirement shall be in addition to any
requirement set forth in Codified Ordinances.



      (1)   A construction permit allows the permittee to construct
and to obstruct travel, in the specified portion of the rights-of-way as
described in the construction permit while placing facilities described
therein, to the extent and for the duration specified therein.



      (2)   Unless otherwise specified, a construction permit is
valid for six months from date of issuance for the area of rights-of-way
specified in the permit.



      (3)   No permittee may construct in the rights-of-way beyond
the date or dates specified in the construction permit unless such permittee:



         (a)   Makes a supplementary application for another
construction permit before the expiration of the initial construction permit;
and



         (b)   Is granted a new construction permit or
construction permit extension.



      (4)   Original construction permits issued under this chapter
shall, when possible, be conspicuously displayed at all times at the
indicated work site and be available for inspection by Inspectors and
authorized city personnel. If the original construction permit is not
conspicuously displayed at the indicated work site or the project involves
work conducted simultaneously at multiple locations, then upon request, the
construction permit must be produced within 12 business hours.



   (B)   Construction permit applications. Application for a
construction permit shall be made to the Director of the Department of Public
Works.  In addition to any information required by the Public Works
Director, all construction permit applications shall contain, and will only
be considered complete upon compliance with the following provisions:



      (1)   Evidence that the applicant has been issued a
certificate of registration (if one is required for the application) or proof
that the applicant has written authority to apply for a construction permit
on behalf of a party that has been issued a certificate of registration; and



      (2)   Submission of a completed construction permit
application in the form required by the Public Works Director, including, but
not limited to, all required attachments, scaled, and dated drawings (or
other information acceptable to the Public Works Director) showing the
location and area of the proposed project, number and location of street
cuts, and the location of all existing and proposed facilities, accompanied
by the certification of a registered professional engineer or other trained
technical personnel acceptable to the Public Works Director that the
drawings, plans and specifications submitted with the application comply with
applicable technical codes, rules and regulations; and



      (3)   A city approved traffic control plan demonstrating the
protective measures and devices that will be employed, consistent with the
Ohio Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage
to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian
and vehicular traffic; and



      (4)   If the applicant proposes to replace existing poles with
larger poles within the rights-of-way, the applicant shall, upon the
reasonable request of the Public Works Director, provide:



         (a)   Evidence satisfactory to the city that there is no
excess capacity on existing poles or in existing underground systems; and



         (b)   Evidence to the city that it is not financially
and/or technically practicable for the applicant to make an underground
installation or locate its facilities on existing poles; and



         (c)   The location, size, height, color, and material of
the proposed replacement poles; and



         (d)   Evidence satisfactory to the city that the
applicant will adhere to all the applicable laws concerning the installation
of such replacement poles.



      (5)   If applicant is proposing an underground installation in
existing ducts or conduits within the right-of-way, the applicant shall
provide credible information satisfactory to the city to sufficiently detail
and identify:



         (a)   The location, approximate depth, size, and
quantity of the existing ducts and conduits. 



      (6)   If applicant is proposing an underground installation
within new ducts or conduits to be constructed within the rights-of-way, the
applicant must provide credible information satisfactory to the city to
sufficiently detail and identify:



         (a)   The location, approximate depth, size, and
quantity of proposed new ducts or conduits. 



      (7)   A preliminary construction schedule and completion date.



      (8)   Payment of all money due to the city for:



         (a)   Permit fees; and



         (b)   Any loss, damage, or expense suffered by the city
as a result of applicant's prior construction in the rights-of-way or any
emergency actions taken by the city; and



         (c)   Any certificate of registration issued to the
applicant/person whose facilities are being constructed; and



         (d)   Any other money due to the city from the
applicant/person whose facilities are being constructed.



      (9)   When a construction permit is requested for purposes of
installing additional systems or any part of a system, the posting of a
construction bond and removal bond, acceptable to the city and subject to §
51.21 of this chapter for the additional systems or any part of a system is
required.



   (C)   Issuance of construction permit; conditions. 



      (1)   If the Public Works Director determines that the
applicant has satisfied the requirements of this chapter and the construction
permit process, the Public Works Director shall issue a construction permit
subject to the provisions of this chapter.



      (2)   The city may impose reasonable conditions in addition to
the rules and regulations enacted by the Public Works Director, upon the
issuance of the construction permit and the performance of the permittee
thereunder in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, to
insure the structural integrity of the rights-of-way, to protect the property
and safety of other users of the rights-of-way, and to minimize the
disruption and inconvenience to the traveling public.



   (D)   Construction permit fees.  The Public Works Director shall,
after providing notice to and seeking input from all providers with systems
in the city right-of-way, develop and maintain a schedule of permit fees in
an amount sufficient to recoup all reasonable costs that the city incurs in
permit issuance, including permit costs and rights-of-way costs, as allowed
by law.  No construction permit shall be issued without payment of
construction permit fees except to the city or county, which shall be exempt.
Construction permit fees that were paid for a permit that the city has
revoked due to breach are not refundable.



   (E)   Joint applications. Applicants are encouraged to make joint
application for construction permits to work in the rights-of-way at the same
place and time.  Joint applicants shall have the ability to divide amongst
themselves, in proportions the parties find appropriate, any applicable
construction permit fees.



(Ord. 10-2001, passed 9-5-01)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.18  CONSTRUCTION, RELOCATION AND RESTORATION.



   (A)   Technical information required.  Prior to commencement of any
initial construction of facilities in the rights-of-way a construction
permittee, upon the reasonable request of the Public Works Director, shall
provide technical information about the proposed route of construction. The
technical information required may consist of completion of the following
tasks:



      (1)   Secure all available "as-built" plans, plats, and other
location data indicating the existence and approximate location of all
facilities along the proposed construction route.



      (2)   Visibly survey and record the location and dimensions of
any facilities along the proposed construction route, including, but not
limited to, manholes, valve boxes, utility boxes, posts, and visible street
cut repairs.



      (3)   Determine and record the presence of and the approximate
horizontal and vertical location of all underground facilities the applicant
or person on whose behalf the permit was applied for owns or controls in the
rights-of-way along the proposed system route.  Upon the reasonable request
of the Public Works Director, a permittee shall also record and identify the
general location of all other facilities in the rights-of-way along the
proposed system route.  For the purposes of this section, general location
shall mean the alignment of other facilities in the rights-of-way, but shall
not necessarily mean the depth of other facilities in the rights-of-way.



      (4)   If a provider records the information requested above in
an electronic format, the provider shall provide the city with an electronic
copy of the data obtained from completion of the tasks described in this
section.  Incorporation of the data required herein (§ 51.18(A)(4)) by
electronic means shall include only data for new facilities that can be
readily incorporated into the city's database.



      (5)   Where the proposed location of facilities and the
location of existing underground facilities appear to conflict with the plans
as drafted, construction permittee has the option of either utilizing
non-destructive digging methods, such as vacuum excavation, at the critical
points identified to determine as precisely as possible, the horizontal,
vertical and spatial position, composition, size and other specifications of
the conflicting underground facilities, or re-designing the construction
plans to eliminate the apparent conflict.  A construction permittee shall
not excavate more than a three (3) foot by three (3) foot square hole in the
rights-of-way to complete this task.



      (6)   Based on all of the data collected upon completion of
the tasks described in this section, adjust the proposed system design to
avoid the need to relocate other underground facilities.



      (7)   All confidential/proprietary information submitted
herein shall be so labeled. 



   (B)   Qualified firm.  All utility engineering studies conducted
pursuant to this § 51.18 shall be performed by a firm specializing in
utility engineering or may be performed by the construction permittee if the
construction permittee is qualified to complete the project itself.



   (C)   Cost of study.  The construction permittee shall bear the
cost of compliance with § 51.18(A) through (C) of this chapter.



   (D)   Construction schedule.  Unless otherwise provided for in this
chapter, or unless the Public Works Director waives any of the requirements
of this section due to unique or unusual circumstances, a construction
permittee shall be required to; submit a written construction schedule to the
city ten working days before commencing any work in or about the
rights-of-way and, shall further notify the city not less than two working
days in advance of any excavation in the rights-of-way.  This section shall
apply to all situations with the exception of circumstances under §
51.20(D)(1) (Emergency situations).



   (E)   Location of facilities.



      (1)   The placement of new facilities and replacement of old
facilities, either above ground or underground, shall be completed in
conformity with applicable laws.



      (2)   The city shall have the power to prohibit or limit the
placement of new or additional facilities within the rights-of-way if the
right-of-way is full.  In making such decisions, the city shall strive to
the extent possible to accommodate all existing and potential users of the
rights-of-way, but shall be guided primarily by considerations of the public
health, safety, and welfare, the condition of the rights-of-way, the time of
year, the protection of existing facilities in the rights-of-way, future city
and county plans for public improvements, development projects which have
been determined to be in the public interest, and the non-discriminatory and
competitively neutral treatment of providers.



      (3)   Upon the concurrence of the city, or if it is determined
by the construction permittee and any appropriate local, state, or federal
agency (or other entity with jurisdictional authority) that any existing
poles in the rights-of-way are full, then those poles may be replaced with
bigger and/or taller poles in order to accommodate additional facilities or
systems only after the construction permittee has made reasonable attempts to
reach an acceptable solution without replacement with bigger and/or taller
poles.  This paragraph shall not apply to replacement of any existing
pole(s) with identically sized pole(s) which results from the destruction of
or hazardous condition of the existing pole(s) as long as no new facilities
or additional facilities are attached.



   (F)   Least disruptive technology. All construction or maintenance
of facilities shall be accomplished in the manner resulting in the least
amount of damage and disruption of the rights-of-way.  In addition, all
cable, wire or fiber optic cable installed in the subsurface rights-of-way
under this chapter may be required to be installed in conduit, and if so
required, no cable, wire or fiber optic cable may be installed under this
chapter using "direct bury" techniques.



   (G)   Relocation of facilities.



      (1)   A provider shall, at its own expense, permanently remove
and relocate its facilities in the rights-of-way whenever the city finds it
necessary to request such removal and relocation.  In instances where the
city requests removal and/or relocation, the city shall waive all applicable
construction permit fees.  Upon removal and/or relocation, the provider
shall restore the rights-of-way to a condition at least as good as its
condition immediately prior to said removal or relocation.  If existing
poles are required to be removed and/or relocated, then the existing poles
will be replaced with reasonably obtainable poles of the same or similar size
unless otherwise permitted by the city.  The Public Works Director may
request relocation and/or removal in order to prevent unreasonable
interference by the provider's facilities with:



         (a)   A public improvement undertaken or approved by the
city or county;



         (b)   When the public health, safety, and welfare
requires it, or when necessary to prevent interference with the safety and
convenience of ordinary travel over the rights-of-way.



      (2)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, a provider who has
facilities in the right-of-way subject to a vacation or narrowing that is not
required for the purposes of the city, shall have a permanent easement in
such vacated portion or excess portion in conformity with R.C. § 723.04.01.



      (3)   If, in the reasonable judgment of the city, a provider
fails to commence the removal process and/or relocation of its facilities as
designated by the city, within 30 days after the city's removal order is
served upon provider, or if a provider fails to substantially complete such
removal, including all associated repair of the rights-of-way of the city,
within 12 months thereafter, then, to the extent not inconsistent with
applicable law, the city shall have the right to:



         (a)   Declare that all rights, title and interest to the
facilities belong to the city with all rights of ownership, including, but
not limited to, the right to connect and use the facilities or to effect a
transfer of all right, title and interest in the facilities to another person
for operation; or



         (b)   Authorize removal of the facilities installed by
the provider in, on, over or under the rights-of-way of the city at
provider's cost and expense, by another person, however the city shall have
no liability for any damage caused by such action and the provider shall be
liable to the city for all reasonable costs incurred by the city in such
action; and



         (c)   To the extent consistent with applicable law, any
portion of the provider's facilities in, on, over or under the rights-of-way
of the city designated by the city for removal and not timely removed by the
provider shall belong to and become the property of the city without payment
to the provider, and the provider shall execute and deliver such documents,
as the city shall request, in form and substance acceptable to the city, to
evidence such ownership by the city.



   (H)   Pre-excavation facilities location.  Before the start date of
any rights-of-way excavation, each provider who has facilities located in the
area to be excavated shall be responsible to mark the horizontal and make
every reasonable attempt using best efforts, to mark the approximate vertical
placement of all its facilities.  All providers shall notify and work
closely with the excavation contractor in an effort to establish the exact
location of its facilities and the best procedure for excavation.



   (I)   Rights-of-way restoration.



      (1)   The work to be done under the permit, and the
restoration of the rights-of-way as required herein, must be completed within
the dates specified in the permit. In addition to its own work, the permittee
must restore the general area of the work, and the surrounding areas,
including trench backfill, paving and its foundations in accordance with the
standards established by the Public Works Director, subject to any applicable
laws.  The permittee must also inspect the area of the work and use
reasonable care to maintain the same condition for 12 months thereafter.



      (2)   In approving an application for a permit, the city may
choose either to have the permittee restore the rights-of-way or the city may
restore the rights-of-way itself at the expense of the  permittee.



      (3)   If the city chooses to allow permittee to restore the
rights-of-way, construction permittee shall at the time of application of a
construction permit post a construction bond in an amount determined by the
city to be sufficient to cover the cost of restoring the rights-of-way to a
condition at least as good as its condition immediately prior to
construction.  If, 12 months after completion of the restoration of the
rights-of-way, the city determines that the rights-of-way have been properly
restored, the surety on the construction bond shall be released.



      (4)   The permittee shall perform the work according to the
standards and with the materials specified and approved by the city.



      (5)   By restoring the rights-of-way itself, the permittee
guarantees its work and shall maintain it for 12 months following its
completion. During this 12 month period, it shall, upon notification from the
Department of Public Works, correct all restoration work to the extent
necessary using the method required by the Department of Public Works. 
Weather permitting, said work shall be completed within five calendar days of
the receipt of the notice from the Department of Public Works.



      (6)   If the permittee fails to restore the rights-of-way in
the manner and to the condition required by the city, or fails to
satisfactorily and timely complete all repairs required by the city, the
city, at its option, with notice to provider and a reasonable time to cure,
may do such work.  In that event, the permittee shall pay to the city,
within 30 days of billing, the cost of restoring the rights-of-way and any
other costs incurred by the city.  Upon failure to pay, the city may call
upon any bond or letter of credit posted by permittee and/or pursue any and
all legal and equitable remedies.



   (J)   Damage to provider's facilities and to other facilities.



      (1)   In the case of an emergency, and if possible after
reasonable efforts to contact the provider seeking a timely response, when
the city performs work in the rights-of-way and finds it necessary to
maintain, support, or move a provider's facilities to protect those
facilities, the costs associated therewith will be billed to that provider
and shall be paid within 30 days from the date of billing. Upon failure to
pay, the city may pursue all legal and equitable remedies in the event a
provider does not pay or the city may call upon any bond or letter of credit
posted by permittee and pursue any and all legal or equitable remedies.



      (2)   Each provider shall be responsible for the cost of
repairing any facilities in the rights-of-way which it or its facilities
damage. Each provider shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any
damage to the facilities of another provider caused during the city's
response to an emergency caused by such provider's facilities.



   (K)   Rights-of-way vacation.  If the city vacates a rights-of-way
which contains the facilities of a provider, such vacation shall be subject
to the provisions of R.C. § 723.04.1.



   (L)   Installation requirements.  The excavation, backfilling,
restoration, and all other work performed in the rights-of-way shall be
performed in conformance with all applicable laws and the standards as
promulgated by the Public Works Director.



   (M)   Inspection.



      (1)   When the construction under any permit hereunder is
completed, the permittee shall notify the Department of Public Works.



      (2)   The permittee shall make the construction site available
to the Inspector and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all
reasonable times during the execution and upon completion of the construction.



      (3)   At any time, including the time of inspection, the
Inspector may order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious
threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the public, violates any law, or
which violates the terms and conditions of the permit and/or this chapter.



      (4)   The Inspector may issue an order to correct work which
does not conform to the permit and/or applicable standards, conditions or
codes.  The order shall state that failure to correct the violation will be
cause for revocation of the permit.  The order may be served on the
permittee as provided in § 51.23(D).  An order may be appealed to the
Public Works Director.  The decision of the Public Works Director may be
appealed to the Board of Review whose decision shall be final.  If not
appealed, within ten days after issuance of the order, the provider shall
present proof to the Public Works Director that the violation has been
corrected.  If such proof has not been presented within the required time,
the Public Works Director may revoke the permit pursuant to § 51.20(E).



   (N)   Other obligations.  Obtaining a construction permit does not
relieve permittee of its duty to obtain all other necessary permits,
licenses, and authority and to pay all fees, including on site inspection
fees, required by the city, or any other city, county, state, or federal laws.



      (1)   A permittee shall comply with all requirements of laws,
including the requirements of the Ohio Utility Protection Service (OUPS)
and/or its lawful successor.



      (2)   A permittee shall perform all work in conformance with
all applicable laws and standards and is responsible for all work done in the
rights-of-way pursuant to its permit, regardless of who performs the work.



      (3)   No rights-of-way obstruction or excavation may be
performed when seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for
such work, except in the case of an emergency as outlined in § 51.20(D)(1).



      (4)   A permittee shall not so obstruct a rights-of-way that
the natural free and clear passage of water through the gutters or other
waterways shall be interfered with.



      (5)   Private vehicles other than necessary construction
vehicles may not be parked within or adjacent to a permit area.  The loading
or unloading of trucks adjacent to a permit area is prohibited unless
specifically authorized by the permit.



   (O)   Undergrounding required.  Any owner of property abutting upon
a street or alley where service facilities are now located underground and
where the service connection is at the property line, shall install or cause
others to install underground any service delivery infrastructure from the
property line to the buildings or other structures on such property to which
such service is supplied.



(Ord. 10-2001, passed 9-5-01)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.19  MINOR MAINTENANCE PERMITS.



   (A)   Minor maintenance permit requirement.  No person shall
perform minor maintenance of facilities in the rights-of-way without first
having obtained a minor maintenance permit as set forth in this chapter. 
Minor maintenance means: (i) the routine repair or replacement of facilities
with like facilities not involving construction and not requiring traffic
control for more than two hours at any one location; (ii) or the routine
repair or replacement of facilities with like facilities not involving
construction and taking place on thoroughfares and arteries between the hours
of 9:00 A.M. and 3:00 P.M.; (iii) or the routine repair or replacement of
facilities with like facilities not involving construction on all
rights-of-ways, other than thoroughfares and arterials, that does not impede
traffic and is for a period of less than eight contiguous hours; (iv) or
construction other than on thoroughfares and arterials that takes less than
eight contiguous hours to complete, does not impede traffic and does not
involve a pavement cut. 



      (1)   A minor maintenance permit allows the minor maintenance
permittee to perform all minor maintenance in any part of the rights-of-way
as required. 



      (2)   A minor maintenance permit is valid from the date of
issuance until December 31 of the year in which the minor maintenance permit
was issued at which time the minor maintenance permit shall expire. 



      (3)   A minor maintenance permit must be displayed or upon
request produced within 12 business hours.



      (4)   A minor maintenance permit by itself shall under no
circumstances provide a permittee with the ability to cut pavement without
seeking additional authority from the Director of the Department of Public
Works. 



   (B)   Minor maintenance permit applications. Application for a minor
maintenance permit shall be made to the Director of the Department of Public
Works.  In addition to any information required by the Public Works
Director, all minor maintenance permit applications shall contain, and will
only be considered complete upon compliance with the following provisions:



      (1)   Credible evidence that the applicant has obtained a
certificate of registration or proof that the applicant has written authority
to apply for a minor maintenance permit on behalf of a party that has been
issued a certificate of registration;



      (2)   Submission of a completed minor maintenance permit
application in the form required by the Public Works Director. 



      (3)   A statement that the applicant will employ protective
measures and devices that, consistent with the Ohio Manual of Uniform Traffic
Control Devices, will prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to
minimize disruptions to the efficient movement of pedestrian and vehicular
traffic. 



   (C)   Issuance of minor maintenance permits; conditions.



      (1)   If the Public Works Director determines that the
applicant has satisfied the requirements of this chapter and the minor
maintenance permit process, the Public Works Director shall issue a minor
maintenance permit subject to the provisions of this chapter.



      (2)   The city may impose reasonable conditions, in addition
to the rules and regulations enacted by the Public Works Director, upon the
issuance of the minor maintenance permit and the performance of the minor
maintenance permittee thereunder in order to protect the public health,
safety, and welfare, to insure the structural integrity of the rights-of-way,
to protect the property and safety of other users of the rights-of-way, and
to minimize the disruption and inconvenience to the traveling public. 



   (D)   Minor maintenance permit fees. The Public Works Director
shall, after providing notice to and seeking input from all providers with
systems in the city right-of-way, develop and maintain a schedule of permit
fees in an amount sufficient to recoup all reasonable costs associated with
processing minor maintenance permits, as allowed by law. No minor maintenance
permit shall be issued without payment of minor maintenance permit fees
except to the city or county, which shall be exempt.  Minor maintenance
permit fees that were paid for a minor maintenance permit that the city has
revoked due to breach are not refundable.  The Public Works Director may
revoke the minor maintenance permit as any other permit may be revoked under
this chapter.



(Ord. 10-2001, passed 9-5-01)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.20  ENFORCEMENT OF PERMIT OBLIGATION.



   (A)   Mandatory denial of permit.  Except in the case of an
emergency, no construction permit will be granted:



      (1)   To any person who has not yet made an application; or



      (2)   To any person or their agent who has outstanding debt
owed to the city; or



      (3)   To any person or their agent as to whom there exists
grounds for the revocation of a permit; or



      (4)   If, in the discretion of the Public Works Director, the
issuance of a permit for the particular date and/or time would cause a
conflict or interfere with an exhibition, celebration, festival, or any other
event.  The Public Works Director, in exercising this discretion, shall be
guided by the safety and convenience of ordinary travel of the public over
the rights-of-way, and by considerations relating to the public health,
safety, and welfare.



   (B)   Permissive denial.  The Public Works Director may deny a
permit in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, to prevent
interference with the safety and convenience of ordinary travel over the
rights-of-way, or when necessary to protect the rights-of-way and its
users.  The Public Works Director, in his or her discretion, may consider
one or more of the following factors: the extent to which rights-of-way space
where the permit is sought is available; the competing demands for the
particular space in the rights-of-way; the availability of other locations in
the rights-of-way or in other rights-of-way for the proposed facilities; the
applicability of this chapter or other regulations of the rights-of-way that
affect location of facilities in the rights-of-way; the degree of compliance
of the provider with the terms and conditions of this chapter and its
requirements, and other applicable ordinances and regulations; the degree of
disruption to surrounding communities and businesses that will result from
the use of that part of the rights-of-way; the condition and age of the
rights-of-way, and whether and when it is scheduled for total or partial
re-construction; the balancing of the costs of disruption to the public and
damage to the rights-of-way, against the benefits to that part of the public
served by the expansion into additional parts of the rights-of-way; and
whether such applicant or their agent has failed within the past three years
to comply, or is presently not in full compliance, with the requirements of
this chapter or, if applicable, any other chapters of the Codified
Ordinances, or any other applicable law.



   (C)   Discretionary issuance.



      (1)   Notwithstanding the provisions of § 51.20(A)(1) and
(2), the Public Works Director may issue a permit in any case where the
permit is necessary:



         (a)   To prevent substantial economic hardship to a
customer of the permit applicant if established by credible evidence
satisfactory to the city;



         (b)   To allow such customer to materially improve its
service; or



         (c)   To allow a new economic development project.



      (2)   To be granted a permit under this section, the permit
applicant must not have had knowledge of the hardship, the plans for
improvement of service, or the development project at the time it was
required to submit its list of next year projects.



   (D)   Work done without a permit.



      (1)   Emergency situations.



         (a)   Each provider shall, as soon as reasonably
practicable, notify the Public Works Director of any event regarding its
facilities which it considers to be an emergency.  The provider may proceed
to take whatever actions are necessary in order to respond to the
emergency.  Within two business days, unless otherwise extended by the
Public Works Director, after the occurrence or discovery of the emergency
(whichever is later), the provider shall apply for the necessary permits, pay
the fees associated therewith and fulfill all the requirements necessary to
bring itself into compliance with this chapter for any and all actions taken
in response to the emergency.



         (b)   In the event that the city becomes aware of an
emergency regarding a provider's facilities, the city may attempt to contact
the provider or system representative of each provider affected, or
potentially affected, by the emergency.  In any event, the city may take
whatever action it deems necessary in order to respond to the emergency, the
cost of which shall be borne by the provider whose facilities caused the
emergency.



      (2)   Non-emergency situations.  Except in the case of an
emergency, any provider who constructs in, on, above, within, over, below or
through a right-of-way without a valid permit shall cease any further work
upon the order of the inspector or Public Works Director and before
commencing any additional work shall within ten business days of initiating
such construction obtain a permit, pay double the normal fee for said permit,
pay double all the other fees required by the Codified Ordinances, deposit
with the city the fees necessary to correct any damage to the rights-of-way
and comply with all of the requirements of this chapter.



   (E)   Revocation of permits.



      (1)   Permittees hold permits issued pursuant to the Codified
Ordinances as a privilege and not as a right.  The city reserves the right,
as provided herein, to revoke any permit, without refunding any fees, in the
event of a substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any law or any
provision or condition of the permit.  A substantial breach by permittee
shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:



         (a)   The violation of any provision or condition of the
permit or this Chapter; or



         (b)   An evasion or attempt to evade any provision or
condition of the permit or this Chapter, or the perpetration or attempt to
perpetrate any fraud or deceit upon the city or its citizens; or



         (c)   Any material misrepresentation of fact in the
application for a permit; or



         (d)   The failure to obtain and/or maintain required
construction or removal bonds and/or insurance; or



         (e)   The failure to obtain and/or maintain, when
required, a certificate of registration; or



         (f)   The failure to complete construction in a timely
manner; or



         (g)   The failure to correct any nonconformity as
ordered pursuant to § 51.18(D).



      (2)   If the Public Works Director determines that the
permittee has committed a substantial breach of a term or condition of any
law or any provision or condition of the permit, the Public Works Director
shall serve a written demand upon the permittee to remedy such violation. 
The demand shall state that continued violations may be cause for revocation
of the permit.  Upon, a substantial breach, as stated above, the Public
Works Director, may place additional or revised conditions on the permit.



      (3)   By the close of the next business day following receipt
of notification of the breach, permittee shall contact the Public Works
Director with a plan, acceptable to the Public Works Director, for its
correction.  Permittee's failure to so contact the Public Works Director, or
the permittee's failure to submit an acceptable plan, or permittee's failure
to reasonably implement the approved plan, shall be cause for immediate
revocation of the permit.



      (4)   From time to time, the Public Works Director may
establish a list of standard conditions for the permit.  A substantial
breach of any condition shall also constitute an unauthorized use of the
public rights-of-way as defined in § 51.14.



      (5)   If a permittee, commits a second substantial breach as
outlined above, permittee's permit will automatically be revoked and not be
allowed further permits for one full year, except for emergency repairs.



      (6)   If a permit is revoked, the permittee shall also
reimburse the city for the city's reasonable costs, including restoration
costs and the costs of collection and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in
connection with such revocation.



(Ord. 10-2001, passed 9-5-01)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.21  CONSTRUCTION AND REMOVAL BONDS.



   (A)   Construction bond. Prior to the commencement of any
construction, a construction permittee, excluding the county or city shall
deposit with the Public Works Director, in a form acceptable to the Director
of Law, an irrevocable, unconditional letter of credit and/or surety bond in
an amount determined by the Public Works Director to be appropriate, based
upon fair and reasonable criteria.  Unless a construction default, problem,
or deficiency involves an emergency or endangers the safety of the general
public, the Public Works Director shall serve the construction permittee with
notice detailing any construction default, problem, or deficiency.  If the
Public Works Director determines that correction or repair of the
construction default, problem or deficiency has not occurred or has not been
substantially initiated within ten calendar days after the date following
service of notification and detailing the construction default, problem or
deficiency, then the city may attach the letter of credit or surety bond. 
Upon attachment, written notice shall be served on the construction permittee
by the Public Works Director.



   (B)   Removal bond. Upon issuance of a certificate of registration,
and continuously thereafter until 120 days after a provider's facilities have
been removed from the rights-of-way, (unless the Public Works Director
notifies the provider that a reasonably longer period shall apply), a
provider shall deposit with the Public Works Director and maintain, in a form
acceptable to the Director of Law, an irrevocable, unconditional letter of
credit or a surety bond in an amount equal to or greater than $50,000.  The
Public Works Director shall make all reasonable efforts to allow provider a
period of five business days after serving notification to correct or repair
any default, problem or deficiency prior to Public Works Director's
attachment of letter of credit or surety bond regarding the removal of
facilities.  Upon attachment, written notice shall be provided to the
provider by the Public Works Director.



   (C)   Blanket bond.  In lieu of the construction bond required by
§ 51.21(A) and the removal bond required by § 51.21(B), provider may
deposit with the Public Works Director, in a form acceptable to the Director
of Law, an irrevocable, unconditional letter of credit and/or surety bond in
the amount of $5,000,000.  Unless a construction default, problem or
deficiency involves an emergency or endangers the safety of the general
public, the Public Works Director shall make all reasonable efforts to allow
permittee a period of five business days after sending notification in
writing to the last known business address to correct or repair any
construction default, problem or deficiency prior to Public Works Director's
attachment of letter of credit or surety bond.  Upon attachment, written
notice shall be provided to the provider by the Public Works Director.



   (D)   Self bonding. In lieu of the construction bond required by §
51.21(A), the removal bond required by § 51.21(B) and the blanket bond
required by § 51.21(C), those providers maintaining a book value in excess
of $20,000,000 may submit a statement to the Public Works Director requesting
to self-bond.  If approval to self-bond is granted, a provider shall assure
the city that such self-bonding shall provide the city with no less
protection and security than would have been afforded to the city by a third
party surety providing provider with the types and amounts bonds detailed in
the above named sections.  This statement shall include:



      (1)   Audited financial statements for the previous year; and,



      (2)   A description of the applicant's self-bonding program;
and,



      (3)   Other applicable and pertinent information as reasonably
requested by the Public Works Director and/or Director of Law.



   (E)   Purposes.  The bonds required by this section, and any self
bonding to the extent it has been permitted, shall serve as security for:



      (1)   The faithful performance by the permittee or provider of
all terms, conditions and obligations of this chapter;



      (2)   Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the city
occasioned by the permittee or provider's violation of this chapter or its
failure to comply with all rules, regulations, orders, permits and other
directives of the city issued pursuant to this chapter;



      (3)   The payment of all compensation due to the city,
including permit fees;



      (4)   The payment of premiums for the liability insurance
required pursuant to this chapter;



      (5)   The removal of facilities from the rights-of-way
pursuant to this chapter;



      (6)   The payment to the city of any amounts for which the
permittee or provider is liable that are not paid by insurance or other
surety; and



      (7)   The payment of any other amounts which become due to the
city pursuant to this chapter or other law.



   (F)   Form.  The bond documents required by this section, and any
replacement bond documents shall, contain the following endorsement: "It is
hereby understood and agreed that this bond may not be canceled or not
renewed by the surety nor the intention to cancel or not to renew be stated
by the surety until 90 days after completion of construction of the
facilities and, notwithstanding the foregoing, shall in no case be canceled
or not renewed by the surety until at least 90 days' written notice to city
of surety's intention to cancel or not renew this bond."



(Ord. 10-2001, passed 9-5-01)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.22  INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY.



   (A)   City does not accept liability.  By reason of the acceptance
of an application or the grant of a permit, the city does not assume any
liability:



      (1)   For injuries to persons, damage to property, or loss of
service claims; or



      (2)   For claims or penalties of any sort resulting from the
installation, presence, maintenance, or operation of facilities.



   (B)   Indemnification.  By applying for and being issued a
certificate of registration with the city a provider agrees, or by accepting
a permit a permittee is required and agrees, to defend, indemnify, and hold
harmless the city's agents, elected officials, officers, employees,
volunteers and subcontractors from all costs, liabilities, claims, and suits
for damages of any kind arising out of the construction, presence,
installation, maintenance, repair, replacement, restoration, or operation of
its facilities, or out of any activity undertaken in or near a rights-of-way,
whether any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed, or
prohibited by a permit.  A provider or permittee further agrees that it will
not bring, nor cause to be brought, any action, suit or other proceeding
claiming damages, or seeking any other relief against the city's agents,
elected officials, officers, employees, volunteers and subcontractors for any
claim nor for any award arising out of the presence, installation,
maintenance or operation of its facilities, or any activity undertaken in or
near a rights-of-way, whether the act or omission complained of is
authorized, allowed or prohibited by a permit.  This section is not, as to
third parties, a waiver of any defense or immunity otherwise available to the
provider, permittee, or to the city; and the provider or permittee, in
defending any action on behalf of the city, if allowable by law, shall be
entitled to assert in any action every defense or immunity that the city
could assert in its own behalf.  Any and all exercise of the above shall be
consistent with, but not limited to, the following:



      (1)   To the fullest extent permitted by law, all providers
and permittees shall, at their sole cost and expense, fully indemnify, defend
and hold harmless the city, its agents, elected officials, officers,
employees, volunteers and subcontractors from and against any and all
lawsuits, claims (including without limitation worker's compensation claims
against the city or others), causes of actions, actions, liability, and
judgments for injury or damages including but not limited to expenses for
reasonable legal fees and disbursements assumed by the city in connection
therewith:



         (a)   To persons or property, to the extent arising out
of or through the acts or omissions of provider, its subcontractors, agents
or employees attributable to the occupation by the provider or permittee of
the rights-of-way, to which permittee's or provider's negligence shall in any
way contribute.



         (b)   Arising out of any claim for invasion of the right
of privacy, for defamation of person, firm or corporation, or the violation
or infringement of any copyright, trademark, trade name, service mark or
patent or any other right of any person, firm and corporation by the provider
or permittee, but excluding claims arising out of or related to city
programming.



         (c)   Arising out of provider's or permittee's failure
to comply with the provisions of any law applicable to provider or permittee
in its business hereunder.



      (2)   The foregoing indemnification is conditioned upon the
city:



         (a)   Giving provider or permittee reasonable notice of
any claim or the commencement of any action, suit or proceeding for which
indemnification is sought;



         (b)   Affording the provider or permittee the
opportunity to participate in any compromise, settlement, or other resolution
or disposition of any claim or proceeding subject to indemnification; and



         (c)   Cooperating in the defense of such claim and
making available to the provider or permittee all pertinent information under
the city's control.



      (3)   The city shall have the right to employ separate counsel
in any such action or proceeding and to participate in the investigation and
defense thereof, and the provider or permittee shall pay all reasonable fees
and expense of such separate counsel if employed.



(Ord. 10-2001, passed 9-5-01)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.23  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Non-exclusive remedy. The remedies provided in this chapter
are not exclusive or in lieu of other rights and remedies that the city may
have at law or in equity.  The city is hereby authorized at any time to seek
legal and equitable relief for actual or threatened injury to the
rights-of-way, including damages to the rights-of-way, whether caused by a
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or other provisions of
applicable law. 



   (B)   Severability.  If any section, subsection, sentence, clause,
phrase, or portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or
unconstitutional by any court or administrative agency of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions thereof.  If a regulatory body or a court of competent
jurisdiction should determine by a final, nonappealable order that any
permit, right or any portions of this chapter are illegal or unenforceable,
then any such permit or right granted or deemed to exist hereunder shall be
considered as a revocable permit with a mutual right in either party to
terminate without cause upon giving 60 days written notice to the other. 
The requirements and conditions of such a revocable permit shall be the same
requirements and conditions as set forth in the permit, right or
registration, respectively, except for conditions relating to the term of the
permit and the right of termination.  If a permit or right shall be
considered a revocable permit as provided herein, the permittee must
acknowledge the authority of the city to issue such revocable permit and the
power to revoke it.



   (C)   Reservation of regulatory and police powers. The city by the
granting of a permit, or by issuing a certificate of registration under this
chapter, does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair, or lessen
the lawful powers and rights, which it has now or may be hereafter vested in
the city under the Constitution and Laws of the United States, State of Ohio,
and under the Charter of the City of Montgomery to regulate the use of the
rights-of-way.  The permittee by its acceptance of a permit, or provider by
applying for and being issued a certificate of registration, agrees that all
lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, or police power, or otherwise as
are or the same may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the city,
shall be in full force and effect and subject to the exercise thereof by the
city at any time.  A permittee or provider is deemed to acknowledge that its
rights are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt
and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the
public and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general laws
enacted by the city pursuant to such powers.



   (D)   Method of service.  Any notice or order of the Public Works
Director or Board of Review shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy
thereof is:



      (1)   Delivered personally; or



      (2)   Successfully transmitted via facsimile transmission to
the last known fax number of the person to be served; or



      (3)   Left at the usual place of business of the person to
whom it is to be served upon and with someone who is 18 years of age or
older; or



      (4)   Sent by certified, preposted U.S. mail to the last known
address; or



      (5)   If the notice is attempted to be served by certified,
preposted U.S. mail and then returned showing that the letter was not
delivered, or the certified letter is not returned within 14 days after the
date of mailing, then notice may be sent by regular, preposted, first-class
U.S.; or



      (6)   If the notice is attempted to be served by regular,
first class U.S. mail, postage prepaid, and the letter is then returned
showing that the letter was not delivered, or is not returned within 14 days
after the date of mailing, then notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place
in or about the structure, building, premises or property affected by such
notice.



   (E)   Applies to all providers.  This chapter shall apply to all
providers and all permittees unless expressly exempted.



   (F)   Police powers.  All person's rights are subject to the police
powers of the city to adopt and enforce ordinances necessary to protect the
health, safety, and welfare of the public.  All persons shall comply with
all applicable laws enacted by city pursuant to its police or other powers. 
In particular, all persons shall comply with city zoning and other land use
requirements pertaining to the placement and specifications of facilities.



   (G)   Compliance. No person shall be relieved of its obligation to
comply with any of the provisions of this chapter by reason of any failure of
city to enforce prompt compliance.



   (H)   Foreclosure and receivership.



      (1)   Upon the filing of any voluntary or involuntary petition
under the Bankruptcy Act by or against any provider and/or permittee, or any
action for foreclosure or other judicial sale of the provider and/or
permittees facilities located within the rights-of-way, the provider and/or
permittee shall so notify the Public Works Director within 14 calendar days
thereof and the provider and/or permittee's certificate of registration or
permit (as applicable) shall be deemed void and of no further force and
effect.



      (2)   The city shall have the right to revoke, pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter, any certificate of registration or permit granted
pursuant to this chapter, subject to any applicable provisions of law,
including the Bankruptcy Act, 120 days after the appointment of a receiver or
trustee to take over and conduct the business of the provider and/or
permittee, whether in receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other
action or proceeding, unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been
vacated prior to the expiration of said 120 days or unless:



         (a)   Within 120 days after election or appointment,
such receiver or trustee shall have fully complied with all the provisions of
the relevant certificate of registration, any outstanding permit and of this
chapter and remedied all defaults thereunder; and,



         (b)   Said receiver or trustee, within said 120 days,
shall have executed an agreement, duly approved by a court having
jurisdiction over the facilities, whereby such receiver or trustee assumes
and agrees to be bound by each and every provisions of the relevant
certificate of registration, permit, and this chapter.



   (I)   Choice of law and forum.  This chapter and the terms and
conditions of any certificate of registration or permit shall be construed
and enforced in accordance with the substantive Laws of the State of Ohio and
the Laws of the United States of America, specifically in that order. All
providers and permittees as a condition for the grant of any permit or
issuance of any certificate of registration agree that all disputes shall be
resolved in a court of competent jurisdiction in Hamilton County, Ohio.



   (J)   Force majeure.  In the event any person's performance of any
of the terms, conditions, or obligations required by this Chapter 51 is
prevented by a cause or event not within such person's control, such
inability to perform shall be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions
shall be imposed as a result thereof.  For the purpose of this section,
causes or events not within the control of a provider shall include, without
limitation, acts of God, strikes, sabotage, riots or civil disturbances,
explosions, acts of public enemies, and natural disasters such as floods,
earthquakes, landslides, and fires.



   (K)   No warranty. The city makes no representation or warranty
regarding its right to authorize the construction of facilities on any
particular rights-of-way. The burden and responsibility for making such
determination shall be upon the person constructing facilities in the
rights-of-way.



   (L)   Continuing obligation and holdover.  In the event a provider
continues to operate all or any part of the facilities after the termination,
lapse, or revocation of a certificate of registration, such provider shall
continue to comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter and other
laws throughout the period of such continued operation, provided that any
such continued operation shall in no way be construed as a renewal or other
extension of the certificate of registration, nor as a limitation on the
remedies, if any, available to the city as a result of such continued
operation after the term, including, but not limited to, damages and
restitution.  Any conflict between the issuance of a certificate of
registration or of a permit and any other present or future lawful exercise
of the city's regulatory or police powers shall be resolved in favor of the
latter.



   (M)   Appeals.  All appeals provided for by this chapter and any
notification to the city required by this chapter shall be in writing and
sent via certified mail to the Board of Review, the Clerk of Council, or
Public Works Director as specified in this chapter.



   (N)   City standards. As part of city required standards, wherever
rights-of-way are under construction, if deemed advisable and practicable by
the Public Works Director, the city may install all such facilities deemed
necessary to accommodate future provider needs.  Any such installed
facilities shall be city property and may be conveyed to any person under
such terms and conditions as are deemed advisable by the Public Works
Director.



   (O)   Chapter headings.  Chapter headings are for convenience only
and shall not be used to interpret any portion of this chapter.



(Ord. 10-2001, passed 9-5-01)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.99  PENALTY.



   In addition to any other penalties set forth in this chapter, and the
remedy of specific performance which may be enforced in a court of competent
jurisdiction, the following penalties shall apply:  Any person violating the
provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.  Each day such violation continued shall be deemed a separate
offense. 



(Ord. 10-2001, passed 9-5-01)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



      Chapter




         70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS





         71.   LICENSING PROVISIONS





         72.   TRAFFIC RULES





         73.   MOTOR VEHICLE CRIMES





         74.   EQUIPMENT AND LOADS





         75.   BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES, AND OTHER VEHICLES





         76.   PARKING REGULATIONS





         77.   PARADES




CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



General Provisions



   70.01   Definitions



   70.02   Compliance with order of police officer



   70.03   Emergency vehicles to proceed cautiously past red or stop
signal



   70.04   Exceptions generally; emergency, public safety and coroner
vehicles exempt



   70.05   Persons riding or driving animals upon roadways



   70.06   Prohibitions against pedestrians and slow-moving vehicles on
freeways



   70.07   Use of private property for vehicular travel



   70.08   Names of persons damaging real property by operation of
vehicle to be provided to owner



   70.09   Limited access highways; barriers along; vehicles to enter
and leave at designated intersections



   70.10   Through highways



   70.11   Officer may remove ignition key



   70.12   Excavating, leaving mud on, or building fence on roadway



   70.13   Removal of vehicles after accidents



Traffic-Control Devices



   70.20   Obeying traffic-control devices



   70.21   Signal lights



   70.22   Signals over reversible lanes



   70.23   Ambiguous or non-working traffic signals



   70.24   Pedestrian-control signals



   70.25   (Reserved)



   70.26   Unauthorized signs and signals prohibited



   70.27   Alteration, defacement, or removal prohibited



   70.28   Unauthorized possession or sale of devices



   70.29   Signal preemption devices; prohibitions



Traffic Regulations



   70.40   Traffic regulations; authority of City Manager



Enforcement



   70.50   Directing traffic



 



   70.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Unauthorized use of a motor vehicle, see § 131.09



Statutory reference:



   Local traffic regulations, scope and authority, see R.C. § 4511.07



   Notice of arrest of certain commercial drivers, see R.C. § 5577.14



   Traffic law photo-monitoring devices, state regulations, see R.C. §
4511.092 et seq.



   Uniform application and precedence of state traffic laws, see R.C. §
4511.06



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 70.01  DEFINITIONS.



   Except as otherwise provided, the definitions set forth in R.C. §
4501.01 shall apply to this Title, Chapter 95, and the penal laws of the
municipality. For the purpose of this Title and Chapter 95, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   AGRICULTURAL TRACTOR. Every self-propelled vehicle designed or used for
drawing other vehicles or wheeled machinery, but having no provision for
carrying loads independently of such other vehicles, and used principally for
agricultural purposes.



   ALLEY. A street or highway intended to provide access to the rear or
side of lots or buildings in urban districts, and not intended for the
purpose of through vehicular traffic, and any street or highway that has been
declared an “alley” by the Legislative Authority of the municipality in
which the street or highway is located.



   ARTERIAL STREET. Any United States or state numbered route,
controlled-access highway, or other major radial or circumferential street or
highway designated by local authorities within their respective jurisdictions
as part of a major arterial system of streets or highways.



   BEACON.   A highway traffic signal with one or more signal sections
that operate in a flashing mode.



   BICYCLE.   Every device, other than a device that is designed solely
for use as a play vehicle by a child, that is propelled solely by human power
upon which a person may ride, and that has two or more wheels, any of which
is more than 14 inches in diameter.



   BUS. Every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than nine
passengers, and used for the transportation of persons other than in a
ridesharing arrangement, and every motor vehicle, automobile for hire, or
funeral car, other than a taxicab or motor vehicle used in a ridesharing
arrangement, designed and used for the transportation of persons for
compensation.



   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory fronting upon a street or highway,
including the street or highway, between successive intersections within the
municipality, where 50% or more of the frontage between successive
intersections is occupied by buildings in use for business, or within or
outside the municipality where 50% or more of the frontage for a distance of
300 feet or more is occupied by buildings in use for business, and the
character of the territory is indicated by official traffic-control devices.



   CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINE. A motor vehicle that is designed to carry nine
or fewer passengers and is operated for hire pursuant to a prearranged
contract for the trans-portation of passengers on public roads and highways
along a route under the control of the person hiring the vehicle and not over
a defined and regular route. “Prearranged contract” means an agreement,
made in advance of boarding, to provide transportation from a specific
location in an chauffeured limousine. The term does not include any vehicle
that is used exclusively in the business of funeral directing. (R.C. §
4501.01(LL))



   CHILD DAY-CARE CENTER. Has the same meaning as set forth in R.C. §
5104.01.



   COMMERCIAL TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle having motive power designed or
used for drawing other vehicles, and not so constructed as to carry any load
thereon, or designed or used for drawing other vehicles while carrying a
portion of the other vehicles, or the load thereon, or both.



   CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY. Every street or highway in respect to which
owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal right
or access to or from the same except at certain points only and in a manner
as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over the
street or highway.



   CROSSWALK.



      (1)   That part of a roadway at intersections ordinarily
included within the real or projected prolongation of property lines and curb
lines or, in the absence of curbs, the edges of the traversable roadway;



      (2)   Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or
elsewhere, distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other
markings on the surface;



      (3)   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this
definition, there shall not be a crosswalk where the Legislative Authority
has placed signs indicating no crossing.



   DRIVER. Any person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.



   EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Emergency vehicles of municipal, township or county
departments or public utility corporations, when identified as such as
required by law, the Director of Public Safety, or local authorities, and
motor vehicles when commandeered by a police officer.



   EXPLOSIVES. Any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is
intended for the purpose of producing an explosion that contains any
oxidizing and combustible units or other ingredients in such proportions,
quantities, or packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion,
by percussion, or by a detonator of any part of the compound or mixture may
cause a sudden generation of highly heated gases, such that the resultant
gaseous pressures are capable of producing destructive effects on contiguous
objects, or of destroying life or limb. Manufactured articles shall not be
held to be explosives when the individual units contain explosives in limited
quantities of such nature or in such packing that it is impossible to procure
a simultaneous or a destructive explosion of the units, to the injury of
life, limb, or property by fire, friction, concussion, percussion, or by a
detonator, such as fixed ammunition for small arms, firecrackers, or safety
fuse matches.



   EXPRESSWAY. A divided arterial highway for through traffic with full or
partial control of access with an excess of 50% of all crossroads separated
in grade.



   FLAMMABLE LIQUID. Any liquid which has a flash point of 70°F or less,
as determined by a tagliabue or equivalent closed cup test device.



   FREEWAY. A divided multi-lane highway for through traffic with
crossroads separated in grade and with full control of access.



   FUNERAL ESCORT VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle, including a funeral hearse,
while used to facilitate the movement of a funeral procession.



   GROSS WEIGHT. The weight of a vehicle plus the weight of any load
thereon.



   HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way open
to the use of the public as a thoroughfare for purposes of vehicular travel.



   HIGHWAY MAINTENANCE VEHICLE. A vehicle used in snow and ice removal or
road surface maintenance, including a snow plow, traffic line striper, road
sweeper, mowing machine, asphalt distributing vehicle, or other such vehicle
designed for use in specific highway maintenance activities.



   HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SIGNAL. A power-operated traffic control device by
which traffic is warned or directed to take some specific action. The term
does not include a power-operated sign, steadily illuminated pavement marker,
warning light, or steady burning electric lamp.



   HYBRID BEACON. A type of beacon that is intentionally placed in a dark
mode between periods of operation where no indications are displayed and,
when in operation, displays both steady and flashing traffic control signal
indications.



   INTERSECTION.



      (1)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection
of the lateral curb lines, or, if none, the lateral boundary lines of the
roadways of two highways that join one another at, or approximately at, right
angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways
that join at any other angle might come into conflict. The junction of an
alley or driveway with a roadway or highway does not constitute an
intersection unless the roadway or highway at the junction is controlled by a
traffic control device.



      (2)   If a highway includes two roadways that are 30 feet or
more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an
intersecting highway constitutes a separate intersection. If both
intersecting highways include two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every
crossing of any two roadways of such highways constitutes a separate
intersection.



      (3)   At a location controlled by a traffic control signal,
regardless of the distance between the separate intersections as described in
division (2) of this definition:



         (a)   If a stop line, yield line, or crosswalk has not
been designated on the roadway within the median between the separate
intersections, the two intersections and the roadway and median constitute
one intersection.



         (b)   Where a stop line, yield line, or crosswalk line
is designated on the roadway on the intersection approach, the area within
the crosswalk and any area beyond the designated stop line or yield line
constitute part of the intersection.



         (c)   Where a crosswalk is designated on a roadway on
the departure from the intersection, the intersection includes the area that
extends to the far side of the crosswalk.



   LANED HIGHWAY. A highway the roadway of which is divided into two or
more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.



   LOCAL AUTHORITIES. Every county, municipal, and other local board or
body having authority to adopt police regulations under the Constitution and
laws of this state.



   MEDIAN. The area between two roadways of a divided highway, measured
from edge of traveled way to edge of traveled way, but excluding turn lanes.
The width of a median may be different between intersections, between
interchanges, and at opposite approaches of the same intersection.



   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle propelled or drawn by power other than
muscular power or power collected from overhead electric trolley wires,
except motorized bicycles, road rollers, traction engines, power shovels,
power cranes and other equipment used in construction work, and not designed
for or employed in general highway transportation, hole-digging machinery,
well-drilling machinery, ditch-digging machinery, farm machinery, and
trailers designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of
storage and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a
street or highway for a distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of
25 miles per hour or less.



   MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle other than a tractor having a seat or
saddle for the use of the operator and designed to travel on not more than
three wheels in contact with the ground, including but not limited to motor
vehicles known as “motor-driven cycle”, “motor scooter”,
“cab-enclosed motorcycle”, or “motorcycle” without regard to weight
or brake horsepower.



   MOTORIZED BICYCLE or MOPED. Any vehicle having either two tandem wheels
or one wheel in the front and two wheels in the rear, that may be pedaled,
and that is equipped with a helper motor of not more than 50 cubic
centimeters piston displacement that produces no more than one brake
horsepower, and is capable of propelling the vehicle at a speed of no greater
than 20 miles per hour on a level surface.



   MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIR. Any self-propelled vehicle designed for, and used
by, a person with a disability and that is incapable of a speed in excess of
eight miles per hour.



   MULTI-WHEEL AGRICULTURAL TRACTOR. A type of agricultural tractor that
has two or more wheels or tires on each side of one axle at the rear of the
tractor, is designed or used for drawing other vehicles or wheeled machinery,
has no provision for carrying loads independently of the drawn vehicles or
machinery, and is used principally for agricultural purposes.



   OPERATE. To cause or have caused movement of a vehicle.



   OPERATOR. Any person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.



   PARKED or PARKING. The standing of a vehicle upon a street, road,
alley, highway or public ground, whether accompanied or unaccompanied by a
driver, but does not include the temporary standing of a vehicle for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or loading merchandise or
passengers.



   PEDESTRIAN. Any natural person afoot.



   PERSON. Every natural person, firm, partnership, association or
corporation.



   POLE TRAILER. Every trailer or semitrailer attached to the towing
vehicle by means of a reach, pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to
the towing vehicle, and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregular
shaped loads such as poles, pipes, or structural members capable, generally,
of sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting connections.



   POLICE OFFICER. Every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic,
or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.



   PREDICATE MOTOR VEHICLE OR TRAFFIC OFFENSE. Any of the following:



      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 4511.03, 4511.051, 4511.12,
4511.132, 4511.16, 4511.20, 4511.201, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.213, 4511.214,
4511.22, 4511.23, 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30,
4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33, 4511.34, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38,
4511.39, 4511.40, 4511.41, 4511.42, 4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.432, 4511.44,
4511.441, 4511.451, 4511.452, 4511.46, 4511.47, 4511.48, 4511.481, 4511.49,
4511.50, 4511.511, 4511.53, 4511.54, 4511.55, 4511.56, 4511.57, 4511.58,
4511.59, 4511.60, 4511.61, 4511.64, 4511.66, 4511.661, 4511.68, 4511.70,
4511.701, 4511.71, 4511.711, 4511.712, 4511.713, 4511.72, 4511.73, 4511.763,
4511.771, 4511.78, or 4511.84;



      (2)   A violation of R.C. § 4511.17(A)(2), 4511.51(A) through
(D), or 4511.74(A);



      (3)   A violation of any provision of R.C. §§ 4511.01
through 4511.76 for which no penalty otherwise is provided in the section
that contains the provision violated;



      (4)   A violation of a municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to any section or provision set forth or described
in division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.



   PRIVATE ROAD OPEN TO PUBLIC TRAVEL. A private toll road or road,
including any adjacent sidewalks that generally run parallel to the road,
within a shopping center, airport, sports arena, or other similar business or
recreation facility that is privately owned but where the public is allowed
to travel without access restrictions. The term includes a gated toll road
but does not include a road within a private gated property where access is
restricted at all times, a parking area, a driving aisle within a parking
area, or a private grade crossing.



   PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY. Every way or place in private ownership used
for vehicular travel by the owner, and those having express or implied
permission from the owner, but not by other persons.



   PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE. Any of the following:



      (1)   Ambulances, including private ambulance companies under
contract to a municipality, township, or county, and private ambulances and
nontransport vehicles bearing license plates issued under R.C. § 4503.49;



      (2)   Motor vehicles used by public law enforcement officers
or other persons sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state;



      (3)   Any motor vehicle when properly identified as required
by the Director of Public Safety, when used in response to fire emergency
calls or to provide emergency medical service to ill or injured persons, and
when operated by a duly qualified person who is a member of a volunteer
rescue service or a volunteer fire department, and who is on duty pursuant to
the rules or directives of that service. The State Fire Marshal shall be
designated by the Director of Public Safety as the certifying agency for all
public safety vehicles described herein;



      (4)   Vehicles used by fire departments, including motor
vehicles when used by volunteer firefighters responding to emergency calls in
the fire department service when identified as required by the Director of
Public Safety;



      (5)   Any vehicle used to transport or provide emergency
medical service to an ill or injured person, when certified as a public
safety vehicle, shall be considered such a vehicle when transporting an ill
or injured person to a hospital, regardless of whether such vehicle has
already passed a hospital;



      (6)   Vehicles used by the Motor Carrier Enforcement Unit for
the enforcement of orders and rules of the Public Utilities Commission as
specified in R.C. § 5503.34.



   RAILROAD. A carrier of persons or property operating upon rails placed
principally on a private right-of-way.



   RAILROAD SIGN OR SIGNAL. Any sign, signal, or device erected by
authority of a public body or official or by a railroad, and intended to give
notice of the presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train.



   RAILROAD TRAIN. A steam engine or an electric or other motor, with or
without cars coupled thereto, operated by a railroad.



   RESIDENCE DISTRICT. The territory, not comprising a business district,
fronting on a street or highway, including the street or highway, where, for
a distance of 300 feet or more, the frontage is improved with residences or
residences and buildings in use for business.



   RIDESHARING ARRANGEMENT. Includes the transportation of persons in a
motor vehicle where the transportation is incidental to another purpose of a
volunteer driver, and includes arrangements known as carpools, vanpools, and
buspools.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY. Either of the following, as the context requires:



      (1)   The right of a vehicle or pedestrian to proceed
uninterruptedly in a lawful manner in the direction in which it, he or she is
moving, in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching from a
different direction into its, his or her path;



      (2)   A general term denoting land, property, or the interest
therein, usually in the configuration of a strip, acquired for or devoted to
transportation purposes. When used in this context, “right-of-way”
includes the roadway, shoulders or berm, ditch, and slopes extending to the
right-of-way limits under the control of the state or local authority.



   ROAD SERVICE VEHICLE. Means wreckers, utility repair vehicles, and
state, county, and municipal service vehicles equipped with visual signals by
means of flashing, rotating, or oscillating lights.



   ROADWAY. That portion of a highway improved, designed, or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel, except the berm or shoulder. If a highway includes
two or more separate roadways, the term means any roadway separately, but not
all the roadways collectively.



   RURAL MAIL DELIVERY VEHICLE. Every vehicle used to deliver United
States mail on a rural mail delivery route.



   SAFETY ZONE. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway
for the exclusive use of pedestrians, and protected or marked or indicated by
adequate signs so as to be plainly visible at all times.



   SCHOOL BUS. Every bus designed for carrying more than nine passengers
which is owned by a public, private, or governmental agency or institution of
learning, and operated for the transportation of children to or from a school
session or a school function, or owned by a private person and operated for
compensation for the transportation of children to or from a school session
or a school function; provided the term does not include a bus operated by a
municipally owned transportation system, a mass transit company operating
exclusively within the territorial limits of a municipality, or within such
limits and the territorial limits of municipalities immediately contiguous to
the municipality, nor a common passenger carrier certified by the Public
Utilities Commission unless the bus is devoted exclusively to the
transportation of children to and from a school session or a school function,
and the term does not include a van or bus used by a licensed child day-care
center or Type A Family Day-Care Home to transport children from the child
day-care center or Type A Family Day-Care Home to a school if the van or bus
does not have more than 15 children in the van or bus at any time.



   SEMITRAILER. Every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or
property with another and separate motor vehicle so that in operation a part
of its own weight or that of its load, or both, rests upon and is carried by
another vehicle.



   SHARED-USE PATH. A bikeway outside the traveled way and physically
separated from motorized vehicular traffic by an open space or barrier and
either within the highway right-of-way or within an independent alignment. A
shared-use path also may be used by pedestrians, including skaters, joggers,
users of manual and motorized wheelchairs, and other authorized motorized and
non-motorized users.



   SIDEWALK. That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the
lateral line of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for the
use of pedestrians.



   STANDING. When prohibited, means any halting of a vehicle, even
momentarily, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control device.



   STATE HIGHWAY. A highway under the jurisdiction of the Department of
Transportation, outside the limits of municipalities, provided that the
authority conferred upon the Director of Transportation in R.C. § 5511.01 to
erect state highway route markers and signs directing traffic shall not be
modified by R.C. §§ 4511.01 through 4511.79 and 4511.99.



   STATE ROUTE. Every highway which is designated with an official state
route number and so marked.



   STOP. When required, means a complete cessation of movement.



   STOP INTERSECTION. Any intersection at one or more entrances of which
stop signs are erected.



   STOPPING. When prohibited, means any halting of a vehicle, even
momentarily, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control device.



   STREET. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way open
to the use of the public as a thoroughfare for purposes of vehicular travel.



   THROUGH HIGHWAY. Every street or highway as provided in R.C. §
4511.65, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



   THRUWAY. A through highway whose entire roadway is reserved for through
traffic and on which roadway parking is prohibited.



   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars,
and other devices, either singly or together, while using for purposes of
travel any highway or private road open to public travel.



   TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE. A flagger, sign, signal, marking, or other
device used to regulate, warn, or guide traffic, placed on, over, or adjacent
to a street, highway, private road open to public travel, pedestrian
facility, or shared-use path by authority of a public agency or official
having jurisdiction, or, in the case of a private road open to public travel,
by authority of the private owner or private official having jurisdiction.



   TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL. Any highway traffic signal by which traffic is
alternately directed to stop and permitted to proceed.



   TRAILER. Every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or
property wholly on its own structure, and for being drawn by a motor vehicle,
including any vehicle when formed by or operated as a combination of a
semitrailer and a vehicle of the dolly type, such as that commonly known as a
trailer dolly, a vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or
agricultural production materials between a local place of storage or supply
and the farm when drawn or towed on a street or highway at a speed greater
than 25 miles per hour and a vehicle designed and used exclusively to
transport a boat between a place of storage and a marina, or in and around a
marina, when drawn or towed on a street or highway for a distance of more
than ten miles or at a speed of more than 25 miles per hour.



   TRUCK. Every motor vehicle, except trailers and semitrailers, designed
and used to carry property.



   TYPE A FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME. Has the same meaning as set forth in R.C.
§ 5104.01.



   URBAN DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including any street or
highway which is built up with structures devoted to business, industry, or
dwelling houses situated at intervals of less than 100 feet for a distance of
one-quarter of a mile or more, and the character of the territory is
indicated by official traffic-control devices.



   VEHICLE. Every device, including a motorized bicycle, in, upon, or by
which any person or property may be transported or drawn upon a highway,
except that the term does not include any motorized wheelchair, any electric
personal assistive mobility device, any device that is moved by power
collected from overhead electric trolley wires or that is used exclusively
upon stationary rails or tracks, or any device, other than a bicycle, that is
moved by human power.



(R.C. § 4511.01)



§ 70.02  COMPLIANCE WITH ORDER OF POLICE OFFICER.



   (A)   No person shall fail to comply with any lawful order or
direction of any police officer invested with authority to direct, control,
or regulate traffic.



   (B)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle so as willfully to
elude or flee a police officer after receiving a visible or audible signal
from a police officer to bring the person's motor vehicle to a stop.



   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to
comply with an order or signal of a police officer.



      (2)   A violation of division (A) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (3)   Except as provided in divisions (C)(4) and (5) of this
section, a violation of division (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.



      (4)   Except as provided in division (C)(5) of this section, a
violation of division (B) of this section is a felony and shall be prosecuted
under appropriate state law if the jury or judge as trier of fact finds by
proof beyond a reasonable doubt that in committing the offense, the offender
was fleeing immediately after the commission of a felony.



      (5)   (a)   A violation of division (B) of this section is
a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law if the jury or
judge as trier of fact finds any of the following by proof beyond a
reasonable doubt:



            1.   The operation of the motor vehicle by the
offender was a proximate cause of serious physical harm to persons or
property.



            2.   The operation of the motor vehicle by the
offender caused a substantial risk of serious physical harm to persons or
property.



         (b)   If a police officer pursues an offender who is
violating division (B) of this section and division (C)(5)(a) of this section
applies, the sentencing court, in determining the seriousness of an
offender's conduct for purposes of sentencing the offender for a violation of
division (B) of this section, shall consider, along with the factors set
forth in R.C. §§ 2929.12 and 2929.13 that are required to be considered,
all of the following:



            1.   The duration of the pursuit;



            2.   The distance of the pursuit;



            3.   The rate of speed at which the offender
operated the motor vehicle during the pursuit;



            4.   Whether the offender failed to stop for
traffic lights or stop signs during the pursuit;



            5.   The number of traffic lights or stop signs
for which the offender failed to stop during the pursuit;



            6.   Whether the offender operated the motor
vehicle during the pursuit without lighted lights during a time when lighted
lights are required;



            7.   Whether the offender committed a moving
violation during the pursuit;



            8.   The number of moving violations the offender
committed during the pursuit;



            9.   Any other relevant factors indicating that
the offender's conduct is more serious than conduct normally constituting the
offense.



   (D)   In addition to any other sanction imposed for a violation of
division (A) of this section or a misdemeanor violation of division (B) of
this section, the court shall impose a class five suspension from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(5). If the offender previously has been found
guilty of an offense under this section or under R.C. § 2921.331 or any
other substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, in addition to any other
sanction imposed for the offense, the court shall impose a class one
suspension as described in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(1). The court may grant limited
driving privileges to the offender on a suspension imposed for a misdemeanor
violation of this section as set forth in R.C. § 4510.021. No judge shall
suspend any portion of the suspension under a class one suspension of an
offender’s license, permit, or privilege required by this division.



   (E)   As used in this section:



      MOVING VIOLATION has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2743.70.



      POLICE OFFICER has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.



(R.C. § 2921.331(A) - (C), (E), (F))



Cross-reference:



   Resisting arrest, see § 136.08



§ 70.03  EMERGENCY VEHICLES TO PROCEED CAUTIOUSLY PAST RED OR STOP SIGNAL.



   (A)   The driver of any emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle,
when responding to an emergency call, upon approaching a red or stop signal
or any stop sign, shall slow down as necessary for safety to traffic, but may
proceed cautiously past the red or stop sign or signal with due regard for
the safety of all persons using the street or highway.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.03)



§ 70.04  EXCEPTIONS GENERALLY; EMERGENCY, PUBLIC SAFETY AND CORONER
VEHICLES EXEMPT.



   (A)   The provisions of this traffic code, except for §§ 73.01 and
73.011, do not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles, and other equipment
while actually engaged in work upon the surface of a highway within an area
designated by traffic-control devices, but apply to those persons and
vehicles when traveling to or from such work.



   (B)   The driver of a highway maintenance vehicle owned by this
state or any political subdivision of this state, while the driver is engaged
in the performance of official duties upon a street or highway, provided the
highway maintenance vehicle is equipped with flashing lights and such other
markings as are required by law and such lights are in operation when the
driver and vehicle are so engaged, shall be exempt from criminal prosecution
for violations of R.C.



§§ 4511.22, 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.33,
4511.35, 4511.66, and 4513.02, and R.C. §§ 5577.01 through 5577.09, and any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



   (C)   (1)   This section does not exempt a driver of a highway
maintenance vehicle from civil liability arising from a violation of R.C. §
4511.22, 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.33,
4511.35, 4511.66, or 4513.02 or R.C. §§ 5577.01 through 5577.09, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



      (2)   This section does not exempt the driver of a vehicle
that is engaged in the transport of highway maintenance equipment from
criminal liability for a violation of R.C. §§ 5577.01 through 5577.09, or
any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



   (D)   The provisions of R.C. §§ 4511.12, 4511.13, 4511.131,
4511.132, 4511.14, 4511.202, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.22, 4511.23, 4511.25,
4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33,
4511.34, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40, 4511.41,
4511.42, 4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.432, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.57, 4511.58,
4511.59, 4511.60, 4511.61, 4511.62, 4511.66, 4511.68, 4511.681, and 4511.69,
and any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, do not apply to the
driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle if the emergency
vehicle or public safety vehicle is responding to an emergency call, is
equipped with and displaying at least one flashing, rotating, or oscillating
light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet
to the front of the vehicle and if the driver of the vehicles is giving an
audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle, or bell. This section does not
relieve the driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the
duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon
the highway.



(R.C. § 4511.041)



   (E)   The provisions of R.C. §§ 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27,
4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33, 4511.35, 4511.36,
4511.37, 4511.38, and 4511.66, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinances, do not apply to a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s
investigator operating a motor vehicle in accordance with R.C. § 4513.171 or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance. This division does not
relieve a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator operating a
motor vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons and property upon the highway.



(R.C. § 4511.042)



§ 70.05  PERSONS RIDING OR DRIVING ANIMALS UPON ROADWAYS.



   Every person riding, driving, or leading an animal upon a roadway is
subject to the provisions of this traffic code, applicable to the driver of a
vehicle, except those provisions of this traffic code which by their nature
are inapplicable.



(R.C. § 4511.05)



§ 70.06  PROHIBITIONS AGAINST PEDESTRIANS AND SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES ON
FREEWAYS.



   (A)   No person, unless otherwise directed by a police officer,
shall:



      (1)   As a pedestrian, occupy any space within the limits of
the right-of-way of a freeway, except: in a rest area; on a facility that is
separated from the roadway and shoulders of the freeway and is designed and
appropriately marked for pedestrian use; in the performance of public works
or official duties; as a result of an emergency caused by an accident or
breakdown of a motor vehicle; or to obtain assistance;



      (2)   Occupy any space within the limits of the right-of-way
of a freeway, with an animal-drawn vehicle, a ridden or led animal, herded
animals, a pushcart, a bicycle, except on a facility that is separated from
the roadway and shoulders of the freeway and is designed and appropriately
marked for bicycle use, a bicycle with motor attached, a motor-driven cycle
with a motor which produces not to exceed five brake horsepower, an
agricultural tractor, or farm machinery, except in the performance of public
works or official duties.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.051)



Statutory reference:



   Designation of a freeway, see R.C. § 4511.011



§ 70.07  USE OF PRIVATE PROPERTY FOR VEHICULAR TRAVEL.



   The provisions of this traffic code do not prevent the owner of real
property, used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel by permission
of the owner and not as a matter of right, from prohibiting such use or from
requiring additional conditions to those specified in this traffic code, or
otherwise regulating such use as may seem best to the owner.



(R.C. § 4511.08)



§ 70.08  NAMES OF PERSONS DAMAGING REAL PROPERTY BY OPERATION OF VEHICLE TO
BE PROVIDED TO OWNER.



   (A)   As used in this section, MOTOR VEHICLE has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 4501.01.



   (B)   If damage is caused to real property by the operation of a
motor vehicle in, or during the, violation of any section of the Revised Code
or of any municipal ordinance, the law enforcement agency that investigates
the case, upon request of the real property owner, shall provide the owner
with the names of the persons who are charged with the commission of the
offense.  If a request for the names is made, the agency shall provide the
names as soon as possible after the persons are charged with the offense.



   (C)   The personnel of law enforcement agencies who act pursuant to
division (B) of this section in good faith are not liable in damages in a
civil action allegedly arising from their actions taken pursuant to that
division.  Political subdivisions and the state are not liable in damages in
a civil action allegedly arising from the actions of personnel of their law
enforcement agencies if the personnel have immunity under this division.



(R.C. § 2935.28)



§ 70.09  LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAYS; BARRIERS ALONG; VEHICLES TO ENTER AND
LEAVE AT DESIGNATED INTERSECTIONS.



   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall cut, injure, remove, or
destroy any fence or other barrier designed and erected to prevent traffic
from entering or leaving a limited access highway without the permission of
the Director of Transportation, except in a case of emergency where life or
property is in danger.  No person, firm or corporation shall cause a vehicle
of any character to enter or leave a limited access highway at any point
other than intersections designated by the Director for such purposes, except
in a case of emergency where life or property is in danger.



(R.C. § 3767.201)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 3767.99(D))



§ 70.10  THROUGH HIGHWAYS.



   (A)   All state routes are hereby designated as through highways,
provided that stop signs, yield signs, or traffic-control signals shall be
erected at all intersections with such through highways by the Department of
Transportation as to highways under its jurisdiction and by local authorities
as to highways under their jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this
section.  Where two or more state routes that are through highways
intersect, and no traffic-control signal is in operation, stop signs or yield
signs shall be erected at one or more entrances thereto by the Department or
by local authorities having jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in
this section.  Whenever the Director of Transportation determines on the
basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that stop signs are
necessary to stop traffic on a through highway for safe and efficient
operation, nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent such
installations.  When circumstances warrant, the Director also may omit stop
signs on roadways intersecting through highways under his or her
jurisdiction.  Before the Director either installs or removes a stop sign
under this division, he or she shall give notice, in writing, of that
proposed action to the affected local authority at least 30 days before
installing or removing the stop sign.



   (B)   Other streets or highways, or portions thereof, are hereby
designated as through highways if they are within the municipality, if they
have a continuous length of more than one mile between the limits of the
street or highway or portion thereof, and if they have stop or yield signs or
traffic-control signals at the entrances of the majority of intersecting
streets or highways.  For purposes of this section, the limits of the street
or highway, or portion thereof, shall be the municipal corporation line, the
physical terminus of the street or highway, or any point on the streets or
highway at which vehicular traffic thereon is required by regulatory signs to
stop or yield to traffic on the intersecting street, provided, that in
residence districts, the municipality may by ordinance designate such street
or highway, or portion thereof, not to be a through highway and thereafter
the affected residence district shall be indicated by official
traffic-control devices.  Where two or more through highways designated
under this division intersect and no traffic-control signal is in operation,
stop signs or yield signs shall be erected at one or more entrances thereto
by the Department or by local authorities having jurisdiction, except as
otherwise provided in this section.



   (C)   The Department or local authorities having jurisdiction need
not erect stop signs at intersections they find to be so constructed as to
permit traffic to safely enter a through highway without coming to a stop. 
Signs shall be erected at such intersections indicating that the operator of
a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to or merge with all traffic
proceeding on the through highway.



   (D)   Local authorities, with reference to highways under their
jurisdiction, may designate additional through highways, and shall erect stop
signs, yield signs, or traffic-control signals at all streets and highways
intersecting such through highways, or may designate any intersection as a
stop or yield intersection, and shall erect like signs at one or more
entrances to the intersection.



(R.C. § 4511.65)



§ 70.11  OFFICER MAY REMOVE IGNITION KEY.



   A law enforcement officer may remove the ignition key left in the
ignition switch of an unlocked and unattended motor vehicle parked on a
street or highway.  The officer removing the key shall place notification
upon the vehicle detailing his or her name and badge number, the place where
the key may be reclaimed, and the procedure for reclaiming the key.  The key
shall be returned to the owner of the motor vehicle upon presentation of
proof of ownership.



(R.C. § 4549.05)



§ 70.12  EXCAVATING, LEAVING MUD ON, OR BUILDING FENCE ON ROADWAY.



   (A)   No person shall dig up, remove, excavate, or place any earth
or mud upon any portion of any public way, or build a fence upon the same
without authority to do so.  Each day that such person continues to dig up,
remove, or excavate, or place any earth or mud upon any portion of the public
way constitutes a separate offense.



('67 Code, § 70.07)



   (B)   No person shall drop or deposit any mud, stones, gravel or
similar material on any street, highway, public way or place.



   (C)   It shall be the duty of the person who unlawfully drops or
deposits mud, stones, gravel or similar material or permits the load or any
portion thereof to be dropped or deposited upon any street, highway, public
way or place to immediately remove the same or cause it to be removed.



   (D)   As used in this section, the term PUBLIC WAY includes but is
not limited to sidewalks.



Penalty, see § 70.99



Cross-reference:



   Placing injurious material on highway or depositing litter from motor
vehicle, see § 72.62



§ 70.13  REMOVAL OF VEHICLES AFTER ACCIDENTS.



   (A)   If a motor vehicle accident occurs on any highway, public
street, or other property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel
and if any motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property that has been damaged
or spilled as a result of the motor vehicle accident is blocking the highway,
street, or other property or is otherwise endangering public safety, a public
safety official may do either of the following without the consent of the
owner but with the approval of the law enforcement agency conducting any
investigation of the accident:



      (1)   Remove, or order the removal of, the motor vehicle if
the motor vehicle is unoccupied, cargo, or personal property from the portion
of the highway, public street, or property ordinarily used for vehicular
travel on the highway, public street, or other property open to the public
for purposes of vehicular travel.



      (2)   If the motor vehicle is a commercial motor vehicle,
allow the owner or operator of the vehicle the opportunity to arrange for the
removal of the motor vehicle within a period of time specified by the public
safety official. If the public safety official determines that the motor
vehicle cannot be removed within the specified period of time, the public
safety official shall remove or order the removal of the motor vehicle.



   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) of this
section, the Department of Transportation, any employee of the Department of
Transportation, or a public safety official who authorizes or participates in
the removal of any unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property as
authorized by division (A) of this section, regardless of whether the removal
is executed by a private towing service, is not liable for civil damages for
any injury, death, or loss to person or property that results from the
removal of that unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property.
Further, except as provided in division (B)(2) of this section, if a public
safety official authorizes, employs, or arranges to have a private towing
service remove any unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property as
authorized by division (A) of this section, that private towing service is
not liable for civil damages for any injury, death, or loss to person or
property that results from the removal of that unoccupied motor vehicle,
cargo, or personal property.



      (2)   Division (B)(1) of this section does not apply to any of
the following:



         (a)   Any person or entity involved in the removal of an
unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property pursuant to division
(A) of this section if that removal causes or contributes to the release of a
hazardous material or to structural damage to the roadway;



         (b)   A private towing service that was not authorized,
employed, or arranged by a public safety official to remove an unoccupied
motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property under this section;



         (c)   Except as provided in division (B)(2)(d) of this
section, a private towing service that was authorized, employed, or arranged
by a public safety official to perform the removal of the unoccupied motor
vehicle, cargo, or personal property but the private towing service performed
the removal in a negligent manner;



         (d)   A private towing service that was authorized,
employed, or arranged by a public safety official to perform the removal of
the unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property that was
endangering public safety but the private towing service performed the
removal in a reckless manner.



   (C)   As used in divisions (A) and (B) of this section:



      HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2305.232.



      PUBLIC SAFETY OFFICIAL. Means any of the following:



         (a)   The sheriff of the county, or the chief of police
in the municipal corporation, township, or township or joint police district,
in which the accident occurred;



         (b)   A state highway patrol trooper;



         (c)   The chief of the fire department having
jurisdiction where the accident occurred;



         (d)   A duly authorized subordinate acting on behalf of
an official specified in divisions (a) to (c) of this definition.



(R.C. § 4513.66)



   (D)   If a towing service is removing a motor vehicle, and the
removal was not authorized under R.C. § 4513.60, 4513.601, 4513.61, or
4513.66, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, prior to
removing the motor vehicle, the towing service shall provide a written
estimate of the price for the removal to the operator of the motor vehicle
unless the operator is incapacitated, seriously injured, or otherwise
unavailable to accept the estimate. The towing service shall not submit such
an estimate to any repair facility or storage facility to which the motor
vehicle is transported unless the operator of the motor vehicle meets one of
the conditions specified above.



   (E)   The towing service shall ensure that any estimate provided
under division (D) of this section includes the fees, services to be
rendered, and destination of the vehicle.



   (F)   If a towing service fails to provide a written estimate as
required by this section, the towing service shall not charge fees for the
towing and storage of the motor vehicle that exceed 25% of the fees
authorized under R.C. § 4513.601(G)(1)(b) for a motor vehicle removed from a
private tow- away zone.



   (G)   Any storage facility that accepts towed vehicles shall
conspicuously post a notice at the entrance to the storage facility that
states the limitation on fees established under division (F) of this section.



(R.C. § 4513.68)



TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES



§ 70.20  OBEYING TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.



   (A)   (1)   No pedestrian or driver of a vehicle shall disobey
the instructions of any traffic-control device placed in accordance with the
provisions of this traffic code, unless at the time otherwise directed by a
police officer.



      (2)   No provision of this traffic code for which signs are
required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and
place of the alleged violation, an official sign is not in proper position
and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person.
Whenever a particular section of this traffic code does not state that signs
are required, that section shall be effective even though no signs are
erected or in place.



(R.C. § 4511.12(A))



   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (C) of this section,
any operator of a commercial motor vehicle, upon approaching a scale location
established for the purpose of determining the weight of the vehicle and its
load, shall comply with any traffic control device or the order of a peace
officer directing the vehicle to proceed to be weighed or otherwise inspected.



      (2)   Any operator of a commercial motor vehicle, upon
bypassing a scale location in accordance with division (C) of this section,
shall comply with an order of a peace officer to stop the vehicle to verify
the use and operation of an electronic clearance device.



   (C)   Any operator of a commercial motor vehicle that is equipped
with an electronic clearance device authorized by the Superintendent of the
State Highway Patrol under R.C. § 4549.081 may bypass a scale location,
regardless of the instruction of a traffic control device to enter the scale
facility, if either of the following apply:



      (1)   The in-cab transponder displays a green light or other
affirmative visual signal and also sounds an affirmative audible signal;



      (2)   Any other criterion established by the Superintendent of
the State Highway Patrol is met.



   (D)   Any peace officer may order the operator of a commercial motor
vehicle that bypasses a scale location to stop the vehicle to verify the use
and operation of an electronic clearance device.



   (E)   As used in this section, COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE means any
combination of vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating or an actual gross
vehicle weight of more than 10,000 pounds if the vehicle is used in
interstate or intrastate commerce to transport property and also means any
vehicle that is transporting hazardous materials for which placarding is
required pursuant to 49 C.F.R. Parts 100 through 180.



(R.C. § 4511.121(A)-(C), (E))



   (F)   No person shall use an electronic clearance device if the
device or its use is not in compliance with rules of the Superintendent of
the State Highway Patrol.



(R.C. § 4549.081(B))



   (G)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division,
whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the
offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle
or traffic offenses, whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.12(B))



      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty
of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division
(B) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more
violations of division (B) of this section or any substantially equivalent
state law or municipal ordinance, whoever violates division (B) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.121(D))



      (3)   Whoever violates division (F) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of
the third degree on each subsequent offense.



(R.C. § 4549.081(C))



Statutory reference:



   Traffic-control devices to conform to the state manual and
specifications, see R.C. § 4511.11



   Placing traffic-control devices on state highways, permission required,
see R.C. § 4511.10



   Uniform system of traffic-control devices, see R.C. § 4511.09



§ 70.21  SIGNAL LIGHTS.



   Highway traffic signal indications for vehicles and pedestrians shall
have the following meanings:



   (A)   Steady green signal indication.



      (1)   (a)   Vehicular traffic facing a circular green
signal indication is permitted to proceed straight through or turn right or
left or make a u-turn movement except as such movement is modified by a
lane-use sign, turn prohibition sign, lane marking, roadway design, separate
turn signal indication, or other traffic control device. Such vehicular
traffic, including vehicles turning right or left or making a u-turn
movement, shall yield the right-of-way to both of the following:



            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated
crosswalk;



            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the
intersection.



         (b)   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or
making a u-turn movement to the left shall yield the right-of-way to other
vehicles approaching from the opposite direction so closely as to constitute
an immediate hazard during the time when such turning vehicle is moving
across or within the intersection.



      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal
indication, displayed alone or in combination with another signal indication,
is permitted to cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement
indicated by such arrow, or such other movement as is permitted by other
indications displayed at the same time. Such vehicular traffic, including
vehicles turning right or left or making a u-turn movement, shall yield the
right-of-way to both of the following:



         (a)   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated
crosswalk;



         (b)   Other traffic lawfully using the intersection.



      (3)   (a)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian
signal indication, as provided in R.C. § 4511.14, pedestrians facing a
circular green signal indication are permitted to proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. The pedestrian shall
yield the right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection or so
close as to create an immediate hazard at the time that the green signal
indication is first displayed.



         (b)   Pedestrians facing a green arrow signal
indication, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or
other traffic control device, shall not cross the roadway.



   (B)   Steady yellow signal indication.



      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular yellow signal
indication is thereby warned that the related green movement or the related
flashing arrow movement is being terminated or that a steady red signal
indication will be exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic
shall not enter the intersection. The provisions governing vehicular
operation under the movement being terminated shall continue to apply while
the steady circular yellow signal indication is displayed.



      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow arrow signal
indication is thereby warned that the related green arrow movement or the
related flashing arrow movement is being terminated. The provisions governing
vehicular operation under the movement being terminated shall continue to
apply while the steady yellow arrow signal indication is displayed.



      (3)   Pedestrians facing a steady circular yellow or yellow
arrow signal indication, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal
indication as provided in R.C. § 4511.14 or other traffic control device,
shall not start to cross the roadway.



   (C)   Steady red signal indication.



      (1)   (a)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red
signal indication, unless entering the intersection to make another movement
permitted by another signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line; but if there is no stop line, traffic shall stop before entering the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk,
then before entering the intersection; and shall remain stopped until a
signal indication to proceed is displayed except as provided in divisions
(C)(1), (C)(2), and (C)(3) of this section.



         (b)   Except when a traffic control device is in place
prohibiting a turn on red or a steady red arrow signal indication is
displayed, vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red signal indication
is permitted, after stopping, to enter the intersection to turn right, or to
turn left from a one-way street into a one-way street. The right to proceed
with the turn shall be subject to the provisions that are applicable after
making a stop at a stop sign.



      (2)   (a)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow
signal indication shall not enter the intersection to make the movement
indicated by the arrow and, unless entering the intersection to make another
movement permitted by another signal indication, shall stop at a clearly
marked stop line; but if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk
on the near side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, then
before entering the intersection; and shall remain stopped until a signal
indication or other traffic control device permitting the movement indicated
by such red arrow is displayed.



         (b)   When a traffic control device is in place
permitting a turn on a steady red arrow signal indication, vehicular traffic
facing a steady red arrow indication is permitted, after stopping, to enter
the intersection to turn right, or to turn left from a one-way street into a
one-way street. The right to proceed with the turn shall be limited to the
direction indicated by the arrow and shall be subject to the provisions that
are applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.



      (3)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal
indication as provided in R.C. § 4511.14 or other traffic control device,
pedestrians facing a steady circular red or steady red arrow signal
indication shall not enter the roadway.



      (4)   Local authorities by ordinance, or the Director of
Transportation on state highways, may prohibit a right or a left turn against
a steady red signal at any intersection, which shall be effective when signs
giving notice thereof are posted at the intersection.



   (D)   Flashing green signal indication. A flashing green signal
indication has no meaning and shall not be used.



   (E)   Flashing yellow signal indication.



      (1)   (a)   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an
intersection, facing a flashing circular yellow signal indication, is
permitted to cautiously enter the intersection to proceed straight through or
turn right or left or make a u-turn movement except as such movement is
modified by lane-use signs, turn prohibition signs, lane markings, roadway
design, separate turn signal indications, or other traffic control devices.
Such vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left or making a
u-turn movement, shall yield the right-of-way to both of the following:



            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated
crosswalk;



            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the
intersection.



         (b)   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or
making a u-turn to the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles
approaching from the opposite direction so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard during the time when such turning vehicle is moving across
or within the intersection.



      (2)   (a)   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an
intersection, facing a flashing yellow arrow signal indication, displayed
alone or in combination with another signal indication, is permitted to
cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such
arrow, or other such movement as is permitted by other signal indications
displayed at the same time. Such vehicular traffic, including vehicles
turning right or left or making a u-turn, shall yield the right-of-way to
both of the following:



            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated
crosswalk;



            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the
intersection.



         (b)   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or
making a u-turn to the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles
approaching from the opposite direction so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard during the time when such turning vehicle is moving across
or within the intersection.



      (3)   Pedestrians facing any flashing yellow signal indication
at an intersection, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal
indication or other traffic control device, are permitted to proceed across
the roadway within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. Pedestrians
shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at
the time that the flashing yellow signal indication is first displayed.



      (4)   When a flashing circular yellow signal indication is
displayed as a beacon to supplement another traffic control device, road
users are notified that there is a need to pay additional attention to the
message contained thereon or that the regulatory or warning requirements of
the other traffic control device, which might not be applicable at all times,
are currently applicable.



   (F)   Flashing red signal indication.



      (1)   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection,
facing a flashing circular red signal indication, shall stop at a clearly
marked stop line; but if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk
on the near side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, at the
point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the
intersection. The right to proceed shall be subject to the provisions that
are applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.



      (2)   Pedestrians facing any flashing red signal indication at
an intersection, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication
or other traffic control device, are permitted to proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. Pedestrians shall yield
the right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time
that the flashing red signal indication is first displayed.



      (3)   When a flashing circular red signal indication is
displayed as a beacon to supplement another traffic control device, road
users are notified that there is a need to pay additional attention to the
message contained thereon or that the regulatory requirements of the other
traffic control device, which might not be applicable at all times, are
currently applicable. Use of this signal indication shall be limited to
supplementing stop, do not enter, or wrong way signs, and to applications
where compliance with the supplemented traffic control device requires a stop
at a designated point.



   (G)   In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this
section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their
nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or
marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the
absence of any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal.



   (H)   This section does not apply at railroad grade- crossings.
Conduct of drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall be
governed by R.C. §§ 4511.61 and 4511.62.



(R.C. § 4511.13)



§ 70.22  SIGNALS OVER REVERSIBLE LANES.



   The meanings of lane-use control signal indications are as follows:



   (A)   A steady downward green arrow. A road user is permitted to
drive in the lane over which the arrow signal indication is located.



   (B)   A steady yellow “X”. A road user is to prepare to vacate
the lane over which the signal indication is located because a lane control
change is being made to a steady red “X” signal indication.



   (C)   A steady white two-way left-turn arrow. A road user is
permitted to use a lane over which the signal indication is located for a
left turn, but not for through travel, with the understanding that common use
of the lane by oncoming road users for left turns also is permitted.



   (D)   A steady white one-way left-turn arrow. A road user is
permitted to use a lane over which the signal indication is located for a
left turn, without opposing turns in the same lane, but not for through
travel.



   (E)   A steady red “X”. A road user is not permitted to use the
lane over which the signal indication is located and that this signal
indication shall modify accordingly the meaning of other traffic controls
present.



(R.C. § 4511.131)



§ 70.23  AMBIGUOUS OR NON-WORKING TRAFFIC SIGNALS.



   (A)   The driver of a vehicle who approaches an intersection where
traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals shall do all of the
following, if the signal facing the driver either exhibits no colored lights
or colored lighted arrows or exhibits a combination of such lights or arrows
that fails to clearly indicate the assignment of right-of-way:



      (1)   Stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, stop
before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if
none, stop before entering the intersection;



      (2)   Yield the right-of-way to all vehicles in the
intersection or approaching on an intersecting road, if the vehicles will
constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or
within the intersection or junction of roadways;



      (3)   Exercise ordinary care while proceeding through the
intersection.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.132)



§ 70.24  PEDESTRIAN-CONTROL SIGNALS.



   Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words
“walk” or “don't walk,” or the symbol of a walking person or an
upraised palm are in place, these signals shall indicate the following
instructions:



   (A)   A steady walking person signal indication, which symbolizes
“walk”, means that a pedestrian facing the signal indication is permitted
to start to cross the roadway in the direction of the signal indication,
possibly in conflict with turning vehicles. The pedestrian shall yield the
right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that
the walking person signal indication is first shown.



   (B)   A flashing upraised hand signal indication, which symbolizes
“don’t walk”, means that a pedestrian shall not start to cross the
roadway in the direction of the signal indication, but that any pedestrian
who has already started to cross on a steady walking person signal indication
shall proceed to the far side of the traveled way of the street or highway,
unless otherwise directed by a traffic control device to proceed only to the
median of a divided highway or only to some other island or pedestrian refuge
area.



   (C)   A steady upraised hand signal indication means that a
pedestrian shall not enter the roadway in the direction of the signal
indication.



   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to invalidate the
continued use of pedestrian control signals utilizing the word “wait” if
those signals were installed prior to March 28, 1985.



   (E)   A flashing walking person signal indication has no meaning and
shall not be used.



(R.C. § 4511.14)



§ 70.25  (RESERVED)



§ 70.26  UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS AND SIGNALS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or
in view of any highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device
which purports to be, is an imitation of, or resembles a traffic-control
device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement
of traffic, or hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any
traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal, and no person shall
place or maintain, nor shall any public authority permit, upon any highway
any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising.  This
section does not prohibit either the erection upon private property adjacent
to highways of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that
cannot be mistaken for traffic-control devices, or the erection upon private
property of traffic-control devices by the owner of real property in
accordance with R.C. §§ 4511.211 and 4511.432.



      (2)   Every prohibited sign, signal, marking, or device is a
public nuisance, and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway may
remove the same or cause it to be removed.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.16)



§ 70.27  ALTERATION, DEFACEMENT, OR REMOVAL PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person, without lawful authority, shall do any of the
following:



      (1)   Knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy, or otherwise
improperly tamper with any traffic-control device, any railroad sign or
signal, or any inscription, shield, or insignia on the device, sign, or
signal, or any part of the device, sign, or signal;



      (2)   Knowingly drive upon or over any freshly applied
pavement marking material on the surface of a roadway while the marking
material is in an undried condition, and is marked by flags, markers, signs,
or other devices intended to protect it.



      (3)   Knowingly move, damage, destroy, or otherwise improperly
tamper with a manhole cover.



   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division,
whoever violates division (A)(1) or (A)(3) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. If a violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(3)
of this section creates a risk of physical harm to any person, the offender
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If a violation of division
(A)(1) or (A)(3) of this section causes serious physical harm to property
that is owned, leased, or controlled by a state or local authority, the
offender is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates division (A)(2) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates division (A)(2) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the
offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle
or traffic offenses, whoever violates division (A)(2) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.17)



§ 70.28  UNAUTHORIZED POSSESSION OR SALE OF DEVICES.



   (A)   As used in this section, TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE means any
sign, traffic control signal or other device conforming to and placed or
erected in accordance with the manual adopted under R.C. § 4511.09 by
authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose
of regulating, warning or guiding traffic, including signs denoting the names
of streets and highways, but does not mean any pavement marking.



   (B)   No individual shall buy or otherwise possess, or sell, a
traffic control device, except when one of the following applies:



      (1)   In the course of the individual's employment by the
state or a local authority for the express or implied purpose of
manufacturing, providing, erecting, moving or removing such a traffic control
device;



      (2)   In the course of the individual's employment by any
manufacturer of traffic control devices other than a state or local authority;



      (3)   For the purpose of demonstrating the design and function
of a traffic control device to state or local officials;



      (4)   When the traffic control device has been purchased from
the state or a local authority at a sale of property that is no longer needed
or is unfit for use; or



      (5)   When the traffic control device has been properly
purchased from a manufacturer for use on private property and the person
possessing the device has a sales receipt for the device or other
acknowledgment of sale issued by the manufacturer.



   (C)   This section does not preclude, and shall not be construed as
precluding, prosecution for theft in violation of R.C. § 2913.02, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or for receiving stolen
property in violation of R.C. § 2913.51, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.18)



§ 70.29  SIGNAL PREEMPTION DEVICES; PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall possess a portable signal preemption
device.



      (2)   No person shall use a portable signal preemption device
to affect the operation of a traffic-control device.



   (B)   Division (A)(1) of this section does not apply to any of the
following persons and division (A)(2) of this section does not apply to any
of the following persons when responding to an emergency call:



      (1)   A peace officer, as defined in R.C. § 109.17(A)(1),
(A)(12), (A)(14), or (A)(19);



      (2)   A state highway patrol officer;



      (3)   A person while occupying a public safety vehicle as
defined in R.C. § 4511.01(E)(1), (E)(3), or (E)(4).



   (C)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) of this section is guilty of
a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Whoever violates division (A)(2) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.



   (D)   As used in this section, PORTABLE SIGNAL PREEMPTION DEVICE
means a device that, if activated by a person, is capable of changing a
traffic-control signal to green out of sequence.



(R.C. § 4511.031)



TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



§ 70.40  TRAFFIC REGULATIONS; AUTHORITY OF CITY MANAGER.



   (A)   In order to expedite the flow and direction of traffic, to
eliminate congestion on streets, alleys, and highways, and to provide for the
safety of passengers in motor vehicles and pedestrians, the City Manager may
make and issue rules and regulations, consistent with the Ohio Manual for
Uniform Traffic Control Devices (OMUTCD), concerning:



      (1)   The number, type, and location of traffic-control
devices and signs;



      (2)   The regulation or prohibition of parking on streets,
alleys, highways, or public property;



      (3)   The regulation of the right-of-way at intersections of
streets, alleys, and highways;



      (4)   The regulation or prohibition of turns at intersections;



      (5)   The creation, abolition, and regulation of through
routes and truck routes;



      (6)   The creation, abolition, and regulation of pedestrian
crosswalk and safety zones;



      (7)   The creation, abolition, and regulation of bus loading
and unloading zones and business loading zones;



      (8)   The creation, abolition, and regulation of traffic
lanes, and passing zones;



      (9)   The regulation of the direction of traffic on streets,
alleys, and highways and the creation and abolition of one-way streets;



      (10)   Such other subjects as may be provided by ordinance,
which shall not be limited by the specific enumeration of subjects by this
section.



   (B)   These rules and regulations shall be issued in the manner and
subject to the conditions and limitations as prescribed in this chapter. 
Violation of such rules and regulations shall be a misdemeanor and shall be
punishable as provided herein.



(Ord. 4-1977, passed 2-2-77)



ENFORCEMENT



§ 70.50  DIRECTING TRAFFIC.



   Police officers shall, whenever conditions require it, direct traffic
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.  Police officers and
members of the fire force are authorized in the event that a fire, or other
emergency condition or the safeguarding or expediting of traffic so requires,
to direct traffic otherwise than as this chapter specifically provides.  The
direction of traffic may be by word or audible signal, by gesture or visible
signal, or by any combination thereof.



('67 Code, § 70.21)



Cross-reference:



   For resisting an officer, see Ch. 135, § 135.09



§ 70.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor or
minor misdemeanor shall be sentenced in accordance with § 130.99(B) through
(G).



   (B)   Whoever violates any provision of this traffic code for which
no penalty otherwise is provided in the section violated is guilty of one of
the following:



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2) or
(B)(3) of this section, a minor misdemeanor;



      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor
vehicle or traffic offense, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree;



      (3)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.99) 



   (C)   Other than as set forth in this section, any person charged
with a misdemeanor of the fourth, third, second or first degree shall be
required to appear in Mayor's Court. In the event a person who is a
nonresident of the state of Ohio is charged with a misdemeanor of the fourth
or third degree, then such person may be permitted to enter a written plea of
guilty to the charge and to pay, either in person or by mail, the fine and
costs which are set by the Mayor for said offense.



(Ord. 18-1993, passed 4-7-93)



Cross-reference:



   Imposing sentence for misdemeanor, see § 130.18



   Multiple sentences, see § 130.19



CHAPTER 71:  LICENSING PROVISIONS



Section



Motor Vehicle Licensing



   71.01   Display of license plates or validation stickers;
registration



   71.02   Improper use of noncommercial motor vehicle



   71.03   Operating motor vehicle ordered immobilized; forfeiture



   71.04   Operation or sale without certificate of title



   71.05   Display of certificate of registration



   71.06   Use of unauthorized plates



   71.07   Operating without dealer or manufacturer license plates



Driver's Licenses



   71.10   Prohibited acts



   71.11   Permitting minor to operate vehicle prohibited; temporary
instruction permit; probationary license



   71.12   License required as driver or commercial driver on public or
private property; nonresident exemption



   71.13   Employment of a minor to operate a taxicab prohibited



   71.14   Restriction against owner lending vehicle for use of another



   71.15   Suspension of driver's licenses; license suspended by court
of record



   71.16   Display of license



   71.17   Prohibition against false statements



   71.18   Driving under suspension or in violation of license
restriction



   71.19   Operating motor vehicle or motorcycle without valid license



   71.20   Driving under OVI suspension



   71.21   Driving under financial responsibility law suspension or
cancellation; driving under a nonpayment of judgment suspension



   71.22   Failure to reinstate license



Commercial Drivers and Driver's Licenses



   71.25   Definitions



   71.26   Use of actual gross weight in lieu of rating



   71.27   Prohibited acts



   71.28   Prerequisites to operation of commercial motor vehicle



   71.29   Physical qualification to operate commercial motor vehicles



   71.30   Disqualification of driver or placement out of service



   71.31   Implied consent to test; effect of refusal; immediate
surrender of license



   71.32   Provision of 49 CFR 383, Subpart C



   71.33   Duties of peace officer as to alcohol or drug offenders



   71.34   Criminal offenses



   71.35   Application of federal regulations



   71.36   Employment of drivers of commercial vehicles



 



   71.99   Penalty



Statutory reference:



   Commercial driver's licenses, see R.C. Chapter 4506



   Driver's licenses, see R.C. Chapter 4507



   Motor vehicle licensing, see R.C. Chapter 4504



   Municipal motor vehicle license tax, see R.C. § 4504.06



   Notice of arrest of certain commercial drivers, see R.C. § 5577.14



   Point system for motor vehicle violations, see R.C. § 4507.021



   Proof of financial responsibility required; civil penalties; peace
officers as agents of Registrar of Motor Vehicles; procedures and rules, see
R.C. §§ 4509.101 et seq.



   Suspension and revocation of driver's licenses, see R.C. Chapter 4510



   Suspension of driver's licenses; municipal power to suspend for a
period not to exceed time permitted or required by state law, see R.C. §
4510.05



MOTOR VEHICLE LICENSING



§ 71.01  DISPLAY OF LICENSE PLATES OR VALIDATION STICKERS; REGISTRATION.



   (A)   (1)   No person who is the owner or operator of a motor
vehicle shall fail to display in plain view on the front and rear of the
motor vehicle the distinctive number and registration mark, including any
county identification sticker and any validation sticker issued under R.C.
§§ 4503.19 and 4503.191, furnished by the Director of Public Safety, except
that a manufacturer of motor vehicles or dealer therein, the holder of an
in-transit permit, and the owner or operator of a motorcycle, motorized
bicycle or moped, motor-driven cycle or motor scooter, cab-enclosed
motorcycle, manufactured home, mobile home, trailer, or semitrailer shall
display on the rear only. A motor vehicle that is issued two license plates
shall display the validation sticker only on the rear license plate, except
that a commercial tractor that does not receive an apportioned license plate
under the international registration plan shall display the validation
sticker on the front of the commercial tractor. An apportioned vehicle
receiving an apportioned license plate under the international registration
plan shall display the license plate only on the front of a commercial
tractor and on the rear of all other vehicles. All license plates shall be
securely fastened so as not to swing, and shall not be covered by any
material that obstructs its visibility.



      (2)   No person to whom a temporary license placard or
windshield sticker has been issued for the use of a motor vehicle under R.C.
§ 4503.182, and no operator of that motor vehicle, shall fail to display the
temporary license placard in plain view from the rear of the vehicle either
in the rear window or on an external rear surface of the motor vehicle, or
fail to display the windshield sticker in plain view on the rear window of
the motor vehicle. No temporary license placard or windshield sticker shall
be covered by any material that obstructs its visibility.



(R.C. § 4503.21(A))



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided by R.C. §§ 4503.103, 4503.173,
4503.41, 4503.43, and 4503.46, no person who is the owner or chauffeur of a
motor vehicle operated or driven upon the public roads or highways shall fail
to file annually the application for registration or to pay the tax therefor.



(R.C. § 4503.11(A))



   (C)   (1)   Within 30 days of becoming a resident of this state,
any person who owns a motor vehicle operated or driven upon the public roads
or highways shall register the vehicle in this state. If such a person fails
to register a vehicle owned by the person, the person shall not operate any
motor vehicle in this state under a license issued by another state.



      (2)   For purposes of division (C)(1) of this section,
RESIDENT means any person to whom any of the following applies:



         (a)   The person maintains their principal residence in
this state and does not reside in this state as a result of the person’s
active service in the United States armed forces.



         (b)   The person is determined by the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles to be a resident in accordance with standards adopted by the
Registrar under R.C. § 4507.01.



(R.C. § 4503.111(A), (C))



   (D)   No person shall operate or drive upon the highways of this
municipality a motor vehicle acquired from a former owner who has registered
the motor vehicle, while the motor vehicle displays the distinctive number or
identification mark assigned to it upon its original registration.



(R.C. § 4549.11(A))



   (E)   No person who is the owner of a motor vehicle and a resident
of this state shall operate or drive the motor vehicle upon the highways of
this municipality while it displays a distinctive number or identification
mark issued by or under the authority of another state, without complying
with the laws of this state relating to the registration and identification
of motor vehicles.



(R.C. § 4549.12(A))



   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4503.21(B))



      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty
of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4503.11(D))



      (3)   (a)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section
is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



         (b)   The offense established under division (F)(3)(a)
of this section is a strict liability offense and strict liability is a
culpable mental state for purposes of R.C. § 2901.20. The designation of
this offense as a strict liability offense shall not be construed to imply
that any other offense, for which there is no specified degree of
culpability, is not a strict liability offense.



(R.C. § 4503.111(B))



      (4)   Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty
of operation of a motor vehicle bearing license plates or an identification
mark issued to another, a minor misdemeanor on a first offense and a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree on each subsequent offense.



(R.C. § 4549.11(B))



      (5)   Whoever violates division (E) of this section is guilty
of illegal operation by a resident of this state of a motor vehicle bearing
the distinctive number or identification mark issued by a foreign
jurisdiction, a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4549.12(B))



§ 71.02  IMPROPER USE OF NONCOMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE.



   (A)   No person shall use a motor vehicle registered as a
noncommercial motor vehicle, for other than the purposes set forth in R.C. §
4501.01.



(Ord. 2-1998, passed 2-4-98)



   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 4503.05)



§ 71.03  OPERATING MOTOR VEHICLE ORDERED IMMOBILIZED; FORFEITURE.



   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle or permit the
operation of a motor vehicle upon any public or private property used by the
public for vehicular travel or parking knowing or having reasonable cause to
believe that the motor vehicle has been ordered immobilized pursuant to an
immobilization order issued under R.C. § 4503.233.



   (B)   A motor vehicle that is operated by a person during a
violation of division (A) of this section shall be criminally forfeited to
the state in accordance with the procedures contained in R.C. § 4503.234.



   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree.



(R.C. § 4503.236)



§ 71.04  OPERATION OR SALE WITHOUT CERTIFICATE OF TITLE.



   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Operate in this municipality a motor vehicle for which a
certificate of title is required without having that certificate in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 4505 or, if a physical certificate of title has
not been issued for a motor vehicle, operate the motor vehicle in this state
knowing that the ownership information relating to the vehicle has not been
entered into the automated title processing system by a Clerk of a Court of
Common Pleas;



      (2)   Display or display for sale or sell as a dealer or
acting on behalf of a dealer, a motor vehicle without having obtained a
manufacturer's or importer's certificate, a certificate of title, or an
assignment of a certificate of title for it as provided in R.C. Chapter 4505;



      (3)   Fail to surrender any certificate of title or any
certificate of registration or license plates upon cancellation of the same
by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles and notice of the cancellation as
prescribed in R.C. Chapter 4505;



      (4)   Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a Clerk of
a Court of Common Pleas as provided in R.C. Chapter 4505 in case of the
destruction or dismantling or change of a motor vehicle in such respect that
it is not the motor vehicle described in the certificate of title;



      (5)   Violate any rules adopted pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4505;



      (6)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapters 4505 and
4517, sell at wholesale a motor vehicle ownership of which is not evidenced
by an Ohio certificate of title, or the current certificate of title issued
for the motor vehicle, or the manufacturer's certificate of origin, and all
title assignments that evidence the seller's ownership of the motor vehicle,
and an odometer disclosure statement  that complies with R.C. § 4505.06 and
subchapter IV of the "Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act," 86
Stat. 961 (1972), 15 USC 1981;



      (7)   Operate in this state a motor vehicle knowing that the
certificate of title to the vehicle or ownership of the vehicle as otherwise
reflected in the automated title processing system has been canceled.



   (B)   This section does not apply to persons engaged in the business
of warehousing or transporting motor vehicles for the purpose of salvage
disposition.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than
$200, imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both.



(R.C. § 4505.18)



§ 71.05  DISPLAY OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.



   (A)   (1)   The operator of a COMMERCIAL CAR, as defined in R.C.
§ 4501.01, when the commercial car is required to be registered under state
law, shall, when operating the commercial car, trailer or semitrailer on the
streets, roads, or highways of this municipality display inside or on the
vehicle the certificate of registration for the commercial car, trailer or
semitrailer provided for in R.C. § 4503.19, or shall carry the certificate
on the operator's person and display it upon the demand of any peace officer.



      (2)   Every person operating a commercial car, trailer or
semitrailer required to be registered under state law shall permit the
inspection of the certificate of registration upon demand of any peace
officer.



   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
commercial car certificate of registration violation, a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4549.18)



§ 71.06  USE OF UNAUTHORIZED PLATES.



   (A)   No person shall operate or drive a motor vehicle upon the
public roads and highways in this municipality if it displays a license plate
or a distinctive number or identification mark that meets any of the
following criteria:



      (1)   It is fictitious;



      (2)   It is a counterfeit or an unlawfully made copy of any
distinctive number or identification mark;



      (3)   It belongs to another motor vehicle, provided that this
section does not apply to a motor vehicle that is operated on the public
roads and highways in this municipality when the motor vehicle displays
license plates that originally were issued for a motor vehicle that
previously was owned by the same person who owns the motor vehicle that is
operated on the public roads and highways in this municipality during the
30-day period described in R.C. § 4503.12(A)(4).



   (B)   A person who fails to comply with the transfer of registration
provisions of R.C. § 4503.12 and is charged with a violation of that section
shall not be charged with a violation of this section.



   (C)   Whoever violates division (A)(1), (A)(2), or (A)(3) of this
section is guilty of operating a motor vehicle bearing an invalid license
plate or identification mark, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first
offense and a misdemeanor of the third degree on each subsequent offense.



(R.C. § 4549.08)



§ 71.07  OPERATING WITHOUT DEALER OR MANUFACTURER LICENSE PLATES.



   (A)   No person shall operate or cause to be operated upon a public
road or highway a motor vehicle of a manufacturer or dealer unless the
vehicle carries and displays two placards, except as provided in R.C. §
4503.21, issued by the Director of Public Safety that bear the registration
number of its manufacturer or dealer.



   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
illegal operation of a manufacturer's or dealer's motor vehicle, a minor
misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4549.10)



DRIVER'S LICENSES



§ 71.10  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Display or cause or permit to be displayed, or possess
any identification card, driver's or commercial driver's license, temporary
instruction permit, or commercial driver's license temporary instruction
permit knowing the same to be fictitious, or to have been canceled,
suspended, or altered;



      (2)   Lend to a person not entitled thereto, or knowingly
permit a person not entitled thereto to use any identification card, driver's
or commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit or commercial
driver's license temporary instruction permit issued to the person so lending
or permitting the use thereof;



      (3)   Display, or represent as one's own, any identification
card, driver's or commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit,
or commercial driver's license temporary instruction permit not issued to the
person so displaying the same;



      (4)   Fail to surrender to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles,
upon the Registrar's demand, any identification card, driver's or commercial
driver's license, temporary instruction permit, or commercial driver's
license temporary instruction permit that has been suspended or canceled;



      (5)   In any application for an identification card, driver's
or commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, or commercial
driver's license temporary instruction permit or any renewal or duplicate
thereof, knowingly conceal a material fact or present any physician's
statement required under R.C. § 4507.08 or 4507.081 when knowing the same to
be false or fictitious.



   (B)   Whoever violates any division of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 4507.30)



Statutory reference:



   Use of license to violate liquor laws; suspension; procedures, see R.C.
§ 4510.33



§ 71.11  PERMITTING MINOR TO OPERATE VEHICLE PROHIBITED; TEMPORARY
INSTRUCTION PERMIT; PROBATIONARY LICENSE.



   (A)   No person shall cause or knowingly permit any minor to drive a
motor vehicle upon a highway as an operator, unless the minor has first
obtained a license or permit to drive a motor vehicle under R.C. Chapter 4507.



(R.C. § 4507.31(A))



   (B)   (1)   No holder of a temporary instruction permit issued
under R.C. § 4507.05(A) shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking in violation of the conditions established under R.C. §
4507.05(A).



      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (B)(2)(b) of
this section, no holder of a temporary instruction permit that is issued
under R.C. § 4507.05(A) and that is issued on or after July 1, 1998, and who
has not attained the age of 18 years, shall operate a motor vehicle upon a
highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m.



         (b)   The holder of a temporary instruction permit
issued under R.C. § 4507.05(A) on or after July 1, 1998, who has not
attained the age of 18 years, may operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposed of vehicular
travel or parking between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. if, at the time
of such operation, the holder is accompanied by the holder's parent,
guardian, or custodian, and the parent, guardian, or custodian holds a
current valid driver's or commercial driver's license issued by this state,
is actually occupying a seat beside the permit holder, and does not have a
prohibited concentration of alcohol in the whole blood, blood serum or
plasma, breath, or urine as provided in R.C. § 4511.19(A).



(R.C. § 4507.05(F))



   (C)   (1)   (a)   No holder of a probationary driver’s
license who has held the license for less than 12 months shall operate a
motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used by the
public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking between the hours of
midnight and 6:00 a.m. unless the holder is accompanied by the holder’s
parent or guardian.



         (b)   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who
has held the license for 12 months or longer shall operate a motor vehicle
upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and
5:00 a.m. unless the holder is accompanied by the holder’s parent or
guardian.



      (2)   (a)   Subject to division (E)(1) of this section,
division (C)(1)(a) of this section does not apply to the holder of a
probationary driver’s license who is doing either of the following:



            1.   Traveling to or from work between the hours
of midnight and 6:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s
immediate possession written documentation from the holder’s employer.



            2.   Traveling to or from an official function
sponsored by the school the holder attends between the hours of midnight and
6:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s immediate
possession written documentation from an appropriate official of the school;



            3.   Traveling to or from an official religious
event between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m., provided that the holder
has in the holder’s immediate possession written documentation from an
appropriate official affiliated with the event.



         (b)   Division (C)(1)(b) of this section does not apply
to the holder of a probationary driver’s license who is doing either of the
following:



            1.   Traveling to or from work between the hours
of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s
immediate possession written documentation from the holder’s employer.



            2.   Traveling to or from an official function
sponsored by the school the holder attends between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and
5:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s immediate
possession written documentation from an appropriate official of the school;



            3.   Traveling to or from an official religious
event between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., provided that the holder
has in the holder’s immediate possession written documentation from an
appropriate official affiliated with the event.



      (3)   An employer, school official, or official affiliated
with a religious event is not liable in damages in a civil action for any
injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly arises from, or
is related to, the fact that the employer, school official, or official
affiliated with a religious event provided the holder of a probationary
driver’s license with the written documentation described in division
(C)(2) of this section. The Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall make available
at no cost a form to serve as the written documentation described in division
(C)(2) of this section, and employers, school officials, officials affiliated
with religious events, and holders of probationary driver’s licenses may
utilize that form or may choose to utilize any other written documentation to
meet the requirements of that division.



      (4)   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who has
held the license for less than 12 months shall operate a motor vehicle upon a
highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking with more than one person who is not a family
member occupying the vehicle unless the probationary license holder is
accompanied by the probationary license holder’s parent, guardian, or
custodian.



   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to a violation of division
(C)(1)(a) or (C)(1)(b) of this section if, at the time of the violation, an
emergency existed that required the holder of the probationary driver’s
license to operate a motor vehicle in violation of division (C)(1)(a) or
(C)(1)(b) of this section or the holder was an emancipated minor.



   (E)   (1)   If a person is issued a probationary driver’s
license prior to attaining the age of 17 years and the person pleads guilty
to, is convicted of, or is adjudicated in juvenile court of having committed
a moving violation during the six- month period commencing on the date on
which the person is issued the probationary driver’s license, the court
with jurisdiction over the violation may order that the holder must be
accompanied by the holder’s parent or guardian whenever the holder is
operating a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property
used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking for a period
not to exceed six months or the date the holder attains the age of 17 years,
whichever occurs first.



      (2)   Any person who is subject to the operating restrictions
established under division (E)(1) of this section as a result of a first
moving violation may petition the court for driving privileges without being
accompanied by the holder’s parent or guardian during the period of time
determined by the court under that division. In granting the driving
privileges, the court shall specify the purposes of the privileges and shall
issue the person appropriate forms setting forth the privileges granted. If a
person is convicted of, pleads guilty to, or is adjudicated in juvenile court
of having committed a second or subsequent moving violation, the court with
jurisdiction over the violation may terminate any driving privileges
previously granted under this division.



      (3)   No person shall violate any operating restriction
imposed under division (E)(1) or (E)(2) of this section.



   (F)   No holder of a probationary license shall operate a motor
vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public
for purposes of vehicular travel or parking unless the total number of
occupants of the vehicle does not exceed the total number of occupant
restraining devices originally installed in the motor vehicle by its
manufacturer, and each occupant of the vehicle is wearing all of the
available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device.



   (G)   A restricted license may be issued to a person who is 14 or 15
years of age under proof of hardship satisfactory to the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles.



   (H)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary,
no law enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a motor vehicle being
operated on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole
purpose of determining whether each occupant of the motor vehicle is wearing
all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining
device as required by division (F) of this section, or for the sole purpose
of issuing a ticket, citation or summons if that requirement has been or is
being violated, or for causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a
person for a violation of that requirement.



   (I)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no
law enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a motor vehicle being
operated on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole
purpose of determining whether a violation of division (C)(1)(a) or (C)(1)(b)
of this section has been or is being committed or for the sole purpose of
issuing a ticket, citation or summons for such a violation or for causing the
arrest or commencing a prosecution of a person for such a violation.



   (J)   As used in this section:



      FAMILY MEMBER. A family member of a probationary license holder
includes any of the following:



         (a)   A spouse;



         (b)   A child or stepchild;



         (c)   A parent, stepparent, grandparent, or
parent-in-law;



         (d)   An aunt or uncle;



         (e)   A sibling, whether of the whole or half blood or
by adoption, a brother-in-law, or a sister-in-law;



         (f)   A son or daughter of the probationary license
holder’s stepparent if the stepparent has not adopted the probationary
license holder;



         (g)   An eligible adult, as defined in R.C. § 4507.05.



      MOVING VIOLATION. Means any violation of any statute or ordinance
that regulates the operation of vehicles on the highways or streets. The term
does not include a violation of R.C. § 4513.263 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, or a violation of any statute or ordinance
regulating pedestrians or the parking of vehicles, vehicle size or load
limitations, vehicle fitness requirements, or vehicle registration.



      OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
4513.263.



(R.C. § 4507.071(B) - (I))



   (K)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 4507.31(B))



      (2)   Whoever violates divisions (B), (C)(1), (C)(4), (E)(3),
or (F) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. §§ 4507.05(I), 4507.071(J))



§ 71.12  LICENSE REQUIRED AS DRIVER OR COMMERCIAL DRIVER ON PUBLIC OR
PRIVATE PROPERTY; NONRESIDENT EXEMPTION.



   (A)   (1)   (a)   No person shall permit the operation of a
motor vehicle upon any public or private property used by the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking, knowing the operator does not have a
valid driver’s license issued to the operator by the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles under R.C. Chapter 4507 or a valid commercial driver’s license
issued under R.C. Chapter 4506.  Except as otherwise provided in this
division, whoever violates this division is guilty of an unclassified
misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender
shall be sentenced pursuant to § 130.18, § 130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to
2929.28, except that the offender shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the
offender shall not be sentenced to a community residential sanction pursuant
to § 130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding § 130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and
R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to $1,000; and,
notwithstanding § 130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender
may be ordered pursuant to § 130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a
term of community service of up to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to
complete a term of community service imposed by the court may be punished as
indirect criminal contempt under R.C. § 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the
underlying case.



         (b)   If, within three years of the offense, the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more
violations of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (2)   No person shall receive a driver’s license, or a
motorcycle operator’s endorsement of a driver’s or commercial driver’s
license, unless and until the person surrenders to the Registrar all valid
licenses issued to the person by another jurisdiction recognized by this
state. The Registrar shall report the surrender of a license to the issuing
authority, together with information that a license is now issued in this
state. The Registrar shall destroy any such license that is not returned to
the issuing authority. No person shall be permitted to have more than one
valid license at any time.



(R.C. § 4507.02(A))



   (B)   (1)   No person shall be required to obtain a driver's or
commercial driver's license for the purpose of temporarily driving,
operating, drawing, moving, or propelling a road roller or road machinery
upon a street or highway.



      (2)   No person shall be required to obtain a driver's or
commercial driver's license for the purpose of temporarily driving,
operating, drawing, moving, or propelling any agricultural tractor or
implement of husbandry upon a street or highway at a speed of 25 miles per
hour or less.



      (3)   No person shall drive, operate, draw, move, or propel
any agricultural tractor or implement of husbandry upon a street or highway
at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour unless the person has a current,
valid driver's or commercial driver's license.



      (4)   No person having a valid driver's or commercial driver's
license shall be required to have a motorcycle operator's endorsement to
operate a motorcycle having three wheels with a motor of not more than 50
cubic centimeters piston displacement.



      (5)   No person having a valid driver’s or commercial
driver’s license shall be required to have a motorcycle operator’s
endorsement to operate a cab-enclosed motorcycle.



      (6)   Every person on active duty in the military or naval
forces of the United States, when furnished with a driver’s permit and when
operating an official motor vehicle in connection with such duty, is exempt
from the license requirements of R.C. Chapters 4506 and 4507. Every person on
active duty in the military or naval forces of the United States or in
service with the peace corps, volunteers in service to America, or the
foreign service of the United States, is exempt from the license requirements
of such sections for the period of the person’s active duty or service and
for six months thereafter, provided such person was a licensee under such
sections at the time the person commenced the person’s active duty or
service. This section does not prevent such a person or the person’s spouse
or dependent from making an application, as provided in R.C. § 4507.10(C),
for the renewal of a driver’s license or motorcycle operator’s
endorsement or as provided in R.C. § 4506.14 for the renewal of a commercial
driver’s license during the period of the person’s active duty or service.



      (7)   Whoever violates division (B)(3) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 4507.03)



   (C)   Nonresidents, permitted to drive upon the highways of their
own state, may operate any motor vehicle upon any highway in this state
without examination or license under R.C. §§ 4507.01 through 4507.39,
inclusive, upon condition that such nonresident may be required at any time
or place to prove lawful possession or their right to operate such motor
vehicle, and to establish proper identity.



(R.C. § 4507.04)



§ 71.13  EMPLOYMENT OF A MINOR TO OPERATE A TAXICAB PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Notwithstanding the definition of CHAUFFEUR in R.C. §
4501.01, no person shall employ any minor for the purpose of operating a
taxicab.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.



(R.C. § 4507.321)



§ 71.14  RESTRICTION AGAINST OWNER LENDING VEHICLE FOR USE OF ANOTHER.



   (A)   No person shall permit a motor vehicle owned by the person or
under the person's control to be driven by another if any of the following
apply:



      (1)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe
that the other person does not have a valid driver's or commercial driver's
license or permit or valid nonresident driving privileges;



      (2)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe
that the other person's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or
nonresident operating privileges have been suspended or canceled under R.C.
Chapter 4510 or any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code.



      (3)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe
that the other person's act of driving the motor vehicle would violate any
prohibition contained in R.C. Chapter 4509.



      (4)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe
that the other person's act of driving would violate R.C. § 4511.19 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



      (5)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe
that the vehicle is the subject of an immobilization waiver order issued
under R.C. § 4503.235 and the other person is prohibited from operating the
vehicle under that order.



   (B)   Without limiting or precluding the consideration of any other
evidence in determining whether a violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2),
(A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5) of this section has occurred, it shall be prima
facie evidence that the offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe
that the operator of the motor vehicle owned by the offender or under the
offender's control is in a category described in division (A)(1), (A)(2),
(A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5) of this section if any of the following applies:



      (1)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category
described in division (A)(1), (A)(3), or (A)(5) of this section, the offender
and the operator of the motor vehicle reside in the same household and are
related by consanguinity or affinity.



      (2)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category
described in division (A)(2) of this section, the offender and the operator
of the motor vehicle reside in the same household, and the offender knows or
has reasonable cause to believe that the operator has been charged with or
convicted of any violation of law or ordinance, or has committed any other
act or omission, that would or could result in the suspension or cancellation
of the operator's license, permit, or privilege.



      (3)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category
described in division (A)(4) of this section, the offender and the operator
of the motor vehicle occupied the motor vehicle together at the time of the
offense.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of wrongful
entrustment of a motor vehicle, and shall be punished as provided in
divisions (C) to (H) of this section.



      (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(2) of this section,
whoever violates division (A)(1), (A)(2), or (A)(3) of this section is guilty
of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified
misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to § 130.18, § 130.99
or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to § 130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26;
notwithstanding § 130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the
offender may be fined up to $1,000; and, notwithstanding § 130.99(F)(1)(c)
and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant to §
130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up
to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community
service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt
under R.C. § 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.



      (2)   (a)   If, within three years of a violation of
division (A)(1), (A)(2), or (A)(3) of this section, the offender previously
has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of two or more violations of division
(A)(1), (A)(2), or (A)(3) of this section, R.C. § 4511.203(A)(1), (A)(2), or
(A)(3), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offender is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.



         (b)   Whoever violates division (A)(4) or (A)(5) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (3)   For any violation of this section, in addition to the
penalties imposed under this Code or R.C. Chapter 2929, the court may impose
a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial
driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or
nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. §
4510.02(A)(7), and, if the vehicle involved in the offense is registered in
the name of the offender, the court may order one of the following:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(3)(b)
or (C)(3)(c) of this section, the court may order, for 30 days, the
immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment of
that vehicle’s license plates. If issued, the order shall be issued and
enforced under R.C. § 4503.233.



         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section, R.C. § 4511.203, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court may order, for 60
days, the immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense and the
impoundment of that vehicle’s license plates. If issued, the order shall be
issued and enforced under R.C. § 4503.233.



         (c)   If the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section, R.C. §
4511.203, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court may
order the criminal forfeiture to the state of the vehicle involved in the
offense. If issued, the order shall be issued and enforced under R.C. §
4503.234.



      (4)   If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to an order
for criminal forfeiture under division (C)(3)(c) of this section is assigned
or transferred and R.C. § 4503.234(B)(2) or (B)(3) applies, in addition to
or independent of any other penalty established by law, the court may fine
the offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of the
National Automobile Dealers Association. The proceeds from any fine imposed
under this division shall be distributed in accordance with R.C. §
4503.234(C)(2).



   (D)   If a court orders the criminal forfeiture of a vehicle under
division (C)(3)(a) or (C)(3)(b) of this section, the court shall not release
the vehicle from the immobilization before the termination of the period of
immobilization ordered unless the court is presented with current proof of
financial responsibility with respect to that vehicle.



   (E)   If a court orders the criminal forfeiture of a vehicle under
division (C)(3)(c) of this section, upon receipt of the order from the court,
neither the Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor any deputy registrar shall accept
any application for the registration or transfer of registration of any motor
vehicle owned or leased by the person named in the order. The period of
denial shall be five years after the date the order is issued, unless, during
that five-year period, the court with jurisdiction of the offense that
resulted in the order terminates the forfeiture and notifies the Registrar of
the termination. If the court terminates the forfeiture and notifies the
Registrar, the Registrar shall take all necessary measures to permit the
person to register a vehicle owned or leased by the person or to transfer the
registration of the vehicle.



   (F)   This section does not apply to motor vehicle rental dealers or
motor vehicle leasing dealers, as defined in R.C. § 4549.65.



   (G)   Evidence of a conviction of, plea of guilty to, or
adjudication as a delinquent child for a violation of this section shall not
be admissible as evidence in any civil action that involves the offender or
delinquent child who is the subject of the conviction, plea, or adjudication
and that arises from the wrongful entrustment of a motor vehicle.



   (H)   For purposes of this section, a vehicle is owned by a person
if, at the time of a violation of this section, the vehicle is registered in
the person’s name.



(R.C. § 4511.203)



§ 71.15  SUSPENSION OF DRIVER'S LICENSE; LICENSE SUSPENDED BY COURT OF
RECORD.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 4510.07 or in any
other provision of the Revised Code, whenever an offender is convicted of or
pleads guilty to a violation of any provision of this code that is
substantially equivalent to a provision of the Revised Code, and a court is
permitted or required to suspend a person's driver's or commercial driver's
license or permit for a violation of that provision, a court, in addition to
any other penalties authorized by law, may suspend the offender's driver's or
commercial driver's license or permit or non resident operating privileges
for the period of time the court determines appropriate, but the period of
suspension imposed for the violation of the provision of this code shall not
exceed the period of suspension that is permitted or required to be imposed
for the violation of the provision of the Revised Code to which the provision
of this code is substantially equivalent.



(R.C. § 4510.05)



   (B)   Whenever a person is found guilty under the laws of this state
or any ordinance of any political subdivision of this state, of operating a
motor vehicle in violation of any such law or ordinance relating to reckless
operation, the trial court of any court of record, in addition to or
independent of all other penalties provided by law, may impose a class five
suspension of the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. §
4510.02(A)(5).



   (C)   Suspension of a commercial driver's license under this section
shall be concurrent with any period of suspension disqualification under R.C.
§ 3123.58 or 4506.16. No person who is disqualified for life from holding a
commercial driver's license under R.C. § 4506.16 shall be issued a driver's
license under R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period for which the commercial
driver's license was suspended under this section, and no person whose
commercial driver's license is suspended under this section shall be issued a
driver's license under R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period of the suspension.



(R.C. § 4510.15)



§ 71.16  DISPLAY OF LICENSE.



   (A)   The operator of a motor vehicle shall display the operator's
driver's license, or furnish satisfactory proof that the operator has a
driver's license, upon demand of any peace officer or of any person damaged
or injured in any collision in which the licensee may be involved. When a
demand is properly made, and the operator has the operator's driver's license
on or about the operator's person, the operator shall not refuse to display
the license. A person's failure to furnish satisfactory evidence that the
person is licensed under R.C. Chapter 4507 when the person does not have the
person's license on or about the person's person shall be prima facie
evidence of the person's not having obtained a driver's license.



   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) of this
section, whoever violates this section is guilty of an unclassified
misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender
shall be sentenced pursuant to § 130.18, § 130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to
2929.28, except that the offender shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the
offender shall not be sentenced to a community residential sanction pursuant
to § 130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding § 130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and
R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to $1,000; and
notwithstanding § 130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender
may be ordered pursuant to § 130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a
term of community service of up to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to
complete a term of community service imposed by the court may be punished as
indirect criminal contempt under R.C. § 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the
underlying case.



      (2)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations
of this section, R.C. § 4507.35, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 4507.35)



§ 71.17  PROHIBITION AGAINST FALSE STATEMENTS.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly make a false statement to any matter
or thing required by the provisions of this traffic code.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.



(R.C. § 4507.36)



§ 71.18  DRIVING UNDER SUSPENSION OR IN VIOLATION OF LICENSE RESTRICTION.



   (A)   Driving under suspension or in violation of license
restriction.



      (1)   Except as provided in division (A)(2) of this section,
division (B) of this section, § 71.21 and in R.C. §§ 4510.111 and 4510.16,
no person whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or
nonresident operating privilege has been suspended under any provision of the
Ohio Revised Code, other than R.C. Chapter 4509, or under any applicable law
in any other jurisdiction in which the person’s license or permit was
issued shall operate any motor vehicle upon the public roads and highways or
upon any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking within this municipality during the period of
suspension unless the person is granted limited driving privileges and is
operating the vehicle in accordance with the terms of the limited driving
privileges.



      (2)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway
or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking in this municipality in violation of any
restriction of the person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit imposed under R.C. § 4506.10(D) or 4507.14.



      (3)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority,
a non-certified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
non-certified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows
the name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with
a violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section may be admitted into
evidence as prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under
suspension at the time of the alleged violation of division (A)(1) of this
section or the person operated a motor vehicle in violation of a restriction
at the time of the alleged violation of division (A)(2) of this section. The
person charged with a violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section
may offer evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.



      (4)   (a)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court may
impose upon the offender a class seven suspension of the offender’s
driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the
range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).



         (b)   1.   Except as provided in division (A)(4)(b)2.
or (A)(4)(b)3. of this section, the court, in addition to any other penalty
that it imposes on the offender and if the vehicle is registered in the
offender’s name and if, within three years of the offense, the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this
section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the court, in addition to or independent of any other
sentence that it imposes upon the offender, may order the immobilization of
the vehicle involved in the offense for 30 days and the impoundment of that
vehicle’s license plates for 30 days in accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.



            2.   If the vehicle is registered in the
offender’s name and if, within three years of the offense, the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of this
section, or any combination of two violations of this section, R.C. §
4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16, or of a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the court, in addition to any other sentence that it imposes on
the offender, may order the immobilization of the vehicle involved in the
offense for 60 days and the impoundment of that vehicle’s license plates
for 60 days in accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.



            3.   If the vehicle is registered in the
offender’s name and if, within three years of the offense, the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more
violations of this section, or any combination of three or more violations of
this section or R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16, or of a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the court, in addition to any other sentence
that it imposes on the offender, may order the criminal forfeiture of the
vehicle involved in the offense to the state.



      (5)   Any order for immobilization and impoundment under this
section shall be issued and enforced under R.C. §§ 4503.233 and 4507.02, as
applicable. The court shall not release a vehicle from immobilization ordered
under this section unless the court is presented with current proof of
financial responsibility with respect to that vehicle.



      (6)   Any order of criminal forfeiture under this section
shall be issued and enforced under R.C. § 4503.234. Upon receipt of the copy
of the order from the court, neither the Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor a
deputy registrar shall accept any application for the registration or
transfer of registration of any motor vehicle owned or leased by the person
named in the declaration of forfeiture. The period of registration denial
shall be five years after the date of the order, unless, during that period,
the court having jurisdiction of the offense that led to the order terminates
the forfeiture and notifies the Registrar of the termination. The Registrar
then shall take necessary measures to permit the person to register a vehicle
owned or leased by the person or to transfer registration of the vehicle.



      (7)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of
financial responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails
to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any
other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to
§ 130.99(G) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any
economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and
proximate result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during,
or after committing the offense for which the offender is sentenced under
this section.



(R.C. § 4510.11)



   (B)   Driving under suspension in violation of other provisions.



      (1)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway
or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking in this municipality whose driver’s or
commercial driver’s license has been suspended pursuant to R.C. §
2151.354, 2151.87, 2935.27, 3123.58, 4301.99, 4510.032, 4510.22, or 4510.33,
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



      (2)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority,
a non-certified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
non-certified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows
the name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with
a violation of division (B)(1) of this section may be admitted into evidence
as prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under suspension
at the time of the alleged violation of division (B)(1) of this section. The
person charged with a violation of division (B)(1) of this section may offer
evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.



      (3)   Whoever violates division (B)(1) of this section is
guilty of driving under suspension and shall be punished as provided in
division (B)(3)(a) or division (B)(3)(b) of this section.



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(3)(b)
of this section, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. The offender
shall be sentenced pursuant to § 130.18, § 130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to
2929.28, except that the offender shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the
offender shall not be sentenced to a community residential sanction pursuant
to § 130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding § 130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and
R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to $1,000; and,
notwithstanding § 130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender
may be ordered pursuant to § 130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a
term of community service of up to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to
complete a term of community service imposed by the court may be punished as
indirect criminal contempt under R.C. § 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the
underlying case.



         (b)   If, within three years of the offense, the
offender previously was convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more
violations of division (B)(1) of this section, or any combination of two or
more violations of division (B)(1) of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111
or 4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is
a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, and the offender shall provide the court
with proof of financial responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the
offender fails to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then in
addition to any other penalties provided by law, the court may order
restitution pursuant to R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for
any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct
and proximate result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before,
during, or after committing the offense for which the offender is sentenced
under this section.



(R.C. § 4510.111)



   (C)   Repeat traffic offender; point system suspension. Any person
whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident
operating privileges are suspended as a repeat traffic offender under R.C. §
4510.037 and who, during the suspension, operates any motor vehicle upon any
public roads and highways is guilty of driving under a twelve-point
suspension, a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court shall sentence the
offender to a minimum term of three days in jail. No court shall suspend the
first three days of jail time imposed pursuant to this division.



(R.C. § 4510.037(J))



   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under
division (A) of this section that the alleged offender drove under
suspension, without a valid permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s
license, or in violation of a restriction because of a substantial emergency,
and because no other person was reasonably available to drive in response to
the emergency.



(R.C. § 4510.04)



   (E)   Any person whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or permit or nonresident operating privileges are suspended as a repeat
traffic offender under this section and who, during the suspension, operates
any motor vehicle upon any public roads and highways is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree, and the court shall sentence the offender to
a minimum term of three days in jail.  No court shall suspend the first
three days of jail time imposed pursuant to this division.



(Ord. 18-2006, passed 10-4-06)



§ 71.19  OPERATING MOTOR VEHICLE OR MOTORCYCLE WITHOUT VALID LICENSE.



   (A)   (1)   No person, except those expressly exempted under R.C.
§§ 4507.03, 4507.04, and 4507.05, shall operate any motor vehicle upon a
public road or highway or any public or private property used by the public
for purposes of vehicular travel or parking in this municipality unless the
person has a valid driver's license issued under R.C. Chapter 4507 or a
commercial driver's license issued under R.C. Chapter 4506.



      (2)   No person, except a person expressly exempted under R.C.
§§ 4507.03, 4507.04, and 4507.05, shall operate any motorcycle upon a
public road or highway or any public or private property used by the public
for purposes of vehicular travel or parking in this municipality unless the
person has a valid license as a motorcycle operator that was issued upon
application by the registrar of motor vehicles under R.C. Chapter 4507. The
license shall be in the form of an endorsement, as determined by the
registrar, upon a driver's or commercial driver's license, if the person has
a valid license to operate a motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle, or in
the form of a restricted license as provided in R.C. § 4507.14, if the
person does not have a valid license to operate a motor vehicle or commercial
motor vehicle.



   (B)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
non-certified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
non-certified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows
the name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with
a violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section may be admitted into
evidence as prima facie evidence that the person did not have either a valid
driver’s or commercial driver’s license at the time of the alleged
violation of division (A)(1) of this section or a valid license as a
motorcycle operator either in the form of an endorsement upon a driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or a restricted license at the time of the
alleged violation of division (A)(2) of this section. The person charged with
a violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section may offer evidence
to rebut this prima facie evidence.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a motor
vehicle or motorcycle without a valid license and shall be punished as
follows:



      (1)   If the trier of fact finds that the offender never has
held a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license issued by this state
or any other jurisdiction, or, in a case involving the operation of a
motorcycle by the offender, if the offender has never held a valid license as
a motorcycle operator, either in the form of an endorsement upon a driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or in the form of a restricted license,
except as otherwise provided in this division, the offense is an unclassified
misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender
shall be sentenced pursuant to § 130.18, § 130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to
2929.28, except that the offender shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the
offender shall not be sentenced to a community residential sanction pursuant
to § 130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding § 130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and
R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to $1,000; and,
notwithstanding § 130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender
may be ordered pursuant to § 130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a
term of community service of up to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to
complete a term of community service imposed by the court may be punished as
indirect criminal contempt under R.C. § 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the
underlying case. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to any violation of this section or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (2)   If the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or permit or, in a case involving the operation of a motorcycle by
the offender, the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license
bearing the motorcycle endorsement or the offender’s restricted license was
expired at the time of the offense, except as otherwise provided in this
division, the offense is a minor misdemeanor. If within three years of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
two or more violations of this section or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



   (D)   The court shall not impose a license suspension for a first
violation of this section or if more than three years have passed since the
offender’s last violation of R.C. § 4510.12, this section, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



   (E)   If the offender is sentenced under division (C)(2) of this
section, if within three years of the offense the offender previously was
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of R.C. § 4510.12,
this section, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and if the
offender’s license was expired for more than six months at the time of the
offense, the court may impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s
driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the
range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).



(R.C. § 4510.12)



§ 71.20  DRIVING UNDER OVI SUSPENSION.



   (A)   No person whose driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit or nonresident operating privilege has been suspended under R.C. §
4511.19, 4511.191, or 4511.196 or under R.C. § 4510.07 for a conviction of a
violation of a municipal OVI ordinance shall operate any motor vehicle upon
the public roads or highways within this municipality during the period of
the suspension.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of driving under OVI
suspension. The court shall sentence the offender under R.C. Chapter 2929,
subject to the differences authorized or required by this section.



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2) or
(B)(3) of this section, driving under OVI suspension is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:



         (a)   A mandatory jail term of three consecutive days.
The three-day term shall be imposed, unless, subject to division (C) of this
section, the court instead imposes a sentence of not less than 30 consecutive
days of house arrest with electronic monitoring. A period of house arrest
with electronic monitoring imposed under this division shall not exceed six
months. If the court imposes a mandatory three-day jail term under this
division, the court may impose a jail term in addition to that term, provided
that in no case shall the cumulative jail term imposed for the offense exceed
six months;



         (b)   A fine of not less than $250 and not more than
$1,000;



         (c)   A license suspension under division (E) of this
section;



         (d)   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the
time of the offense is registered in the offender's name, immobilization for
30 days of the offender's vehicle and impoundment for 30 days of the
identification license plates of that vehicle. The order for immobilization
and impoundment shall be issued and enforced in accordance with R.C. §
4503.233.



      (2)   If, within six years of the offense, the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this
section or one equivalent offense, driving under OVI suspension is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all
of the following:



         (a)   A mandatory jail term of 10 consecutive days.
Notwithstanding the jail terms provided in R.C. §§ 2929.21 through 2929.28,
the court may sentence the offender to a longer jail term of not more than
one year. The 10-day mandatory jail term shall be imposed unless, subject to
division (C) of this section, the court instead imposes a sentence of not
less than 90 consecutive days of house arrest with electronic monitoring. The
period of house arrest with electronic monitoring shall not exceed one year;



         (b)   Notwithstanding the fines provided for in R.C.
Chapter 2929, a fine of not less than $500 and not more than $2,500;



         (c)   A license suspension under division (E) of this
section;



         (d)   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the
time of the offense is registered in the offender's name, immobilization of
the offender's vehicle for 60 days and the impoundment for 60 days of the
identification license plates of that vehicle. The order for immobilization
and impoundment shall be issued and enforced in accordance with R.C. §
4503.233.



      (3)   If, within six years of the offense, the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations
of this section or two or more equivalent offenses, driving under OVI
suspension is a misdemeanor. The court shall sentence the offender to all of
the following:



         (a)   A mandatory jail term of 30 consecutive days.
Notwithstanding the jail terms provided in R.C. §§ 2929.21 through 2929.28,
the court may sentence the offender to a longer jail term of not more than
one year. The court shall not sentence the offender to a term of house arrest
with electronic monitoring in lieu of the mandatory portion of the jail term;



         (b)   Notwithstanding the fines set forth in R.C.
Chapter 2929, a fine of not less than $500 and not more than $2,500;



         (c)   A license suspension under division (E) of this
section;



         (d)   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the
time of the offense is registered in the offender's name, criminal forfeiture
to the state of the offender's vehicle. The order of criminal forfeiture
shall be issued and enforced in accordance with R.C. § 4503.234. If title to
a motor vehicle that is subject to an order for criminal forfeiture under
this division is assigned or transferred and R.C. § 4503.234(B)(2) or (B)(3)
applies, the court may fine the offender the value of the vehicle as
determined by publications of the National Automobile Dealers Association.
The proceeds from any fine so imposed shall be distributed in accordance with
R.C. § 4503.234(C)(2).



   (C)   (1)   No court shall impose an alternative sentence of
house arrest with electronic monitoring under division (B)(1) or (B)(2) of
this section unless, within 60 days of the date of sentencing, the court
issues a written finding on the record that, due to the unavailability of
space at the jail where the offender is required to serve the jail term
imposed, the offender will not be able to begin serving that term within the
60-day period following the date of sentencing.



      (2)   An offender sentenced under this section to a period of
house arrest with electronic monitoring shall be permitted work release
during that period.



   (D)   Fifty percent of any fine imposed by a court under division
(B)(1), (B)(2), or (B)(3) of this section shall be deposited into the
municipal indigent drivers alcohol treatment fund under the control of that
court, as created by the municipality pursuant to R.C. § 4511.191(H).



   (E)   In addition to or independent of all other penalties provided
by law or ordinance, the trial judge of any court of record or the mayor of a
mayor's court shall impose on an offender who is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a violation of this section a class seven suspension of the
offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).



      (1)   When permitted as specified in R.C. § 4510.021, if the
court grants limited driving privileges during a suspension imposed under
this section, the privileges shall be granted on the additional condition
that the offender must display restricted license plates, issued under R.C.
§ 4503.231, on the vehicle driven subject to the privileges, except as
provided in R.C. § 4503.231(B).



      (2)   A suspension of a commercial driver's license under this
section shall be concurrent with any period of suspension or disqualification
under R.C. § 3123.58 or 4506.16. No person who is disqualified for life from
holding a commercial driver's license under R.C. § 4506.16 shall be issued a
driver's license under R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period for which the
commercial driver's license was suspended under this section, and no person
whose commercial driver's license is suspended under this section shall be
issued a driver's license under R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period of the
suspension.



   (F)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to
provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any
other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to
§ 130.99(G) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any
economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and
proximate result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during,
or after committing the offense that is a misdemeanor of the first degree
under this section for which the offender is sentenced.



   (G)   As used in this section:



      ELECTRONIC MONITORING has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.



      EQUIVALENT OFFENSE means any of the following:



         (a)   A violation of a municipal ordinance, law of
another state, or law of the United States that is substantially equivalent
to division (A) of this section;



         (b)   A violation of a former law of this state that was
substantially equivalent to division (A) of this section.



      JAIL has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.



      MANDATORY JAIL TERM means the mandatory term in jail of 3, 10, or
30 consecutive days that must be imposed under division (B)(1), (B)(2), or
(B)(3) of this section upon an offender convicted of a violation of division
(A) of this section and in relation to which all of the following apply:



         (a)   Except as specifically authorized under this
section, the term must be served in a jail.



         (b)   Except as specifically authorized under this
section, the term cannot be suspended, reduced, or otherwise modified
pursuant to any provision of the Ohio Revised Code.



(R.C. § 4510.14)



   (H)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under
this section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a
valid permit or driver's or commercial driver's license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person
was reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.



(R.C. § 4510.04)



Statutory reference:



   Immobilization of vehicle; impoundment of license plates; criminal
forfeiture of vehicle, see R.C. § 4510.161



§ 71.21  DRIVING UNDER FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY LAW SUSPENSION OR
CANCELLATION; DRIVING UNDER A NONPAYMENT OF JUDGMENT SUSPENSION.



   (A)   No person, whose driver's or commercial driver's license or
temporary instruction permit or nonresident's operating privilege has been
suspended or canceled pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4509, shall operate any motor
vehicle within this municipality, or knowingly permit any motor vehicle owned
by the person to be operated by another person in the municipality, during
the period of the suspension or cancellation, except as specifically
authorized by R.C. Chapter 4509. No person shall operate a motor vehicle
within this municipality, or knowingly permit any motor vehicle owned by the
person to be operated by another person in the municipality, during the
period in which the person is required by R.C. § 4509.45 to file and
maintain proof of financial responsibility for a violation of R.C. §
4509.101, unless proof of financial responsibility is maintained with respect
to that vehicle.



   (B)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking in this municipality if the person’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or temporary instruction permit or nonresident
operating privilege has been suspended pursuant to R.C. § 4509.37 or 4509.40
for nonpayment of a judgment.



   (C)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
non-certified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
non-certified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows
the name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with
a violation of division (A) or (B) of this section may be admitted into
evidence as prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under
either a financial responsibility law suspension at the time of the alleged
violation of division (A) of this section or a nonpayment of judgment
suspension at the time of the alleged violation of division (B) of this
section. The person charged with a violation of division (A) or (B) of this
section may offer evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.



   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
driving under financial responsibility law suspension or cancellation and
shall be punished as provided in this division (D). Whoever violates division
(B) of this section is guilty of driving under a nonpayment of judgment
suspension and shall be punished as provided in this division (D).



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(2) of this
section, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an
unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to §
130.18, § 130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender
shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to
a community residential sanction pursuant to § 130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26;
notwithstanding § 130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the
offender may be fined up to $1,000; and, notwithstanding § 130.99(F)(1)(c)
and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant to §
130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up
to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community
service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt
under R.C. § 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.



      (2)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender
previously was convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of
this section, or any combination of two violations of this section, R.C. §
4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (3)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of
financial responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails
to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then in addition to any
other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to
R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss
arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate
result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense for which the offender is sentenced under this section.



(R.C. § 4510.16)



   (E)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution
brought under this section that the alleged offender drove under suspension,
without a valid permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in
violation of a restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no
other person was reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.



      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought
under this section that the order of suspension resulted from the failure of
the alleged offender to respond to a financial responsibility random
verification request under R.C. § 4509.101(A)(3)(c) and that, at the time of
the initial financial responsibility random verification request, the alleged
offender was in compliance with R.C. § 4509.101(A)(1) as shown by proof of
financial responsibility that was in effect at the time of that request.



(R.C. § 4510.04)



Statutory reference:



   Immobilization of vehicle; impoundment of license plates; criminal
forfeiture of vehicle, see R.C. § 4510.161



§ 71.22  FAILURE TO REINSTATE LICENSE.



   (A)   No person whose driver's license, commercial driver's license,
temporary instruction permit, or nonresident's operating privilege has been
suspended shall operate any motor vehicle upon a public road or highway or
any public or private property after the suspension has expired unless the
person has complied with all license reinstatement requirements imposed by
the court, the bureau of motor vehicles, or another provision of the Ohio
Revised Code.



   (B)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
non-certified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
non-certified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows
the name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with
a violation of division (A) of this section may be admitted into evidence as
prima facie evidence that the license of the person had not been reinstated
by the person at the time of the alleged violation of division (A) of this
section. The person charged with a violation of division (A) of this section
may offer evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to
reinstate a license, and shall be punished as follows:



      (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(2) of this section,
whoever violates this section is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When
the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to § 130.18, § 130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that
the offender shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be
sentenced to a community residential sanction pursuant to § 130.99(E) or
R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding § 130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C. §
2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to $1,000; and,
notwithstanding § 130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender
may be ordered pursuant to § 130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a
term of community service of up to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to
complete a term of community service imposed by the court may be punished as
indirect criminal contempt under R.C. § 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the
underlying case.



      (2)   If, within three years of a violation of division (A) of
this section, the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted
of two or more violations of this section, R.C. § 4510.21 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.



      (3)   In all cases, the court may impose upon the offender a
class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial
driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary driver’s
license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C.
§ 4510.02(A)(7).



(R.C. § 4510.21)



   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under
this section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a
valid permit or driver's or commercial driver's license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person
was reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.



(R.C. § 4510.04)



COMMERCIAL DRIVERS AND DRIVER'S LICENSES



§ 71.25  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALCOHOL CONCENTRATION.  The concentration of alcohol in a person's
blood, breath or urine.  When expressed as a percentage, it means grams of
alcohol per the following:



      (1)   100 milliliters of whole blood, blood serum, or blood
plasma;



      (2)   210 liters of breath;



      (3)   100 milliliters of urine.



   COMMERCIAL DRIVER'S LICENSE.  A license issued in accordance with R.C.
Chapter 4506 that authorizes an individual to drive a commercial motor
vehicle.



   COMMERCIAL DRIVER'S LICENSE INFORMATION SYSTEM.  The information
system established pursuant to the requirements of the "Commercial Motor
Vehicle Safety Act of 1986," 100 Stat. 3207-171, 49 USC App. 2701.



   COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE.  Except when used in R.C. § 4506.25, any
motor vehicle designed or used to transport persons or property that meets
any of the following qualifications:



      (1)   Any combination of vehicles with a gross vehicle weight
or combined gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 pounds or more, provided
that the gross vehicle weight or gross vehicle weight rating of the vehicle
or vehicles being towed is in excess of 10,000 pounds;



      (2)   Any single vehicle with a gross vehicle weight or gross
vehicle weight rating of 26,001 pounds or more;



      (3)   Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles that is
not a Class A or Class B vehicle, but is designed to transport 16 or more
passengers including the driver;



      (4)   Any school bus with a gross vehicle weight or gross
vehicle weight rating of less than 26,001 pounds that is designed to
transport fewer than 16 passengers including the driver;



      (5)   Is transporting hazardous materials for which placarding
is required  under 49 C.F.R. Part 172, Subpart F, as amended; or



      (6)   Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles that is
designed to be operated and to travel on a public street or highway and is
considered by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration to be a
commercial motor vehicle, including, but not limited to, a motorized crane, a
vehicle whose function is to pump cement, a rig for drilling wells, and a
portable crane.



   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE.  Includes all of the following:



      (1)   Any substance classified as a controlled substance under
the "Controlled Substances Act," 80 Stat. 1242 (1970), 21 USC 802(6), as
amended;



      (2)   Any substance included in Schedules I through V of 21
CFR Part 1308, as amended;



      (3)   Any drug of abuse.



   CONVICTION.  An unvacated adjudication of guilt or a determination
that a person has violated or failed to comply with the law in a court of
original jurisdiction or an authorized administrative tribunal, an unvacated
forfeiture of bail or collateral deposited to secure the person's appearance
in court, a plea of guilty or nolo contendere accepted by the court, the
payment of a fine or court cost, or violation of a condition of release
without bail, regardless of whether or not the penalty is rebated, suspended
or probated.



   DISQUALIFICATION.  Means any of the following:



      (1)   The suspension, revocation, or cancellation of a
person's privileges to operate a commercial motor vehicle;



      (2)   Any withdrawal of a person's privileges to operate a
commercial motor vehicle as the result of a violation of state or local law
relating to motor vehicle traffic control other than parking, vehicle weight,
or vehicle defect violations;



      (3)   A determination by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Administration that a person is not qualified to operate a commercial motor
vehicle under 49 C.F.R. § 391.



   DOMICILED.  Having a true, fixed, principal, and permanent residence
to which an individual intends to return.



   DOWNGRADE. Any of the following, as applicable:



      (1)   A change in the commercial driver’s license, or
commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit, holder’s
self-certified status as described in R.C. § 4506.10(A)(1);



      (2)   A change to a lesser class of vehicle;



      (3)   Removal of commercial driver’s license privileges from
the individual’s driver’s license.



   DRIVE.   To drive, operate or be in physical control of a motor
vehicle.



   DRIVER.   Any person who drives, operates or is in physical control of
a commercial motor vehicle or is required to have a commercial driver's
license.



   DRIVER'S LICENSE.   A license issued by the Bureau of Motor Vehicles
that authorizes an individual to drive.



   DRUG OF ABUSE.   Any controlled substance, dangerous drug as defined
in R.C. § 4729.01, or over-the-counter medication that, when taken in
quantities exceeding the recommended dosage, can result in impairment of
judgment or reflexes.



   ELECTRONIC DEVICE. Includes a cellular telephone, a personal digital
assistant, a pager, a computer, and any other device used to input, write,
send, receive, or read text.



   ELIGIBLE UNIT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT. A village, township, or county that
has a population of not more than 3,000 persons according to the most recent
federal census.



   EMPLOYER.   Any person, including the federal government, any state,
and a political subdivision of any state, that owns or leases a commercial
motor vehicle or assigns a person to drive such a motor vehicle.



   ENDORSEMENT.   An authorization on a person's commercial driver's
license that is required to permit the person to operate a specified type of
commercial motor vehicle.



   FARM TRUCK. A truck controlled and operated by a farmer for use in the
transportation to or from a farm, for a distance of not more than 150 miles,
of products of the farm, including livestock and its products, poultry and
its products, floricultural and horticultural products, and in the
transportation to the farm, from a distance of not more than 150 miles, of
supplies for the farm, including tile, fence and every other thing or
commodity used in agricultural, floricultural, horticultural, livestock, and
poultry production, and livestock, poultry, and other animals and things used
for breeding, feeding, or other purposes connected with the operation of the
farm, when the truck is operated in accordance with this definition and is
not used in the operations of a motor transportation company or private motor
carrier.



   FATALITY. The death of a person as the result of a motor vehicle
accident occurring not more than 365 days prior to the date of death.



   FELONY.   Any offense under federal or state law that is punishable by
death or imprisonment for a term exceeding one year and includes any offense
specifically classified as a felony under the law of this state, regardless
of the penalty that may be imposed.



   FOREIGN JURISDICTION.   Any jurisdiction other than a state.



   GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING.   The value specified by the manufacturer
as the maximum loaded weight of a single or a combination vehicle. The gross
vehicle weight rating of a combination vehicle is the gross vehicle weight
rating of the power unit plus the gross vehicle weight rating of each towed
unit.



   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.   Any material that has been designated as
hazardous under 49 U.S.C. § 5103 and is required to be placarded under 49
C.F.R. Part 172, Subpart F or any quantity of a material listed as a select
agent or toxin in 42 C.F.R. Part 73, as amended.



   IMMINENT HAZARD. The existence of a condition that presents a
substantial likelihood that death, serious illness, severe personal injury,
or a substantial endangerment to health, property, or the environment may
occur before the reasonably foreseeable completion date of a formal
proceeding begun to lessen the risk of death, illness, injury, or
endangerment.



   MEDICAL VARIANCE. One of the following received by a driver from the
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration that allows the driver to be
issued a medical certificate:



      (1)   An exemption letter permitting operation of a commercial
motor vehicle under 49 C.F.R. part 381, subpart C or 49 C.F.R. § 391.64;



      (2)   A skill performance evaluation certificate permitting
operation of a commercial motor vehicle pursuant to 49 C.F.R. § 391.49.



   MOBILE TELEPHONE. A mobile communication device that falls under or
uses any commercial mobile radio service as defined in 47 C.F.R. part 20,
except that mobile telephone does not include two-way or citizens band radio
services.



   MOTOR VEHICLE.   A vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer, or semitrailer
propelled or drawn by mechanical power used on highways, except that such
term does not include a vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer, or semitrailer
operated exclusively on a rail.



   OUT-OF-SERVICE ORDER.   A declaration by an authorized enforcement
officer of a federal, state, local, Canadian, or Mexican jurisdiction
declaring that the driver, commercial motor vehicle, or commercial motor
carrier operation is out of service as defined in 49 C.F.R. § 390.5.



   PEACE OFFICER.   Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01



   PORTABLE TANK.   A liquid or gaseous packaging designed primarily to
be loaded on or temporarily attached to a vehicle and equipped with skids,
mountings, or accessories to facilitate handling of the tank by mechanical
means.



   PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01(E)(1)
and (E)(3).



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Includes every vehicle that is defined as a
recreational vehicle in R.C. § 4501.01 and is used exclusively for purposes
other than engaging in business for profit.



   RESIDENCE.   Any person's residence determined in accordance with
standards prescribed in the rules adopted by the Registrar.



   SCHOOL BUS.   Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.



   SERIOUS TRAFFIC VIOLATION.  Any of the following:



      (1)   A conviction arising from a single charge of operating a
commercial motor vehicle in violation of any provision of R.C. § 4506.03;



      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (2)(b) of this
definition, a violation while operating a commercial motor vehicle of a law
of this state, or any municipal ordinance or county or township resolution,
or any other substantially equivalent law of another state or political
subdivision of another state, prohibiting either of the following:



            1.   Texting while driving;



            2.   Using a handheld mobile telephone.



         (b)   It is not a serious traffic violation if the
person was texting or using a handheld mobile telephone to contact law
enforcement or other emergency services.



      (3)   A conviction arising from the operation of any motor
vehicle that involves any of the following:



         (a)   A single charge of any speed in excess of the
posted speed limit by 15 miles per hour or more;



         (b)   Violations of R.C. § 4511.20 or 4511.201 or any
substantially equivalent ordinance or resolution, or of any substantially
equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of another state;



         (c)   Violation of a law of this state or an ordinance
or resolution relating to traffic control, other than a parking violation, or
of any substantially equivalent law of another state or political subdivision
of another state, that results in a fatal accident;



         (d)   Violation of R.C. § 4506.03 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or county or township resolution, or of any
substantially equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of
another state, that involves the operation of a commercial motor vehicle
without a valid commercial driver’s license with the proper class or
endorsement for the specific vehicle group being operated or for the
passengers or type of cargo being transported;



         (e)   Violation of R.C. § 4506.03 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or county or township resolution, or of any
substantially equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of
another state, that involves the operation of a commercial motor vehicle
without a valid commercial driver’s license being in the person’s
possession;



         (f)   Violation of R.C. § 4511.33 or 4511.34, or any
municipal ordinance or county or township resolution substantially equivalent
to either of those sections, or any substantially equivalent law of another
state or political subdivision of another state;



         (g)   Violation of any other law of this state, any law
of another state, or any ordinance or resolution of a political subdivision
of this state or another state that meets both of the following requirements:



            1.   It relates to traffic control, other than a
parking violation;



            2.   It is determined to be a serious traffic
violation by the United States Secretary of Transportation and is designated
by the director as such by rule.



   STATE.   A state of the United States and includes the District of
Columbia.



   TANK VEHICLE.  Any commercial motor vehicle that is designed to
transport any liquid or gaseous materials within a tank or tanks that are
either permanently or temporarily attached to the vehicle or its chassis and
have an individual rated capacity of more than 119 gallons and an aggregate
rated capacity of 1,000 gallons or more. The term does not include a
commercial motor vehicle transporting an empty storage container tank that is
not designed for transportation, has a rated capacity of 1,000 gallons or
more, and is temporarily attached to a flatbed trailer.



   TESTER. Means a person or entity acting pursuant to a valid agreement
entered into pursuant to R.C. § 4506.09(B).



   TEXTING. Manually entering alphanumeric text into, or reading text
from, an electronic device. Texting includes short message service (SMS), e-
mail, instant messaging, a command or request to access a world wide web
page, pressing more than a single button to initiate or terminate a voice
communication using a mobile telephone, or engaging in any other form of
electronic text retrieval or entry, for present or future communication.
Texting does not include the following:



      (1)   Using voice commands to initiate, receive, or terminate
a voice communication using a mobile telephone;



      (2)   Inputting, selecting, or reading information on a global
positioning system or navigation system;



      (3)   Pressing a single button to initiate or terminate a
voice communication using a mobile telephone; or



      (4)   Using, for a purpose that is not otherwise prohibited by
law, a device capable of performing multiple functions, such as a fleet
management system, a dispatching device, a mobile telephone, a citizens band
radio, or a music player.



   TEXTING WHILE DRIVING. Texting while operating a commercial motor
vehicle, with the motor running, including while temporarily stationary
because of traffic, a traffic control device, or other momentary delays.
Texting while driving does not include operating a commercial motor vehicle
with or without the motor running when the driver has moved the vehicle to
the side of, or off, a highway and is stopped in a location where the vehicle
can safely remain stationary.



   UNITED STATES.  Means the 50 states and the District of Columbia.



   UPGRADE. A change in the class of vehicles, endorsements, or
self-certified status as described in R.C. § 4506.10(A)(1) that expands the
ability of a current commercial driver’s license holder to operate
commercial motor vehicles under this chapter or R.C. Chapter 4506.



   USE OF A HANDHELD MOBILE TELEPHONE. Means:



      (1)   Using at least one hand to hold a mobile telephone to
conduct a voice communication;



      (2)   Dialing or answering a mobile telephone by pressing more
than a single button; or



      (3)   Reaching for a mobile telephone in a manner that
requires a driver to maneuver so that the driver is no longer in a seated
driving position, or restrained by a seat belt that is installed in
accordance with 49 C.F.R. § 393.93 and adjusted in accordance with the
vehicle manufacturer’s instructions.



   VEHICLE.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.



(R.C. § 4506.01)



§ 71.26  USE OF ACTUAL GROSS WEIGHT IN LIEU OF RATING.



   For purposes of this subchapter, the actual gross weight of a vehicle
or combination of vehicles may be used in lieu of a gross vehicle weight
rating to determine whether a vehicle or combination of vehicles qualifies as
a commercial motor vehicle if the gross vehicle weight rating specified by
the manufacturer for the vehicle of combination of vehicles is not
determinable, or if the manufacturer of the vehicle has not specified a gross
vehicle weight rating.



(R.C. § 4506.011)



§ 71.27  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having in the
person's possession or otherwise under the person's control more than one
valid driver's license issued by this state, any other state, or by a foreign
jurisdiction;



      (2)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle on a highway in this
municipality in violation of an out-of-service order while the person's
driving privilege is suspended, revoked, or cancelled, or while the person is
subject to disqualification;



      (3)   Drive a motor vehicle on a highway in the municipality
under the authority of a commercial driver's license issued by another state
or a foreign jurisdiction, after having been a resident of this state for 30
days or longer;



      (4)   Knowingly give false information in any application or
certification required by R.C. § 4506.07.



   (B)   The municipality shall give every conviction occurring out of
this state and notice of which was received by the state Department of Public
Safety after December 31, 1989, full faith and credit and treat it for
sanctioning purposes under this chapter as though the conviction had occurred
in this state.



(R.C. § 4506.04(A), (B))



   (C)   No person shall drive any commercial motor vehicle for which
an endorsement is required under R.C. § 4506.12 unless the proper
endorsement appears on the person’s commercial driver’s license or
commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit. No person shall
drive a commercial motor vehicle in violation of a restriction established
under R.C. § 4506.12 that appears on the person’s commercial driver’s
license or commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit.



(R.C. § 4506.12(I))



   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A)(1), (A)(2) or (A)(3) of
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(4) of this section is
guilty of falsification, a misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition, the
provisions of R.C. § 4507.19 apply.



(R.C. § 4506.04(C))



      (3)   (a)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.



         (b)   The offenses established under division (C) of
this section are strict liability offenses and R.C. § 2901.20 does not
apply. The designation of these offenses as strict liability offenses shall
not be construed to imply that any other offense for which there is no
specified degree of culpability, whether in this section or another section
of this code or the Ohio Revised Code, is not a strict liability offense.



(R.C. § 4506.12(J))



§ 71.28  PREREQUISITES TO OPERATION OF COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE.



   (A)   Except as provided in divisions (B) or (C) of this section,
the following shall apply:



      (1)   No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle on a
highway in this state unless the person holds, and has in the person’s
possession, any of the following:



         (a)   A valid commercial driver’s license with proper
endorsements for the motor vehicle being driven, issued by the Registrar of
Motor Vehicles or by another jurisdiction recognized by this state;



         (b)   A valid examiner’s commercial driving permit
issued under R.C. § 4506.13;



         (c)   A valid restricted commercial driver’s license
and waiver for farm- related service industries issued under R.C. § 4506.24;



         (d)   A valid commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit issued by the Registrar, provided that the person is
accompanied by an authorized state driver’s license examiner or tester or a
person who has been issued and has in the person’s immediate possession a
current, valid commercial driver’s license and who meets the requirements
of R.C. § 4506.06(B).



      (2)   No person’s commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit shall be upgraded, and no commercial driver’s license
shall be upgraded, renewed, or issued to a person until the person surrenders
to the registrar of motor vehicles all valid licenses and permits issued to
the person by this state or by another jurisdiction recognized by this state.
If the license or permit was issued by any other state or another
jurisdiction recognized by this state, the Registrar shall report the
surrender of a license or permit to the issuing authority, together with
information that a license or permit is now issued in this state. The
Registrar shall destroy any such license or permit that is not returned to
the issuing authority.



      (3)   No person who has been a resident of this state for 30
days or longer shall drive a commercial motor vehicle under the authority of
a commercial driver’s license issued in another jurisdiction.



   (B)   Nothing in division (A) of this section applies to any
qualified person when engaged in the operation of any of the following:



      (1)   A farm truck;



      (2)   Fire equipment for a fire department, volunteer or
nonvolunteer fire company, fire district, or joint fire district;



      (3)   A public safety vehicle used to provide transportation
or emergency medical service for ill or injured persons;



      (4)   A recreational vehicle;



      (5)   A commercial motor vehicle within the boundaries of an
eligible unit of local government, if the person is employed by the eligible
unit of local government and is operating the commercial motor vehicle for
the purpose of removing snow or ice from a roadway by plowing, sanding, or
salting, but only if either the employee who holds a commercial driver’s
license issued under R.C. Chapter 4506 and ordinarily operates a commercial
motor vehicle for these purposes is unable to operate the vehicle, or the
employing eligible unit of local government determines that a snow or ice
emergency exists that requires additional assistance;



      (6)   A vehicle operated for military purposes by any member
or uniformed employee of the armed forces of the United States or their
reserve components, including the Ohio National Guard. This exception does
not apply to United States reserve technicians;



      (7)   A commercial motor vehicle that is operated for
nonbusiness purposes. “Operated for nonbusiness purposes” means that the
commercial motor vehicle is not used in commerce as “commerce” is defined
in 49 C.F.R. § 383.5, as amended, and is not regulated by the Public
Utilities Commission pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4905, 4921, or 4923;



      (8)   A motor vehicle that is designed primarily for the
transportation of goods and not persons, while that motor vehicle is being
used for the occasional transportation of personal property by individuals
not for compensation and not in the furtherance of a commercial enterprise;



      (9)   A police SWAT team vehicle;



      (10)   A police vehicle used to transport prisoners.



   (C)   Nothing contained in division (B)(5) of this section shall be
construed as preempting or superseding any law, rule or regulation of this
state concerning the safe operation of commercial motor vehicles.



(R.C. § 4506.03(A) - (C))



   (D)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a person may drive
a commercial motor vehicle on a highway in this municipality if all of the
following conditions are met:



      (1)   The person has a valid commercial driver’s license or
commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit issued by any
state or jurisdiction in accordance with the minimum standards adopted by the
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration under the “Commercial Motor
Vehicle Safety Act of 1986", 100 Stat. 3207-171, 49 U.S.C. App., for issuance
of commercial driver’s licenses;



      (2)   The person’s commercial driver’s license or
temporary instruction permit is not suspended, revoked, or canceled, and the
person has the appropriate endorsements for the vehicle that is being driven;



      (3)   The person is not disqualified from driving a commercial
motor vehicle;



      (4)   The person is not subject to an out-of-service order;



      (5)   The person is medically certified as physically
qualified to operate a commercial motor vehicle in accordance with R.C.
Chapter 4506.



         (a)   A person who submitted a medical examiner’s
certificate to the Registrar in accordance with R.C. § 4506.10(A)(1) and
whose medical certification information is maintained in the commercial
driver’s license information system is not required to have the medical
examiner’s certificate in the person’s possession when on duty.



         (b)   A person whose medical certification information
is not maintained in the commercial driver’s license information system
shall have in the person’s possession when on duty the original or a copy
of the current medical examiner’s certificate that was submitted to the
Registrar. However, the person may operate a commercial motor vehicle with
such proof of medical certification for not more than 15 days after the date
the current medical examiner’s certificate was issued to the person.



         (c)   A person who has a medical variance shall have in
the person’s possession the original or copy of the medical variance
documentation at all times while on duty.



   (E)   No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle on a highway
in this municipality if the person does not meet the conditions specified in
division (D) of this section.



   (F)   Except as set forth in 49 C.F.R. §§ 390.3(f), 391.2, 391.62,
391.67, and 391.68, no person holding a commercial driver’s license
temporary instruction permit or a commercial driver’s license issued under
R.C. Chapter 4506 may drive a commercial motor vehicle in interstate commerce
until the person is at least 21 years of age.



(R.C. § 4506.05(A) - (C))



   (G)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (2)   The offenses established under divisions (D), (E) and
(F) of this section are strict liability offenses and R.C. § 2901.20 does
not apply. The designation of these offenses as strict liability offenses
shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for which there is no
specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability offense.



(R.C. §§ 4506.03(D), 4506.05(D))



§ 71.29  PHYSICAL QUALIFICATION TO OPERATE COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLES.



   (A)   No person who holds a valid commercial driver's license shall
drive a commercial motor vehicle unless the person is physically qualified to
do so.



      (1)   Any person applying for a commercial driver’s license
or commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit, the renewal or
upgrade



of a commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit, or the transfer of a commercial driver’s license from
out of state shall self-certify to the Registrar for purposes of 49 C.F.R. §
383.71 one of the following in regard to the applicant’s operation of a
commercial motor vehicle, as applicable:



         (a)   1.   If the applicant operates or expects to
operate a commercial motor vehicle in interstate or foreign commerce and is
subject to and meets the requirements under 49 C.F.R. part 391, the applicant
shall self-certify that the applicant is non- excepted interstate and shall
provide the Registrar with the original or a copy of a medical examiner’s
certificate and each subsequently issued medical examiner’s certificate
prepared by a qualified medical examiner to maintain a medically certified
status on the applicant’s commercial driver licensing system driver record;



            2.   If the applicant operates or expects to
operate a commercial motor vehicle in interstate commerce, but engages in
transportation or operations excepted under 49 C.F.R. §§ 390.3(f), 391.2,
391.68, or 398.3 from all or parts of the qualification requirements of 49
C.F.R. part 391, the applicant shall self-certify that the applicant is
excepted interstate and is not required to obtain a medical examiner’s
certificate;



         (b)   1.   If the applicant operates only in
intrastate commerce and is subject to state driver qualification
requirements, the applicant shall self-certify that the applicant is non-
excepted intrastate;



            2.   If the applicant operates only in intrastate
commerce and is excepted from all or parts of the state driver qualification
requirements, the applicant shall self- certify that the applicant is
excepted intrastate.



      (2)   Notwithstanding the expiration date on a person’s
commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit, every commercial driver’s license or commercial
driver’s license temporary instruction permit holder shall provide the
Registrar with the certification required by this section on or after January
30, 2012, but prior to January 30, 2014.



   (B)   A person is qualified to drive a school bus if the person
holds a valid commercial driver’s license along with the proper
endorsements, and if the person has been certified as medically qualified in
accordance with rules adopted by the Department of Education.



   (C)   (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(2) of this
section, any medical examination required by this section shall be performed
only by one of the following:



         (a)   A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4731 to
practice medicine or surgery or osteopathic medicine and surgery in this
state, or licensed under any similar law of another state;



         (b)   A physician assistant who is authorized by the
supervising physician to perform such a medical examination;



         (c)   A certified nurse practitioner, a clinical nurse
specialist, or a certified nurse-midwife;



         (d)   A doctor of chiropractic.



      (2)   Any part of an examination required by this section that
pertains to visual acuity, field of vision, and the ability to recognize
colors may be performed by a person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4725 to
practice optometry in this state, or licensed under any similar law of
another state.



      (3)   Any written documentation of a physical examination
conducted pursuant to this section shall be completed by the individual who
performed the examination.



   (D)   Whenever good cause appears, the Registrar, upon issuing a
commercial driver's license under this chapter, may impose restrictions
suitable to the licensee's driving ability with respect to the type of motor
vehicle or special mechanical control devices required on a motor vehicle
which the licensee may



operate, or such other restrictions applicable to the licensee as the
Registrar determines to be necessary.



      (1)   The Registrar may either issue a special restricted
license or may set forth upon the usual license form the restrictions imposed.



      (2)   The Registrar, upon receiving satisfactory evidence of
any violation of the restrictions of such license, may impose a class D
license suspension of the license for the period of time specified in
division (B)(4) of R.C. § 4510.02.



      (3)   The Registrar, upon receiving satisfactory evidence that
an applicant or holder of a commercial driver's license has violated R.C. §
4506.04(A)(4) and knowingly given false information on any application or
certification required by R.C. § 4506.07, shall cancel the commercial
driver's license of the person or any pending application from the person for
a commercial driver's license or class D driver's license for a period of at
least 60 days, during which time no application for a commercial driver's
license or class D driver's license shall be received from the person.



   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.



(R.C. § 4506.10)  (Ord. 2-1998, passed 2-4-98)



§ 71.30  DISQUALIFICATION OF DRIVER OR PLACEMENT OUT OF SERVICE.



   (A)   Whoever violates R.C. § 4506.15(A) or a similar law of this
jurisdiction or of another state or a foreign jurisdiction, immediately shall
be placed out-of-service for 24 hours, in addition to any disqualification
required by this section and any other penalty imposed by the Revised Code.
(R.C. § 4501.16(A))



   (B)   Any further disqualification of a person operating a
commercial vehicle shall be governed by the Ohio Revised Code.



(Ord. 2-1998, passed 2-4-98)



§ 71.31  IMPLIED CONSENT TO TEST; EFFECT OF REFUSAL; IMMEDIATE SURRENDER OF
LICENSE.



   (A)   Any person who holds a commercial driver's license or operates
a commercial motor vehicle requiring a commercial driver's license within
this state shall be deemed to have given consent to a test or tests of the
person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine for the purpose
of determining the person's alcohol concentration or the presence of any
controlled substance.



   (B)   A test or tests as provided in division (A) hereof may be
administered at the direction of a peace officer having reasonable ground to
stop or detain the person and, after investigating the circumstances
surrounding the operation of the commercial motor vehicle, also having
reasonable ground to believe the person was driving the commercial vehicle
while having a measurable or detectable amount of alcohol or of a controlled
substance in the person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or
urine. Any such test shall be given within two hours of the time of the
alleged violation.



   (C)   A person requested to submit to a test under division (A)
hereof shall be advised by the peace officer requesting the test that a
refusal to submit to the test will result in the person immediately being
placed out-of-service for a period of 24 hours and being disqualified from
operating a commercial motor vehicle for a period of not less than one year,
and that the person is required to surrender the person's commercial driver's
license to the peace officer.



   (D)   If a person refuses to submit to a test after being warned as
provided in division (C) hereof or submits to a test that discloses the
presence of a controlled substance, an alcohol concentration of
four-hundredths of one percent or more by whole blood or breath, and alcohol
concentration of forty-eight-thousandths of one percent or more by blood
serum or blood plasma, or an alcohol concentration of fifty-six-thousandths
of one percent or more by urine, the person immediately shall surrender the
person's commercial driver's license to the peace officer. The peace officer
shall forward the license, together with a sworn report, to the Registrar of
Motor Vehicles certifying that the test was requested pursuant to division
(A) hereof and that the person either refused to submit to testing or
submitted to a test that disclosed the presence of a controlled substance or
a prohibited alcohol concentration. The form and contents of the report
required by this section shall be established by the Registrar by rule, but
shall contain the advice to be read to the driver and a statement to be
signed by the driver acknowledging that the driver has been read the advice
and that the form was shown to the driver.



   (E)   Upon receipt of a sworn report from the peace officer as
provided in division (D) of this section, the Registrar shall disqualify the
person named in the report from driving a commercial motor vehicle for the
period described below:



      (1)   Upon a first incident, one year;



      (2)   Upon an incident of refusal or of a prohibited
concentration of alcohol after one or more previous incidents of either
refusal or of a prohibited concentration of alcohol, the person shall be
disqualified for life or such lesser period as prescribed by rule by the
Registrar.



   (F)   A test of a person's whole blood or a person's blood serum or
plasma given under this section shall comply with the applicable provisions
of R.C. § 4511.19(D) and any physician, registered nurse, or qualified
technician, chemist, or phlebotomist who withdraws whole blood or blood serum
or plasma from a person under this section, and any hospital, first-aid
station, clinic, or other facility at which whole blood or blood serum or
plasma is withdrawn from a person pursuant to this section, is immune from
criminal liability, and from civil liability that is based upon a claim of
assault and battery or based upon any other claim of malpractice, for any act
performed in withdrawing whole blood or blood serum or plasma from the person.



   (G)   When a person submits to a test under this section, the
results of the test, at the person's request, shall be made available to the
person, the person's attorney, or the person's agent, immediately upon
completion of the chemical test analysis.  The person also may have an
additional test administered by a physician, a registered nurse, or a
qualified technician, chemist or phlebotomist of the person's own choosing as
provided in R.C. § 4511.19(D) for tests administered under that section, and
the failure to obtain such a test has the same effect as in that section.



   (H)   No person shall refuse to immediately surrender the person's
commercial driver's license to a peace officer when required to do so by this
section.



   (I)   A peace officer issuing an out-of-service order or receiving a
commercial driver's license surrendered under this section may remove or
arrange for the removal of any commercial motor vehicle affected by the
issuance of that order of the surrender of that license.



   (J)   (1)   Except for civil actions arising out of the operation
of a motor vehicle and civil actions in which the state is a Plaintiff, no
peace officer of any law enforcement agency within this state is liable in
compensatory damages in any civil action that arises under the Revised Code
or common law of this state for any injury, death, or loss to a person or
property caused in the performance of his duties under this section and rules
adopted under this section, unless the officer's actions were manifestly
outside the scope of the officer's employment or official responsibilities,
or unless the officer acted with malicious purpose, in bad faith, or in a
wanton reckless manner.



      (2)   Except for civil actions that arise out of the operation
of a motor vehicle and civil actions in which the state is a Plaintiff, no
peace officer of any law enforcement agency within this state is liable in
punitive or exemplary damages in any civil action that arises under the
Revised Code or common law of this state for any injury, death or loss to
person or property caused in the performance of official duties under this
section of the Revised Code and rules adopted under this section, unless the
officer's actions were manifestly outside the scope of the officer's
employment or official responsibilities, or unless the officer acted with
malicious purpose, in bad faith or in wanton or reckless manner.



   (K)   Whoever violated division (H) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 4506.17)  (Ord. 2-1998, passed 2-4-98)



§ 71.32  PROVISION OF 49 CFR 383, SUBPART C.



   (A)   The provisions of 49 C.F.R. Part 383, Subpart C (Notification
Requirements and Employer Responsibilities), as amended, shall apply to all
commercial drivers or persons who apply for employment as commercial drivers.
No person shall fail to make a report to the person's employer as required by
this section.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.



(R.C. § 4506.19)  (Ord. 2-1998, passed 2-4-98)



§ 71.33  DUTIES OF PEACE OFFICER AS TO ALCOHOL OR DRUG OFFENDERS.



   Within the jurisdictional limits of his or her appointed  authority,
any peace officer shall stop and detain any person found violating R.C. §
4506.15, without obtaining a warrant. When there is reasonable ground to
believe that a violation of R.C. § 4506.15 has been committed and a test or
tests of the person's whole blood, blood plasma or blood serum, breath or
urine is necessary, the peace officer shall take the person to an appropriate
place for testing. If the person refuses to submit to a test after being
warned as provided in R.C. § 4506.17(C), or submits to a test that discloses
the presence of a controlled substance or an alcohol concentration of
four-hundredths of one percent or more by whole blood or breath, an alcohol
concentration of forty-eight-thousandths of one percent or more by blood
serum or blood plasma, or an alcohol concentration of fifty-six-thousandths
of one percent or more by urine, the peace officer shall require that the
person immediately surrender the person's commercial driver's license to the
peace officer. As used in this section, JURISDICTIONAL LIMITS means the
limits within which a peace officer may arrest and detain a person without a
warrant under R.C. § 2935.03, except that the Superintendent and the
troopers of the State Highway Patrol may stop and detain, without warrant any
person who, in the presence of the Superintendent or any trooper, is engaged
in the violation of this chapter.



(R.C. § 4506.23)  (Ord. 2-1998, passed 2-4-98)



§ 71.34  CRIMINAL OFFENSES.



   (A)   No person who holds a commercial driver’s license or
commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit or who operates a
motor vehicle for which a commercial driver’s license or permit is required
shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having a
measurable or detectable amount of alcohol or of a controlled substance in
the person’s blood, breath, or urine;



      (2)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of 0.04% or more by whole blood or breath;



      (3)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of .048% or more by blood serum or blood plasma;



      (4)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of .056% or more by urine;



      (5)   Drive a motor vehicle while under the influence of a
controlled substance;



      (6)   Drive a motor vehicle in violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or
a municipal OVI ordinance as defined in R.C. § 4511.181;



      (7)   Use a vehicle in the commission of a felony;



      (8)   Refuse to submit to a test under R.C. § 4506.17 or R.C.
§ 4511.191, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;



      (9)   Operate a commercial motor vehicle while the person’s
commercial driver’s license or permit or other commercial driving
privileges are revoked, suspended, cancelled, or disqualified;



      (10)   Cause a fatality through the negligent operation of a
commercial motor vehicle, including but not limited to the offenses of
aggravated vehicular homicide, vehicular homicide, and vehicular manslaughter;



      (11)   Fail to stop after an accident in violation of R.C.
§§ 4549.02 to 4549.03, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;



      (12)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle in violation of any
provision of R.C. §§  4511.61 through 4511.63 or any federal or local law
or ordinance pertaining to railroad-highway grade crossings;



      (13)   Use a motor vehicle in the commission of a felony
involving the manufacture, distribution, or dispensing of a controlled
substance as defined in R.C. § 3719.01 or the possession with intent to
manufacture, distribute, or dispense a controlled substance.



(R.C. § 4506.15(A))



   (B)   No person shall refuse to immediately surrender the person’s
commercial driver’s license or permit to a peace officer when required to
do so by R.C. § 4506.17.



(R.C. § 4506.17(H))



   (C)   (1)   Within the jurisdictional limits of the appointing
authority, any peace officer shall stop and detain any person found violating
division (A) of this section without obtaining a warrant. When there is
reasonable ground to believe that a violation of division (A) of this section
has been committed and a test or tests of the person’s whole blood, blood
plasma or blood serum, breath or urine is necessary, the peace officer shall
take the person to an appropriate place for testing. If a person refuses to
submit to a test after being warned as provided in R.C. § 4506.17(C), or
submits to a test that discloses the presence of a controlled substance or an
alcohol concentration of 0.04% or more by whole blood or breath, an alcohol
concentration of .048% or more by blood serum or blood plasma, or an alcohol
concentration of .056% or more by urine, the peace officer shall require that
the person immediately surrender the person’s commercial driver’s license
to the peace officer.



      (2)   As used in this division (C), JURISDICTIONAL LIMITS
means the limits within which a peace officer may arrest and detain a person
without a warrant under R.C. § 2935.03, except that the Superintendent and
the troopers of the State Highway Patrol may stop and detain, without
warrant, any person who, in the presence of the Superintendent or any
trooper, is engaged in a violation of any of the provisions of this
subchapter or R.C. Chapter 4506.



(R.C. § 4506.23)



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.



(R.C.§§ 4506.15(B), 4506.17(N))



Statutory reference:



   Alcohol or controlled substance testing, disqualification of drivers,
see R.C. § 4506.17



§ 71.35  APPLICATION OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The provisions of 49 CFR 383, Subpart C (Notification
Requirements and Employer Responsibilities), as amended, shall apply to all
commercial drivers or persons who apply for employment as commercial drivers.
No person shall fail to make a report to the person's employer as required by
this section.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.



(R.C. § 4506.19)



§ 71.36  EMPLOYMENT OF DRIVERS OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.



   (A)   Each employer shall require every applicant for employment as
a driver of a commercial vehicle to provide the applicant's employment
history for the 10 years preceding the date the employment application is
submitted to the prospective employer. The following information shall be
submitted:



      (1)   A list of the names and addresses of the applicant's
previous employers for which the applicant was the operator of a commercial
motor vehicle;



      (2)   The dates the applicant was employed by these employers;



      (3)   The reason for leaving each of these employers.



   (B)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize any driver
employed by the employer to drive a commercial motor vehicle during any
period in which any of the following apply:



      (1)   The driver's commercial driver's license is suspended,
revoked, or cancelled by any state or a foreign jurisdiction;



      (2)   The driver has lost the privilege to drive, or currently
is disqualified from driving, a commercial motor vehicle in any state or
foreign jurisdiction;



      (3)   The driver, the commercial motor vehicle the driver is
driving, or the motor carrier operation is subject to an out-of-service order
in any state or a foreign jurisdiction;



      (4)   The driver has more than one driver's license.



   (C)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to
operate a commercial motor vehicle in violation of R.C. § 4506.15.



   (D)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to
operate a commercial motor vehicle if the driver does not hold a valid,
current commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license
temporary instruction permit bearing the proper class or endorsements for the
vehicle. No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate
a commercial motor vehicle in violation of the restrictions on the driver’s
commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit.



   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A), (B) or (D) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty
of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 4506.20)



§ 71.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which another
penalty is not provided in the section that contains the provision violated
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. §§ 4506.99, 4507.99)



Cross-reference:



   For misdemeanor penalty provisions, see § 70.99



CHAPTER 72:  TRAFFIC RULES



Section



General Provisions



   72.01   Lanes of travel upon roadways



   72.02   Driving through safety zone



   72.03   Vehicles traveling in opposite directions



   72.04   Rules governing overtaking and passing of vehicles



   72.05   Permission to overtake and pass on the right



   72.06   Driving to left of center line



   72.07   Prohibition against driving upon left side of roadway



   72.08   Hazardous zones



   72.09   One-way highways and rotary traffic islands



   72.10   Rules for driving in marked lanes



   72.11   Space between moving vehicles



   72.12   Divided roadways



   72.13   Rules for turns at intersections



   72.14   U-turns and turning in roadway prohibited



   72.15   Starting and backing vehicles



   72.16   Turn and stop signals



   72.17   Hand and arm signals



   72.171   Opening and closing vehicle doors



Right-of-Way



   72.20   Right-of-way at intersections



   72.21   Right-of-way when turning left



   72.22   Right-of-way at through highways; stop signs; yield signs



   72.23   Stop at sidewalk area; stop signs on private roads and
driveways



   72.24   Right-of-way on public highway



   72.25   Pedestrian on sidewalk has right-of-way



   72.26   Right-of-way of public safety vehicles



   72.27   Funeral procession has right-of-way



   72.28   Pedestrians yield right-of-way to public safety vehicle



   72.29   Pedestrian on crosswalk has right-of-way



   72.30   Right-of-way yielded to blind person



   72.31   Right-of-way yielded by pedestrian



Pedestrians



   72.35   Pedestrian movement in crosswalks



   72.36   Pedestrian walking along highway



   72.37   Prohibition against soliciting rides; riding on outside of
vehicle



   72.38   Pedestrian on bridge or railroad crossing



   72.39   Persons operating motorized wheelchairs



   72.40   Intoxicated or drugged pedestrian hazard on highway



   72.41   Operation of electric personal assistive mobility devices



Grade Crossings



   72.45   Stop signs at grade crossings



   72.46   Driving vehicle across railroad grade crossing



   72.47   Vehicles required to stop at grade crossings



   72.48   Slow-moving vehicles or equipment crossing railroad tracks



Prohibitions



   72.55   Obstruction and interference affecting view and control of
driver



   72.56   Occupying travel trailer while in motion



   72.57   Driving upon closed highway prohibited



   72.58   Driving upon sidewalk area or paths exclusively for bicycles



   72.59   Obstructing passage of other vehicles



   72.60   Following an emergency or public vehicle prohibited;
approaching stationary public safety vehicle with caution



   72.61   Driving over unprotected fire hose



   72.62   Placing injurious material on highway or depositing litter
from motor vehicle



   72.63   Transporting child not in child-restraint system prohibited



   72.64   Occupant restraining devices



   72.65   (Reserved)



   72.66   Operating motor vehicle while wearing earphones or earplugs



   72.67   Chauffeured limousines and livery services



   72.68   Operating traction engine upon improved highway



   72.69   Excessive acceleration



School Buses



   72.80   Regulations concerning school buses



   72.81   Violation of regulations; report; investigation; citation;
warning



   72.82   Restrictions on the operation of school buses



   72.83   School bus inspection



   72.84   School bus not used for school purposes



   72.85   Licensing by Department of Public Safety



   72.86   Registration and identification of school buses



   72.87   School bus marking



   72.88   Flashing light signal lamps



   72.89   Occupant restraining device for operator



Statutory reference:



   Notice of arrest of certain commercial drivers, see R.C. § 5577.14



   Standards for school buses, see O.A.C. Chapter 4501-5



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 72.01  LANES OF TRAVEL UPON ROADWAYS.



   (A)   Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be
driven upon the right half of the roadway, except as follows:



      (1)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding
in the same direction, or when making a left turn under the rules governing
such movements;



      (2)   When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive
to the left of the center of the highway; provided, any person so doing shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon
the unobstructed portion of the highway within such distance as to constitute
an immediate hazard;



      (3)   When driving upon a roadway divided into three or more
marked lanes for traffic under the rules applicable thereon;



      (4)   When driving upon a roadway designated and posted with
signs for one-way traffic;



      (5)   When otherwise directed by a police officer or
traffic-control device.



   (B)   (1)   Upon all roadways any vehicle proceeding at less than
the prevailing and lawful speed of traffic at the time and place and under
the conditions then existing shall be driven in the right-hand lane then
available for traffic, and far enough to the right to allow passing by faster
vehicles if such passing is safe and reasonable, except under any of the
following circumstances:



         (a)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction;



         (b)   When preparing for a left turn;



         (c)   When the driver must necessarily drive in a lane
other than the right-hand lane to continue on the driver's intended route.



      (2)   Nothing in division (B)(1) of this section requires a
driver of a slower vehicle to compromise the driver's safety to allow
overtaking by a faster vehicle.



   (C)   Upon any roadway having four or more lanes for moving traffic
and providing for two-way movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to
the left of the center line of the roadway, except when authorized by
official traffic-control devices designating certain lanes to the left of the
center of the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use the
lanes, or except as permitted under division (A)(2) of this section. This
division shall not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of the center
line in making a left turn into or from an alley, private road, or driveway.



   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.25)



§ 72.02  DRIVING THROUGH SAFETY ZONE.



   (A)   No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a
safety zone.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.60)



§ 72.03  VEHICLES TRAVELING IN OPPOSITE DIRECTIONS.



   (A)   Operators of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall
pass each other to the right, and upon roadways having width for not more
than one line of traffic in each direction, each operator shall give to the
other one-half of the main traveled portion of the roadway or as nearly
one-half as is reasonably possible.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.26)



§ 72.04  RULES GOVERNING OVERTAKING AND PASSING OF VEHICLES.



   (A)   The following rules govern the overtaking and passing of
vehicles proceeding in the same direction:



      (1)   The operator of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction shall, except as provided in division (A)(3)
of this section, signal to the vehicle to be overtaken, shall pass to the
left thereof at a safe distance, and shall not again drive to the right side
of the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle.



      (2)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is
permitted, the operator of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right
in favor of the overtaking vehicle at the latter's audible signal, and the
operator shall not increase the speed of the operator's vehicle until
completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.



      (3)   The operator of a vehicle overtaking and passing another
vehicle proceeding in the same direction on a divided highway as defined in
R.C. § 4511.35, a limited access highway as defined in R.C. § 5511.02, or a
highway with four or more traffic lanes is not required to signal audibly to
the vehicle being overtaken and passed.



      (4)   The operator of a motor vehicle overtaking a bicycle
proceeding in the same direction on a roadway shall leave a safe distance,
but not less than three feet, when passing the bicycle and the operator of
the motor vehicle shall maintain that distance until safely past the
overtaken bicycle.  (Ord. 13-2010, passed 12-1-10)



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.27)



§ 72.05  PERMISSION TO OVERTAKE AND PASS ON THE RIGHT.



   (A)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass on the right of
another vehicle only under the following conditions:



      (1)   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a
left turn; or



      (2)   Upon a roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient
width for two or more lines of vehicles moving lawfully in the direction
being traveled by the overtaking vehicle.



   (B)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle
only under conditions permitting the movement in safety.  The movement shall
not be made by driving off the roadway.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.28)



§ 72.06  DRIVING TO LEFT OF CENTER LINE.



   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven to the left of the center of the
roadway in overtaking and passing traffic proceeding in the same direction,
unless the left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a
sufficient distance ahead to permit the overtaking and passing to be
completely made without interfering with the safe operation of any traffic
approaching from the opposite direction or any traffic overtaken.  In every
event, the overtaking vehicle must return to an authorized lane of travel as
soon as practicable, and in the event the passing movement involves the use
of a lane authorized for the traffic approaching from the opposite direction,
before coming within 200 feet of any approaching vehicle.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.29)



§ 72.07  PROHIBITION AGAINST DRIVING UPON LEFT SIDE OF ROADWAY.



   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven upon the left side of the roadway
under the following conditions:



      (1)   When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in
the highway, where the operator's view is obstructed within such a distance
as to create a hazard in the event traffic might approach from the opposite
direction;



      (2)   When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100
feet of any bridge, viaduct, or tunnel; or



      (3)   When approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any
intersection or railroad grade crossing.



   (B)   This section does not apply to vehicles upon a one-way
roadway, upon a roadway where traffic is lawfully directed to be driven to
the left side, or under the conditions described in R.C. § 4511.25(A)(2) or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.30)



§ 72.08  HAZARDOUS ZONES.



   (A)   The Department of Transportation may determine those portions
of any state highway where overtaking and passing other traffic or driving to
the left of the center or center line of the roadway would be especially
hazardous, and may, by appropriate signs or markings on the highway, indicate
the beginning and end of such zones.  When signs or markings are in place
and clearly visible, every operator of a vehicle shall obey the directions of
the signs or markings, notwithstanding the distances set out in R.C. §
4511.30.



   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not apply when all of the
following apply:



      (1)   The slower vehicle is proceeding at less than half the
speed of the speed limit applicable to that location.



      (2)   The faster vehicle is capable of overtaking and passing
the slower vehicle without exceeding the speed limit.



      (3)   There is sufficient clear sight distance to the left of
the center or center line of the roadway to meet the overtaking and passing
provisions of R.C. § 4511.29, considering the speed of the slower vehicle.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.31)



§ 72.09  ONE-WAY HIGHWAYS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS.



   (A)   (1)   Upon a roadway designated and posted with signs for
one-way traffic, a vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated.



      (2)   A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall
be driven only to the right of the rotary traffic island.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.32)



§ 72.10  RULES FOR DRIVING IN MARKED LANES.



   (A)   Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly
marked lanes for traffic, or wherever within the municipality traffic is
lawfully moving in two or more substantially continuous lines in the same
direction, the following rules apply:



      (1)   A vehicle shall be driven, as nearly as is practicable,
entirely within a single lane or line of traffic and shall not be moved from
the lane or line until the driver has first ascertained that the movement can
be made with safety.



      (2)   Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes and
provides for the two-way movement of traffic, a vehicle shall not be driven
in the center lane, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle where
the roadway is clearly visible and the center lane is clear of traffic within
a safe distance, or when preparing for a left turn, or where the center lane
is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the
vehicle is proceeding, and is posted with signs to give notice of such
allocation.



      (3)   Official signs may be erected directing specified
traffic to use a designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by
traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the center of the
roadway, or restricting the use of a particular lane to only buses during
certain hours or during all hours, and drivers of vehicles shall obey the
directions of such signs.



      (4)   Official traffic-control devices may be installed
prohibiting the changing of lanes on sections of roadway, and drivers of
vehicles shall obey the directions of every such device.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.33)



§ 72.11  SPACE BETWEEN MOVING VEHICLES.



   (A)   (1)   The operator of a motor vehicle shall not follow
another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due
regard for the speed of the vehicle and the traffic upon and the condition of
the highway.



      (2)   The driver of any truck, or motor vehicle drawing
another vehicle, when traveling upon a roadway outside a business or
residence district, shall maintain a sufficient space, whenever conditions
permit, between the vehicle and another vehicle ahead so an overtaking motor
vehicle may enter and occupy the space without danger.  This division does
not prevent overtaking and passing nor does it apply to any lane specially
designated for use by trucks.



      (3)   Motor vehicles being driven upon any roadway outside of
a business or residence district in a caravan or motorcade shall maintain a
sufficient space between the vehicles so an overtaking vehicle may enter and
occupy the space without danger.  This division (C) shall not apply to
funeral processions.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.34)



§ 72.12  DIVIDED ROADWAYS.



   (A)   Whenever any highway has been divided into two roadways by an
intervening space, or by a physical barrier, or a clearly indicated dividing
section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall be
driven only upon the right-hand roadway, and no vehicle shall be driven over,
across, or within any dividing space, barrier, or section, except through an
opening, crossover, or intersection established by public authority.  This
section does not prohibit the occupancy of the dividing space, barrier, or
section for the purpose of an emergency stop, or in compliance with an order
of a police officer.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.35)



§ 72.13  RULES FOR TURNS AT INTERSECTIONS.



   (A)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection
shall be governed by the following rules:



      (1)   Approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made
as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.



      (2)   At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move
in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for
a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway
nearest the center line thereof and by passing to the right of the center
line where it enters the intersection, and, after entering the intersection,
the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of
the center line of the roadway being entered.  Whenever practicable, the
left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of
the center of the intersection.



      (3)   At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one
direction on one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending
to turn left at any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the
extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction
of travel of the vehicle, and, after entering the intersection, the left turn
shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in
the left hand lane of the roadway being entered lawfully available to traffic
moving in that lane.



   (B)   The Department of Transportation and local authorities may
cause markers, buttons, or signs to be placed within or adjacent to
intersections, and thereby require and direct that a different course from
that specified in this section be traveled by vehicles turning at an
intersection, and when markers, buttons, or signs are so placed, no operator
of a vehicle shall turn the vehicle at an intersection other than as directed
and required by the markers, buttons, or signs.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.36)



§ 72.14  U-TURNS AND TURNING IN ROADWAY PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Except as provided in R.C. § 4511.13 and division (B) of this
section, no vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite
direction upon any curve, or upon the approach to or near the crest of a
grade, if such vehicle cannot be seen within 500 feet by the driver of any
other vehicle approaching from either direction.



   (B)   The driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle,
when responding to an emergency call, may turn the vehicle so as to proceed
in the opposite direction.  This division applies only when the emergency
vehicle or public safety vehicle is responding to an emergency call, is
equipped with and displaying at least one flashing, rotating, or oscillating
light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet
to the front of the vehicle, and when the driver of the vehicle is giving an
audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle, or bell.  This division does not
relieve the driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the
duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon
the highway.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.37)



§ 72.15  STARTING AND BACKING VEHICLES.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped,
standing, or parked until the movement can be made with reasonable safety.



      (2)   Before backing, operators of vehicles shall give ample
warning, and while backing they shall exercise vigilance not to injure person
or property on the street or highway.



      (3)   No person shall back a motor vehicle on a freeway,
except:



         (a)   In a rest area;



         (b)   In the performance of public works or official
duties;



         (c)   As a result of an emergency caused by an accident
or breakdown of a motor vehicle.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.38)



§ 72.16  TURN AND STOP SIGNALS.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall turn a vehicle or move right or left
upon a highway unless and until the person has exercised due care to
ascertain that the movement can be made with reasonable safety, nor without
giving an appropriate signal in the manner hereinafter provided.



      (2)   When required, a signal of intention to turn or move
right or left shall be given continuously during not less than the last 100
feet traveled by the vehicle before turning, except that in the case of a
person operating a bicycle, the signal shall be made not less than one time
but is not required to be continuous. A bicycle operator is not required to
make a signal if the bicycle is in a designated turn lane, and a signal shall
not be given when the operator's hands are needed for the safe operation of
the bicycle.



      (3)   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a
vehicle without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided
herein to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear, when there is
opportunity to give a signal.



      (4)   Any stop or turn signal required by this section shall
be given either by means of the hand and arm, or by signal lights that
clearly indicate to both approaching and following traffic the intention to
turn or move right or left, except that any motor vehicle in use on a highway
shall be equipped with, and the required signal shall be given by, signal
lights when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to
the left outside limit of the body, cab or load of such motor vehicle exceeds
24 inches, or when the distance from the center of the top of the steering
post to the rear limit of the body or load thereof exceeds 14 feet, whether a
single vehicle or a combination of vehicles.



      (5)   The signal lights required by this section shall not be
flashed on one side only on a disabled vehicle, flashed as a courtesy or "do
pass" signal to operators of other vehicles approaching from the rear, nor be
flashed on one side only of a parked vehicle except as may be necessary for
compliance with this section.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.39)



§ 72.17  HAND AND ARM SIGNALS.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, all
signals required by the provisions of this traffic code, when given by hand
and arm, shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following
manner, and the signals shall indicate as follows:



      (1)   Left turn, hand and arm extended horizontally;



      (2)   Right turn, hand and arm extended upward;



      (3)   Stop or decrease speed, hand and arm extended downward.



   (B)   As an alternative to division (A)(2) of this section, a person
operating a bicycle may give a right turn signal by extending the right hand
and arm horizontally and to the right side of the bicycle.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.40)



§ 72.171  OPENING AND CLOSING VEHICLE DOORS.



   (A)   No person shall open the door of a vehicle on the side
available to moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so,
and can be done without interfering with the movement of other traffic,
including bicyclists, nor shall any person leave a door open on the side of a
vehicle available to moving traffic including bicyclists for a period of time
longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If within one year
of the offense the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, then whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If
within one year of the offense the offender previously has been convicted of
two or more predicate motor vehicle offenses, then whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(Ord. 13-2010, passed 12-1-10)



RIGHT-OF-WAY



§ 72.20  RIGHT-OF-WAY AT INTERSECTIONS.



   (A)   When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection from
different streets or highways at approximately the same time, the driver of
the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the
right.



   (B)   The right-of-way rule declared in division (A) of this section
is modified at through highways and otherwise as stated in this traffic code
or R.C. Chapter 4511.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.41)



§ 72.21  RIGHT-OF-WAY WHEN TURNING LEFT.



   (A)   The operator of a motor vehicle intending to turn to the left
within an intersection or into an alley, private road or driveway shall yield
the right-of-way to any motor vehicle or bicycle approaching from the
opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to
constitute an immediate hazard.



   (B)   When a motor vehicle and a bicycle are traveling in the same
direction on any roadway, the operator of the motor vehicle overtaking such
bicycle, traveling on the right side of the roadway, shall not turn to the
right in front of the bicycle at any intersection or at any alley or driveway
until such motor vehicle has overtaken and is safely clear of the bicycle.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If within one year
of the offense the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, then whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If
within one year of the offense the offender previously has been convicted of
two or more predicate motor vehicle offenses, then whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(Ord. 13-2010, passed 12-1-10)



Statutory reference:



   For similar state law regarding right-of-way when turning left, see
R.C. § 4511.42



§ 72.22  RIGHT-OF-WAY AT THROUGH HIGHWAYS; STOP SIGNS; YIELD SIGNS.



   (A)   Except when directed to proceed by a law enforcement officer,
every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop at a clearly
marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side
of the intersection, or, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting
roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway before entering it.  After having stopped, the driver
shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or
approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an immediate
hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the intersection
or junction of roadways.



   (B)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall slow
down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions, and if required for
safety to stop, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then
at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering it.  After
slowing, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the
intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the
intersection or junction of roadways.  Whenever a driver is involved in a
collision with a vehicle in the intersection or junction of roadways, after
driving past a yield sign without stopping, the collision shall be prima
facie evidence of the driver's failure to yield the right-of-way.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.43)



§ 72.23  STOP AT SIDEWALK AREA; STOP SIGNS ON PRIVATE ROADS AND DRIVEWAYS.



   (A)   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, building,
private road, or driveway within a business or residence district shall stop
the vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk
area extending across the alley, building entrance, road, or driveway, or in
the event there is no sidewalk area, shall stop at the point nearest the
street to be entered where the driver has a view of approaching traffic
thereon.



(R.C. § 4511.431(A))



   (B)   The owner of a private road or driveway located in a private
residential area containing 20 or more dwelling units may erect stop signs at
places where the road or driveway intersects with another private road or
driveway in the residential area, in compliance with all of the following
requirements:



      (1)   The stop sign is sufficiently legible to be seen by an
ordinarily observant person and meets the specifications of and is placed in
accordance with the manual adopted by the Department of Transportation
pursuant to R.C. § 4511.09;



      (2)   The owner has posted a sign at the entrance of the
private road or driveway that is in plain view and clearly informs persons
entering the road or driveway that they are entering private property, stop
signs have been posted and must be obeyed, and the signs are enforceable by
law enforcement officers under state law. The sign required by this division,
where appropriate, may be incorporated with the sign required by R.C. §
4511.211(A)(2), or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



   (C)   The provisions of R.C. § 4511.43(A) and R.C. § 4511.46, or
any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, shall be deemed to apply to
the driver of a vehicle on a private road or driveway where a stop sign is
placed in accordance with division (B) of this section and to a pedestrian
crossing such a road or driveway at an intersection where a stop sign is in
place.



   (D)   When a stop sign is placed in accordance with division (B) of
this section, any law enforcement officer may apprehend a person found
violating the stop sign and may stop and charge the person with violating the
stop sign.



   (E)   As used in this section, and for the purpose of applying R.C.
§ 4511.43(A) and R.C. § 4511.46, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, to conduct under this section:



      INTERSECTION means:



         (a)   The area embraced within the  prolongation or
connection of the lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary
lines of the roadways of two private roads or driveways which join one
another at, or approximately at, right angles, or the area within which
vehicles traveling upon different private roads or driveways joining at any
other angle may come in conflict.



         (b)   Where a private road or driveway includes two
roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of two roadways of such
private roads or driveways shall be regarded as a separate intersection.



      ROADWAY means that portion of a private road or driveway
improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, except the berm
or shoulder.  If a private road or driveway includes two or more separate
roadways, the term ROADWAY means any such roadway separately but not all such
roadways collectively.



      OWNER and PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL AREA CONTAINING 20 OR MORE DWELLING
UNITS have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4511.211.



(R.C.§ 4511.432(A) - (C), (E)) 



   (F)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. §§ 4511.431(B), 4511.432(D))



§ 72.24  RIGHT-OF-WAY ON PUBLIC HIGHWAY.



   (A)   The operator of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway
from any place other than another roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all
traffic approaching on the roadway to be entered or crossed.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.44)



§ 72.25  PEDESTRIAN ON SIDEWALK HAS RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   (A)   The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to any
pedestrian on a sidewalk.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.441)



§ 72.26  RIGHT-OF-WAY OF PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLES.



   (A)   Upon the approach of a public safety vehicle or coroner's
vehicle, equipped with at least one flashing, rotating, or oscillating light
visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to
the front of the vehicle, and the driver is giving an audible signal by
siren, exhaust whistle, or bell, no driver of any other vehicle shall fail to
yield the right-of-way, immediately drive if practical to a position parallel
to, and as close as possible to, the right edge or curb of the highway clear
of any intersection, and stop and remain in that position until the public
safety vehicle or coroner's vehicle has passed, except when otherwise
directed by a police officer.



   (B)   This section does not relieve the driver of a public safety
vehicle or coroner's vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the
safety of all persons and property upon the highway.



   (C)   This section applies to a coroner’s vehicle only when the
vehicle is operated in accordance with R.C. § 4513.171, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance. As used in this section, CORONER’S VEHICLE
means a vehicle used by a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator
that is equipped with a flashing, oscillating or rotating red or blue light
and a siren, exhaust whistle or bell capable of giving an audible signal.



   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree on a first offense. On a second offense within one year after
the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree,
and, on each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the
person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.



(R.C. § 4511.45)



§ 72.27  FUNERAL PROCESSION HAS RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   (A)   As used in this section, FUNERAL PROCESSION means two or more
vehicles accompanying the cremated remains or the body of a deceased person
in the daytime when each of the vehicles has its headlights lighted and is
displaying a purple and white or an orange and white pennant attached to each
vehicle in such a manner as to be clearly visible to traffic approaching from
any direction.



   (B)   Excepting public safety vehicles proceeding in accordance with
R.C. § 4511.45 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or when
directed otherwise by a police officer, pedestrians and the operators of all
vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to each vehicle that is a part of a
funeral procession. Whenever the lead vehicle in a funeral procession
lawfully enters an intersection, the remainder of the vehicles in the
procession may continue to follow the lead vehicle through the intersection,
notwithstanding any traffic-control devices or right-of-way provisions of the
Ohio Revised Code, provided that the operator of each vehicle exercises due
care to avoid colliding with any other vehicle or pedestrian.



   (C)   No person shall operate any vehicle as a part of a funeral
procession without having the headlights of the vehicle lighted and without
displaying a purple and white or an orange and white pennant in such a manner
as to be clearly visible to traffic approaching from any direction.



   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.451)



§ 72.28  PEDESTRIANS YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY TO PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE.



   (A)   Upon the immediate approach of a public safety vehicle, as
stated in R.C. § 4511.45 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
every pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to the public safety vehicle.



   (B)   This section shall not relieve the driver of a public safety
vehicle from the duty to exercise due care to avoid colliding with any
pedestrian.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.452)



§ 72.29  PEDESTRIAN ON CROSSWALK HAS RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   (A)   When traffic-control signals are not in place, not in
operation, or are not clearly assigning the right-of-way, the driver of a
vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to
so yield, or if required by R.C. § 4511.132 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk
when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is
traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite
half of the roadway as to be in danger.



   (B)   No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of
safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close as to
constitute an immediate hazard.



   (C)   Division (A) of this section does not apply under the
conditions stated in R.C. § 4511.48(B), or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.



   (D)   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at
any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass the stopped vehicle.



   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.46)



§ 72.30  RIGHT-OF-WAY YIELDED TO BLIND PERSON.



   (A)   (1)   As used in this section BLIND PERSON or BLIND
PEDESTRIAN means a person having not more than 20/200 visual acuity in the
better eye with correcting lenses, or visual acuity greater than 20/200, but
with a limitation in the fields of vision such that the widest diameter of
the visual field subtends an angle no greater than 20°.



      (2)   The driver of every vehicle shall yield the right-of-way
to every blind pedestrian guided by a guide dog, or carrying a cane which is
predominantly white or metallic in color, with or without a red tip.



   (B)   No person, other than a blind person, while on any public
highway, street, alley, or other public thoroughfare, shall carry a white or
metallic cane, with or without a red tip.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.47)



§ 72.31  RIGHT-OF-WAY YIELDED BY PEDESTRIAN.



   (A)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than
within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.



   (B)   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a
pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall
yield the right-of-way to all traffic upon the roadway.



   (C)   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control
signals are in operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in
a marked crosswalk.



   (D)   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally
unless authorized by official traffic-control devices; and when authorized to
cross diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the
official traffic-control devices pertaining to such crossing movements.



   (E)   This section does not relieve the operator of a vehicle from
exercising due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway.



   (F)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.48)



PEDESTRIANS



§ 72.35  PEDESTRIAN MOVEMENT IN CROSSWALKS.



   (A)   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right
half of crosswalks.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.49)



§ 72.36  PEDESTRIAN WALKING ALONG HIGHWAY.



   (A)   Where a sidewalk is provided and its use is practicable, it
shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent
roadway.



   (B)   Where a sidewalk is not available, any pedestrian walking
along and upon a highway shall walk only on a shoulder, as far as practicable
from the edge of the roadway.



   (C)   Where neither a sidewalk nor a shoulder is available, any
pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall walk as near as practicable
to an outside edge of the roadway, and, if on a two-way roadway, shall walk
only on the left side of the roadway.



   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. §§ 4511.13 and 4511.46,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, any pedestrian upon a
roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.



   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.50)



§ 72.37  PROHIBITION AGAINST SOLICITING RIDES; RIDING ON OUTSIDE OF VEHICLE.



   (A)   No person while on a roadway outside a safety zone shall
solicit a ride from the driver of any vehicle.



   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in subsection (2) of this
division, no person shall stand on a highway for the purpose of soliciting
employment, business, or contributions from the occupant of any vehicle.



      (2)   The Legislative Authority, by ordinance, may authorize
the issuance of a permit to a charitable organization to allow a person
acting on behalf of the organization to solicit charitable contributions from
the occupant of a vehicle by standing on a highway, other than a freeway as
provided in R.C. § 4511.051(A)(1), that is under the jurisdiction of the
municipality.  The permit shall be valid for only one period of time, which
shall be specified in the permit, in any calendar year.  The Legislative
Authority also may specify the locations where contributions may be solicited
and may impose any other restrictions on or requirements regarding the manner
in which the solicitations are to be conducted that the Legislative Authority
considers advisable.



      (3)   As used in subsection (2) of this division, CHARITABLE
ORGANIZATION means an organization that has received from the Internal
Revenue Service a currently valid ruling or determination letter recognizing
the tax-exempt status of the organizations pursuant to Internal Revenue Code
§ 501(c)(3).



   (C)   No person shall hang onto or ride on the outside of any motor
vehicle while it is moving upon a roadway, except mechanics or test engineers
making repairs or adjustments, or workers performing specialized highway or
street maintenance or construction under authority of a public agency.



   (D)   No operator shall knowingly permit any person to hang onto or
ride on the outside of any motor vehicle while it is moving upon a roadway,
except mechanics or test engineers making repairs or adjustments, or workers
performing specialized highway or street maintenance or construction under
authority of a public agency.



   (E)   No driver of a truck, trailer, or semitrailer shall knowingly
permit any person who has not attained the age of 16 years to ride in the
unenclosed or unroofed cargo storage area of the driver's vehicle if the
vehicle is traveling faster than 25 miles per hour, unless either of the
following applies:



      (1)   The cargo storage area of the vehicle is equipped with a
properly secured seat to which is attached a seat safety belt that is in
compliance with federal standards for an occupant restraining device as
defined in R.C. § 4513.263(A)(2), the seat and seat safety belt were
installed at the time the vehicle was originally assembled, and the person
riding in the cargo storage area is in the seat and is wearing the seat
safety belt; or



      (2)   An emergency exists that threatens the life of the
driver or the person being transported in the cargo storage area of the
truck, trailer, or semitrailer.



   (F)   No driver of a truck, trailer, or semitrailer shall permit any
person, except for those workers performing specialized highway or street
maintenance or construction under authority of a public agency, to ride in
the cargo storage area or on a tailgate of the driver's vehicle while the
tailgate is unlatched.



   (G)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division,
whoever violates any provision of divisions (A) to (D) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates any provision of divisions
(A) to (D) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been
convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever
violates any provision of divisions (A) to (D) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (E) or (F) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4511.51)



§ 72.38  PEDESTRIAN ON BRIDGE OR RAILROAD CROSSING.



   (A)   No pedestrian shall enter or remain upon any bridge or
approach thereto beyond the bridge signal, gate, or barrier after a bridge
operation signal indication has been given.



   (B)   No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over, or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing or bridge while the
gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.511)



§ 72.39  PERSONS OPERATING MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIRS.



   Every person operating a motorized wheelchair shall have all of the
rights and duties applicable to a pedestrian that are contained in this
chapter, except those provisions which by their nature can have no
application.



(R.C. § 4511.491)



§ 72.40  INTOXICATED OR DRUGGED PEDESTRIAN HAZARD ON HIGHWAY.



   (A)   A pedestrian who is under the influence of alcohol, any drug
of abuse, or any combination of them to a degree that renders the pedestrian
a hazard shall not walk or be upon a highway.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.481)



§ 72.41  OPERATION OF ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICES.



   (A)   (1)   Electric personal assistive mobility devices may be
operated on the public streets, highways, sidewalks, and paths and portions
of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles in accordance with
this section.



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, those
sections of this Traffic Code that by their nature are applicable to an
electric personal assistive mobility device apply to the device and the
person operating it whenever it is operated upon any public street, highway,
sidewalk, or path or upon any portion of a roadway set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles.



      (3)   The municipality may regulate or prohibit the operation
of electric personal assistive mobility devices on public streets, highways,
sidewalks, and paths, or portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use
of bicycles, under its jurisdiction.



   (B)   No operator of an electric personal assistive mobility device
shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Fail to yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians and
human-powered vehicles at all times;



      (2)   Fail to give an audible signal before overtaking and
passing a pedestrian;



      (3)   Operate the device at night unless the device or its
operator is equipped with or wearing both of the following:



         (a)   A lamp pointing to the front that emits a white
light visible from a distance of not less than 500 feet;



         (b)   A red reflector facing the rear that is visible
from all distances from 100 feet to 600 feet when directly in front of lawful
lower beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle;



      (4)   Operate the device on any portion of a street or highway
that has an established speed limit of 55 miles per hour or more;



      (5)   Operate the device upon any path set aside for the
exclusive use of pedestrians or other specialized use when an appropriate
sign giving notice of the specialized use is posted on the path;



      (6)   If under 18 years of age, operate the device unless
wearing a protective helmet on the person's head with the chin strap properly
fastened;



      (7)   If under 16 years of age, operate the device unless,
during the operation, the person is under the direct visual and audible
supervision of another person who is 18 years of age or older and is
responsible for the immediate care of the person under 16 years of age.



   (C)   No person who is under 14 years of age shall operate an
electric personal assistive mobility device.



   (D)   No person shall distribute or sell an electric personal
assistive mobility device unless the device is accompanied by a written
statement that is substantially equivalent to the following: "WARNING: TO
REDUCE THE RISK OF SERIOUS INJURY, USE ONLY WHILE WEARING FULL PROTECTIVE
EQUIPMENT – HELMET, WRIST GUARDS, ELBOW PADS, AND KNEE PADS."



   (E)   Nothing in this section affects or shall be construed to
affect any rule of the Director of Natural Resources or a board of park
district commissioners governing the operation of vehicles on lands under the
control of the Director or board, as applicable.



   (F)   Penalty.



      (1)   Whoever violates division (B) or (C) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be punished as follows:



         (a)   The offender shall be fined $10;



         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (B) or (C) of this section, or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, the court, in
addition to imposing the fine required under division (F)(1)(a) of this
section, shall do one of the following:



            1.   Order the impoundment for not less than one
day but no more than 30 days of the electric personal assistive mobility
device that was involved in the current violation of that division. The court
shall order the device to be impounded at a safe indoor location designated
by the court and may assess storage fees of not more than $5 per day;
provided the total storage, processing, and release fees assessed against the
offender or the device in connection with the device's impoundment or
subsequent release shall not exceed $50.



            2.    If the court does not issue an impoundment
order pursuant to division (F)(1)(b)1. of this section, issue an order
prohibiting the offender from operating any electric personal assistive
mobility device on the public streets, highways, sidewalks, and paths and
portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles for not less
than one day but not more than 30 days.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty
of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4511.512)



   (G)   As used in this Code, ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY
DEVICE means a self-balancing two non-tandem wheeled device that is designed
to transport only one person, has an electric propulsion system of an average
of 750 watts, and when ridden on a paved level surface by an operator who
weighs 170 pounds has a maximum speed of less than 20 miles per hour.



(R.C. § 4501.01(TT))



GRADE CROSSINGS



§ 72.45  STOP SIGNS AT GRADE CROSSINGS.



   (A)   As used in this section, ACTIVE GRADE CROSSING WARNING DEVICE
has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5733.43.



   (B)   The Department of Transportation and local authorities, with
the approval of the Department, may designate dangerous highway crossings
over railroad tracks and erect stop signs thereat.



   (C)   (1)   The Department and local authorities shall erect stop
signs at a railroad highway grade crossing in either of the following
circumstances:



         (a)   New warning devices that are not active grade
crossing warning devices are being installed at the grade crossing, and
railroad crossbucks were the only warning devices at the grade crossing prior
to the installation of the new warning devices.



         (b)   The grade crossing is constructed after July 1,
2013 and only warning devices that are not active grade crossing warning
devices are installed at the grade crossing.



      (2)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not apply to a
railroad highway grade crossing that the Director of Transportation has
exempted from that division because of traffic flow or other considerations
or factors.



   (D)   When stop signs are erected pursuant to division (B) or (C) of
this section, the operator of any vehicle shall stop within 50, but not less
than 15, feet from the nearest rail of the railroad tracks and shall exercise
due care before proceeding across such grade crossing.



   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates division (D) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If,
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If,
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.61)



§ 72.46  DRIVING VEHICLE ACROSS RAILROAD GRADE CROSSING.



   (A)   (1)   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a
railroad grade crossing, the person shall stop within 50 feet but not less
than 15 feet from the nearest rail of the railroad if any of the following
circumstances exist at the crossing:



         (a)   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal
device gives warning of the immediate approach of a train.



         (b)   A crossing gate is lowered.



         (c)   A flagperson gives or continues to give a signal
of the approach or passage of a train.



         (d)   There is insufficient space on the other side of
the railroad grade crossing to accommodate the vehicle the person is
operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles, pedestrians or
railroad trains, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to
proceed.



         (e)   An approaching train is emitting an audible signal
or is plainly visible, and is in hazardous proximity to the crossing.



         (f)   There is insufficient undercarriage clearance to
safely negotiate the crossing.



      (2)   A person who is driving a vehicle and who approaches a
railroad grade crossing shall not proceed as long as any of the circumstances
described in divisions (A)(1)(a) through (A)(1)(f) of this section exist at
the crossing.



   (B)   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around, or under
any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while the gate or barrier
is closed, or is being opened or closed unless the person is signaled by a
law enforcement officer or flagperson that it is permissible to do so.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 4511.62)



§ 72.47  VEHICLES REQUIRED TO STOP AT GRADE CROSSINGS.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, the
operator of any bus, any school vehicle, or any vehicle transporting material
required to be placarded under 49 C.F.R. Parts 100 through 185, before
crossing at grade any track of a railroad, shall stop the vehicle, and while
so stopped, shall listen through an open door or open window, and look in
both directions along the track for any approaching train and for signals
indicating the approach of a train, and shall proceed only upon exercising
due care after stopping, looking, and listening as required by this section.
Upon proceeding, the operator of such a vehicle shall cross only in a gear
that will ensure there will be no necessity for changing gears while
traversing the crossing, and shall not shift gears while crossing the tracks.



   (B)   This section does not apply at grade crossings when any local
authority has filed an application with the Public Utilities Commission
requesting the approval of an exempt crossing, and the Public Utilities
Commission has authorized and approved an exempt crossing as provided R.C. §
4511.63(B).



   (C)   As used in this section:



   BUS. Means any vehicle originally designed by its manufacturer to
transport 16 or more passengers, including the driver, or carries 16 or more
passengers, including the driver.



   EXEMPT CROSSING. Means a highway rail grade crossing authorized and
approved by the Public Utilities Commission under R.C. § 4511.63(B) at which
vehicles may cross without making the stop otherwise required by this section.



   SCHOOL VEHICLE. Means any vehicle used for the transportation of pupils
to and from a school or school-related function if the vehicle is owned or
operated by, or operated under contract with, a public or nonpublic school.



   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations
of this section or R.C. § 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.762, 4511.764,
4511.77, or 4511.79, or a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to any of those sections, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 4511.63)



§ 72.48  SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES OR EQUIPMENT CROSSING RAILROAD TRACKS.



   (A)   No person shall operate or move any crawler-type tractor,
steam shovel, derrick, roller, or any equipment or structure having a normal
operating speed of six or less miles per hour or a vertical body or load
clearance of less than nine inches above the level surface of a roadway, upon
or across any tracks at a railroad grade crossing without first complying
with divisions (A)(1) and (2) of this section.



      (1)   Before making any such crossing, the person operating or
moving any such vehicle or equipment shall first stop the same, and while
stopped, the person shall listen and look in both directions along the track
for any approaching train and for signals indicating the approach of a train,
and shall proceed only upon exercising due care.



      (2)   No such crossing shall be made when warning is given by
automatic signal, crossing gates, or a flagperson, or otherwise of the
immediate approach of a railroad train or car.



   (B)   If the normal sustained speed of the vehicle, equipment, or
structure is not more than three miles per hour, the person owning,
operating, or moving the same shall also give notice of the intended crossing
to a station agent or superintendent of the railroad, and a reasonable time
shall be given to the railroad to provide proper protection for the
crossing.  Where the vehicles or equipment are being used in constructing or
repairing a section of highway lying on both sides of a railroad grade
crossing, and in this construction or repair it is necessary to repeatedly
move the vehicles or equipment over the crossing, one daily notice specifying
when the work will start and stating the hours during which it will be
prosecuted is sufficient.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.64)



PROHIBITIONS



§ 72.55  OBSTRUCTION AND INTERFERENCE AFFECTING VIEW AND CONTROL OF DRIVER.



   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when
there are in the front seat such number of persons, as to obstruct the view
of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle, or to interfere with the
driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.



   (B)   No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in a position as to
interfere with the driver's view ahead or to the sides, or to interfere with
the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.



   (C)   No person shall open the door of a vehicle on the side
available to moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so,
and can be done without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor
shall any person leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to
moving traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload
passengers.



   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.70)



§ 72.56  OCCUPYING TRAVEL TRAILER WHILE IN MOTION.



   (A)   No person shall occupy any travel trailer or manufactured or
mobile home while it is being used as a conveyance upon a street or highway.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.701)



§ 72.57  DRIVING UPON CLOSED HIGHWAY PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall drive upon, along, or across a street or
highway, or any part of a street or highway that has been closed in the
process of its construction, reconstruction, or repair, and posted with
appropriate signs by the authority having jurisdiction to close the highway.



(R.C. § 4511.71(A))



   (B)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle on or onto a public
street or highway that is temporarily covered by a rise in water level,
including groundwater or an overflow of water, and that is clearly marked by
a sign that specifies that the road is closed due to the rise in water level
and that any person who uses the closed portion of the road may be fined up
to $2,000.



      (2)   A person who is issued a citation for a violation of
division (B)(1) of this section is not permitted to enter a written plea of
guilty and waive the person’s right to contest the citation in court, but
instead must appear in person in the proper court to answer the charge.



(R.C. § 4511.714(A), (B))



   (C)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division,
whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the
offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle
or traffic offenses, whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.71(B))



      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section
is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



         (b)   In addition to the financial sanctions authorized
or required under R.C. § 2929.28 and to any costs otherwise authorized or
required under any provision of law, the court imposing the sentence upon an
offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of division (B)
of this section shall order the offender to reimburse one or more rescuers
for the cost any such rescuer incurred in rescuing the person, excluding any
cost of transporting the rescued person to a hospital or other facility for
treatment of injuries, up to a cumulative maximum of $2,000. If more than one
rescuer was involved in the emergency response, the court shall allocate the
reimbursement proportionately, according to the cost each rescuer incurred. A
financial sanction imposed under this section is a judgment in favor of the
rescuer and, subject to a determination of indigency under R.C. §
2929.28(B), a rescuer may collect the financial sanction in the same manner
as provided in R.C. § 2929.28.



(R.C. § 4511.714(C))



   (D)   As used in this section:



      EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE ORGANIZATION. Has the same meanings as
in R.C. § 9.60.



      FIREFIGHTING AGENCY. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 9.60.



      PRIVATE FIRE COMPANY. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 9.60.



      RESCUER. Means a state agency, political subdivision,
firefighting agency, private fire company, or emergency medical service
organization.



(R.C. § 4511.714(D))



§ 72.58  DRIVING UPON SIDEWALK AREA OR PATHS EXCLUSIVELY FOR BICYCLES.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall drive any vehicle, other than a
bicycle, upon a sidewalk or sidewalk area, except upon a permanent or duly
authorized temporary driveway.



      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as
prohibiting local authorities from regulating the operation of bicycles,
except that no local authority may require that bicycles be operated on
sidewalks.



(R.C. § 4511.711(A))



   (B)   (1)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, snowmobile,
or all-purpose vehicle upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles, when an appropriate sign giving notice of such use is posted on the
path.



      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect any
rule of the Director of Natural Resources governing the operation of motor
vehicles, snowmobiles, all-purpose vehicles, and bicycles on lands under the
Director's jurisdiction.



(R.C. § 4511.713(A))



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. §§ 4511.711(B), 4511.713(B))



§ 72.59  OBSTRUCTING PASSAGE OF OTHER VEHICLES.



   (A)   No driver shall enter an intersection or marked crosswalk, or
drive onto any railroad grade crossing, unless there is sufficient space on
the other side of the intersection, crosswalk, or grade crossing to
accommodate the vehicle the driver is operating without obstructing the
passage of other vehicles, pedestrians, or railroad trains, notwithstanding
any traffic-control signal indication to proceed.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.712)



§ 72.60  FOLLOWING AN EMERGENCY OR PUBLIC VEHICLE PROHIBITED; APPROACHING
STATIONARY PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE WITH CAUTION.



   (A)   Following an emergency or public vehicle prohibited. The
driver of any vehicle, other than an emergency vehicle or public safety
vehicle on official business, shall not follow any emergency vehicle or
public safety vehicle traveling in response to an alarm closer than 500 feet,
or drive into or park the vehicle within the block where the fire apparatus
has stopped in answer to a fire alarm, unless directed to do so by a police
officer or a firefighter.



(R.C. § 4511.72(A))



   (B)   Approaching stationary public safety vehicle with caution.



      (1)   The driver of a motor vehicle, upon approaching a
stationary public safety vehicle, emergency vehicle, road service vehicle,
vehicle used by the Public Utilities Commission to conduct motor vehicle
inspections in accordance with R.C. §§ 4923.04 and 4923.06, or a highway
maintenance vehicle that is displaying the appropriate visual signals by
means of flashing, oscillating, or rotating lights, as prescribed in R.C. §
4513.17, shall do either of the following:



         (a)   If the driver of the motor vehicle is traveling on
a highway that consists of at least two lanes that carry traffic in the same
direction of travel as that of the driver’s motor vehicle, the driver shall
proceed with due caution and, if possible and with due regard to the road,
weather, and traffic conditions, shall change lanes into a lane that is not
adjacent to that of the stationary public safety vehicle, emergency vehicle,
road service vehicle, vehicle used by the Public Utilities Commission to
conduct motor vehicle inspections in accordance with R.C. §§ 4923.04 and
4923.06, or a highway maintenance vehicle.



         (b)   If the driver is not traveling on a highway of a
type described in division (B)(1)(a) of this section, or if the driver is
traveling on a highway of that type but it is not possible to change lanes or
if to do so would be unsafe, the driver shall proceed with due caution,
reduce the speed of the motor vehicle, and maintain a safe speed for the
road, weather, and traffic conditions.



      (2)   This division (B) does not relieve the driver of a
public safety vehicle, emergency vehicle, road service vehicle, vehicle used
by the Public Utilities Commission to conduct motor vehicle inspections in
accordance with R.C. §§ 4923.04 and 4923.06, or a highway maintenance
vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons
and property upon the highway.



      (3)   No person shall fail to drive a motor vehicle in
compliance with divisions (B)(1)(a) or (B)(1)(b) of this section when so
required by division (B) of this section.



(R.C. § 4511.213(A) - (C))



   (C)   Penalty.



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



      (2)   Notwithstanding § 130.99 or R.C. § 2929.28, upon a
finding that a person operated a motor vehicle in violation of division
(B)(3) of this section, the court, in addition to all other penalties
provided by law, shall impose a fine of two times the usual amount imposed
for the violation.



(R.C. §§ 4511.213(D), 4511.72(B))



§ 72.61  DRIVING OVER UNPROTECTED FIRE HOSE.



   (A)   No vehicle shall, without the consent of the fire department
official in command, be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department
that is laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire or
alarm of fire.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.73)



§ 72.62  PLACING INJURIOUS MATERIAL ON HIGHWAY OR DEPOSITING LITTER FROM
MOTOR VEHICLE.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall place or knowingly drop upon any part
of a highway, lane, road, street, or alley any tacks, bottles, wire, glass,
nails, or other articles which may damage or injure any person, vehicle, or
animal traveling along or upon the highway, except such substances that may
be placed upon the roadway by proper authority for the repair or construction
thereof.



      (2)   Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown
upon any highway any destructive or injurious material shall immediately
remove the same.



      (3)   Any person authorized to remove a wrecked or damaged
vehicle from a highway shall remove any glass or other injurious substance
dropped upon the highway from such vehicle.



      (4)   No person shall place any obstruction in or upon a
highway without proper authority.



   (B)   No person, with intent to cause physical harm to a person or a
vehicle, shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a highway, lane,
road, street, or alley any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails, or other
articles which may damage or injure any person, vehicle, or animal traveling
along or upon such highway, except such substances that may be placed upon
the roadway by proper authority for the repair or construction thereof.



(R.C. § 4511.74(A), (B))



   (C)   No operator or occupant of a motor vehicle shall, regardless
of intent, throw, drop, discard, or deposit litter from any motor vehicle in
operation upon any street, road, or highway, except into a litter receptacle
in a manner that prevents its being carried away or deposited by the elements.



   (D)   No operator of a motor vehicle in operation upon any street,
road, or highway shall allow litter to be thrown, dropped, discarded, or
deposited from the motor vehicle, except into a litter receptacle in a manner
that prevents its being carried away or deposited by the elements.



   (E)   As used in this section, LITTER means garbage, trash, waste,
rubbish, ashes, cans, bottles, wire, paper, cartons, boxes, automobile parts,
furniture, glass, or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature.



(R.C. § 4511.82(A), (B), (D))



   (F)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division,
whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the
offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle
or traffic offenses, whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 4511.74(C))



      (3)   Whoever violates division (C) or (D) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4511.82(C))



Cross-reference:



   Excavating, leaving mud on, or building fence on roadway, see § 70.12



§ 72.63  TRANSPORTING CHILD NOT IN CHILD RESTRAINT SYSTEM PROHIBITED.



   (A)   When any child who is in either or both of the following
categories is being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or
public safety vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4511.01, that is required by the
United States Department of Transportation to be equipped with seat belts at
the time of manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle shall
have the child properly secured in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions in a child restraint system that meets federal motor vehicle
safety standards:



      (1)   A child who is less than four years of age;



      (2)   A child who weighs less than 40 pounds.



   (B)   When any child who is in either or both of the following
categories is being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab,
that is owned, leased, or otherwise under the control of a nursery school or
day-care center, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child
properly secured in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions in a
child restraint system that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards:



      (1)   A child who is less than four years of age;



      (2)   A child who weighs less than 40 pounds.



   (C)   When any child who is less than eight years of age and less
than four feet nine inches in height, who is not required by division (A) or
(B) of this section to be secured in a child restraint system, is being
transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety vehicle
as defined in R.C. § 4511.01 or a vehicle that is regulated under R.C. §
5104.015, that is required by the United States Department of Transportation
to be equipped with seat belts at the time of manufacture or assembly, the
operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child properly secured in
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions on a booster seat that
meets federal motor vehicle safety standards.



   (D)   When any child who is at least eight years of age but not
older than 15 years of age, and who is not otherwise required by division
(A), (B), or (C) of this section to be secured in a child restraint system or
booster seat, is being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab
or public safety vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4511.01, that is required by
the United States Department of Transportation to be equipped with seat belts
at the time of manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle
shall have the child properly restrained either in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions in a child restraint system that meets federal
motor vehicle safety standards or in an occupant restraining device as
defined in R.C. § 4513.263.



   (E)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause an operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of division (C) or (D) of this section has
been or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket,
citation, or summons for a violation of division (C) or (D) of this section
or causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a
violation of division (C) or (D) of this section, and absent another
violation of law, a law enforcement officer's view of the interior or visual
inspection of a motor vehicle being operated on any street or highway may not
be used for the purpose of determining whether a violation of division (C) or
(D) of this section has been or is being committed.



   (F)   The Director of Public Safety shall adopt such rules as are
necessary to carry out this section.



   (G)   The failure of an operator of a motor vehicle to secure a
child in a child restraint system, a booster seat, or an occupant restraining
device as required in this section is not negligence imputable to the child,
is not admissible as evidence in any civil action involving the rights of the
child against any other person allegedly liable for injuries to the child, is
not to be used as a basis for a criminal prosecution of the operator of the
motor vehicle other than a prosecution for a violation of this section, and
is not admissible as evidence in any criminal action involving the operator
of the motor vehicle other than a prosecution for a violation of this section.



   (H)   This section does not apply when an emergency exists that
threatens the life of any person operating or occupying a motor vehicle that
is being used to transport a child who otherwise would be required to be
restrained under this section. This section does not apply to a person
operating a motor vehicle who has an affidavit signed by a physician licensed
to practice in this state under R.C. Chapter 4731 or a chiropractor licensed
to practice in this state under R.C. Chapter 4734 that states that the child
who otherwise would be required to be restrained under this section has a
physical impairment that makes use of a child restraint system, booster seat,
or an occupant restraining device impossible or impractical, provided that
the person operating the vehicle has safely and appropriately restrained the
child in accordance with any recommendations of the physician or chiropractor
as noted on the affidavit.



   (I)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any
person to carry with the person the birth certificate of a child to prove the
age of the child, but the production of a valid birth certificate for a child
showing that the child was not of an age to which this section applies is a
defense against any ticket, citation, or summons issued for violating this
section.



   (J)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A), (B), (C), or (D) of
this section shall be punished as follows, provided that the failure of an
operator of a motor vehicle to secure more than one child in a child
restraint system, booster seat, or occupant restraining device as required by
this section that occurred at the same time, on the same day, and at the same
location is deemed to be a single violation of this section:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (J)(1)(b)
of this section, the offender is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be
fined not less than $25 nor more than $75.



         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (A), (B), (C), or (D) of this
section or of a state law or municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent any of those divisions, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.



      (2)   All fines imposed pursuant to division (J)(1) of this
section shall be forwarded to the State Treasurer for deposit in the Child
Highway Safety Fund created by R.C. § 4511.81(I).



(R.C. § 4511.81(A) - (H), (K), (L))



§ 72.64  OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICES.



   (A)   Definitions. As used in this section:



      AUTOMOBILE. Means any commercial tractor, passenger car,
commercial car, or truck that is required to be factory-equipped with an
occupant restraining device for the operator or any passenger by regulations
adopted by the United States Secretary of Transportation pursuant to the
"National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966", 80 Stat. 719, 15
U.S.C. § 1392.



      COMMERCIAL CAR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.



      COMMERCIAL TRACTOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.



      OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICE. A seat safety belt, shoulder belt,
harness, or other safety device for restraining a person who is an operator
of or passenger in an automobile and that satisfies the minimum federal
vehicle safety standards established by the United States Department of
Transportation.



      PASSENGER. Any person in an automobile, other than its operator,
who is occupying a seating position for which an occupant restraining device
is provided.



      PASSENGER CAR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.



      TORT ACTION. A civil action for damages for injury, death, or
loss to person or property. The term includes a product liability claim, as
defined in R.C. § 2307.71, and as asbestos claim, as defined in R.C. §
2307.91, but does not include a civil action for damages for breach of
contract or another agreement between persons.



      VEHICLE and MOTOR VEHICLE. As used in the definitions of the
terms set forth above, VEHICLE and MOTOR VEHICLE have the same meanings as in
R.C. § 4511.01.



   (B)   Prohibited acts. No person shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless he
or she is wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted
occupant restraining device, or operate a school bus that has an occupant
restraining device installed for use in its operator's seat unless he or she
is wearing all of the available elements of the device, as properly adjusted.



      (2)   Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless
each passenger in the automobile who is subject to the requirement set forth
in division (B)(3) of this section is wearing all of the available elements
of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device.



      (3)   Occupy, as a passenger, a seating position on the front
seat of an automobile being operated on any street or highway unless he or
she is wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant
restraining device.



      (4)   Operate a taxicab on any street or highway unless all
factory-equipped occupant restraining devices in the taxicab are maintained
in usable form.



   (C)   Exceptions. Division (B)(3) of this section does not apply to
a person who is required by R.C. § 4511.81 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance to be secured in a child restraint device or booster
seat. Division (B)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is an
employee of the United States Postal Service or of a newspaper home delivery
service, during any period in which the person is engaged in the operation of
an automobile to deliver mail or newspapers to addressees. Divisions (B)(1)
and (B)(3) of this section do not apply to a person who has an affidavit
signed by a physician licensed to practice in this state under R.C. Chapter
4731 or a chiropractor licensed to practice in this state under R.C. Chapter
4734 that states that the person has a physical impairment that makes use of
an occupant restraining device impossible or impractical.



   (D)   Officers not permitted to stop cars to determine violation.
Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law enforcement
officer shall cause an operator of an automobile being operated on any street
or highway to stop the automobile for the sole purpose of determining whether
a violation of division (B) of this section has been or is being committed or
for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or summons for the
violation or for causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a
person for the violation. No law enforcement officer shall view the interior
or visually inspect any automobile being operated on any street or highway
for the sole purpose of determining whether the violation has been or is
being committed.



   (E)   Use of fines for educational program. All fines collected for
violations of division (B) of this section shall be forwarded to the State
Treasurer for deposit in the funds as set forth in R.C. § 4513.263(E).



   (F)   Limitations on evidence used for prosecution.



      (1)   Subject to division (F)(2) of this section, the failure
of a person to wear all of the available elements of a properly adjusted
occupant restraining device in violation of division (B)(1) or (B)(3) of this
section or the failure of a person to ensure that each minor who is a
passenger of an automobile being operated by that person is wearing all of
the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device in
violation of division (B)(2) of this section shall not be considered or used
by the trier of fact in a tort action as evidence of negligence or
contributory negligence. But, the trier of fact may determine based on
evidence admitted consistent with the Ohio Rules of Evidence that the failure
contributed to the harm alleged in the tort action and may diminish a
recovery of compensatory damages that represents non-economic loss, as
defined in R.C. § 2307.011, in a tort action that could have been recovered
but for the plaintiff's failure to wear all of the available elements of a
properly adjusted occupant restraining device. Evidence of that failure shall
not be used as a basis for a criminal prosecution of the person other than a
prosecution for a violation of this section; and shall not be admissible as
evidence in a criminal action involving the person other than a prosecution
for a violation of this section.



      (2)   If, at the time of an accident involving a passenger car
equipped with occupant restraining devices, any occupant of the passenger car
who sustained injury or death was not wearing an available occupant
restraining device, was not wearing all of the available elements of such a
device, or was not wearing such a device as properly adjusted, then,
consistent with the Rules of Evidence, the fact that the occupant was not
wearing the available occupant restraining device, was not wearing all of the
available elements of such a device, or was not wearing such a device as
properly adjusted is admissible in evidence in relation to any claim for
relief in a tort action to the extent that the claim for relief satisfies all
of the following:



         (a)   It seeks to recover damages for injury or death to
the occupant;



         (b)   The defendant in question is the manufacturer,
designer, distributor, or seller of the passenger car;



         (c)   The claim for relief against the defendant in
question is that the injury or death sustained by the occupant was enhanced
or aggravated by some design defect in the passenger car or that the
passenger car was not crashworthy.



(R.C. § 4513.263(A)-(F))



   (G)   Penalty.  Except as otherwise provided in this division,
whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of
division (B)(4) of this section, whoever violates division (B)(4) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



Cross-reference:



   Child restraint systems, see § 72.63



   Installation and sale of seat safety belts, see § 74.33



   School bus operators, restraining devices, see § 72.89



§ 72.65  [RESERVED]



§ 72.66  OPERATING MOTOR VEHICLE WHILE WEARING EARPHONES OR EARPLUGS.



   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle while wearing
earphones over, or earplugs in, both ears.  As used in this section,
EARPHONES means any headset, radio, tape player, or other similar device that
provides the listener with radio programs, music, or other recorded
information through a device attached to the head and that covers all or a
portion of both ears.  EARPHONES does not include speakers or other
listening devices that are built into protective headgear.



   (B)   This section does not apply to:



      (1)   Any person wearing a hearing aid;



      (2)   Law enforcement personnel while on duty;



      (3)   Fire department personnel and emergency medical service
personnel while on duty;



      (4)   Any person operating equipment for use in the
maintenance or repair of any highway;



      (5)   Any person engaged in the operation of refuse collection
equipment.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within
one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.84)



§ 72.67  CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINES AND LIVERY SERVICES.



   (A)   The operator of a chauffeured limousine shall accept
passengers only on the basis of prearranged contracts, as defined in R.C. §
4501.01, and shall not cruise in search of patronage unless the limousine is
in compliance with any statute or ordinance governing the operation of
taxicabs or other similar vehicles for hire.



   (B)   The operator of a chauffeured limousine may provide
transportation to passengers who arrange for the transportation through an
intermediary, including a digital dispatching service. Notwithstanding any
law to the contrary, when providing transportation arranged through an
intermediary, the operator of a chauffeured limousine may establish the fare
and method of fare calculation, so long as the method of fare calculation is
provided to the passenger upon request.



   (C)   No person shall advertise or hold himself or herself out as
doing business as a limousine service or  livery service or other similar
designation unless each vehicle used by the person to provide the service is
registered in accordance with R.C. § 4503.24 and is in compliance with R.C.
§ 4509.80.



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.



(R.C. § 4511.85)



Statutory reference:



   Chauffeured limousine, motor vehicle licensing, see R.C. § 4503.24



   Proof of financial responsibility, see R.C. § 4509.80



§ 72.68  OPERATING TRACTION ENGINE UPON IMPROVED HIGHWAYS.



   (A)   No person shall drive over the improved highways of this
municipality a traction engine or tractor with tires or wheels equipped with
ice picks, spuds, spikes, chains or other projections of any kind extending
beyond the cleats, and no person shall tow or in any way pull another vehicle
over the improved highways of this municipality which towed or pulled vehicle
has tires or wheels equipped with ice picks, spuds, spikes, chains or other
projections of any kind.  TRACTION ENGINE or TRACTOR, as used in this
section, applies to all self-propelling engines equipped with metal-tired
wheels operated or propelled by any form of engine, motor or mechanical power.



   (B)   This municipality shall not adopt, enforce, or maintain any
ordinance, rule or regulation contrary to or inconsistent with division (A),
nor shall this municipality require any license tax upon or registration fee
for any traction engine, tractor, or trailer, or any permit or license to
operate.  Operators of traction engines or tractors shall have the same
rights upon the public streets and highways as the drivers of any other
vehicles, unless some other safe and convenient way is provided, and no
public road open to traffic shall be closed to traction engines or tractors.



(R.C. § 5589.08)



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 5589.99(B))



§ 72.69  EXCESSIVE ACCELERATION.



   It shall be unlawful to "race" or accelerate the motor of any motor
vehicle while the vehicle is not in gear or in motion so as to cause
unreasonably loud noise.  It shall be unlawful to "race" or accelerate
excessively the motor of any motor vehicle while said vehicle is moving so as
to cause unreasonably loud noise. Such noise is unreasonably loud if such
noise can be heard by a person of reasonable sensibilities 100 feet or more
from the location of the motor vehicle emitting such noise.



('67 Code, § 73.36) (Am. Ord. 9-1968, passed 7-3-68)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHOOL BUSES



§ 72.80  REGULATIONS CONCERNING SCHOOL BUSES.



   (A)   The driver of a vehicle, upon meeting or overtaking from
either direction any school bus stopped for the purpose of receiving or
discharging any school child, person attending programs offered by community
boards of mental health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or
child attending a program offered by a head start agency, shall stop at least
ten feet from the front or rear of the school bus and shall not proceed until
such school bus resumes motion, or until signaled by the school bus driver to
proceed. It is no defense to a charge under this division that the school bus
involved failed to display or be equipped with an automatically extended stop
warning sign as required by division (B) of this section.



   (B)   Every school bus shall be equipped with amber and red visual
signals meeting the requirements of R.C. § 4511.771 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, and an automatically extended stop warning
sign of a type approved by the state Board of Education, which shall be
actuated by the driver of the bus whenever but only whenever the bus is
stopped or stopping on the roadway for the purpose of receiving or
discharging school children, persons attending programs offered by community
boards of mental health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or
children attending programs offered by head start agencies. A school bus
driver shall not actuate the visual signals or the stop warning sign in
designated school bus loading areas where the bus is entirely off the roadway
or at school buildings when children or persons attending programs offered by
community boards of mental health and county boards of developmental
disabilities are loading or unloading at curbside or at buildings when
children attending programs offered by head start agencies are loading or
unloading at curbside. The visual signals and stop warning sign shall be
synchronized or otherwise operated as required by rule of the Board.



   (C)   Where a highway has been divided into four or more traffic
lanes, a driver of a vehicle need not stop for a school bus approaching from
the opposite direction which has stopped for the purpose of receiving or
discharging any school child, persons attending programs offered by community
boards of mental health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or
children attending programs offered by head start agencies. The driver of any
vehicle overtaking the school bus shall comply with division (A) above.



   (D)   School buses operating on divided highways or on highways with
four or more traffic lanes shall receive and discharge all school children,
persons attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and
county boards of developmental disabilities, and children attending programs
offered by head start agencies on their residence side of the highway.



   (E)   No school bus driver shall start the driver's bus until after
any child, person attending programs offered by community boards of mental
health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or child attending a
program offered by a head start agency who may have alighted therefrom has
reached a place of safety on the child's or person's residence side of the
road.



   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section may be
fined an amount not to exceed $500. A person who is issued a citation for a
violation of division (A) of this section is not permitted to enter a written
plea of guilty and waive the person's right to contest the citation in a
trial but instead must appear in person in the proper court to answer the
charge.



      (2)   In addition to and independent of any other penalty
provided by law, the court or mayor may impose upon an offender who violates
this section a class seven suspension of the offender's driver's license,
commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C.
§ 4510.02(A)(7). When a license is suspended under this section, the court
or mayor shall cause the offender to deliver the license to the court, and
the court or clerk of the court immediately shall forward the license to the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles, together with notice of the court's action.



   (G)   As used in this section:



      HEAD START AGENCY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3301.32.



      SCHOOL BUS. As used in relation to children who attend a program
offered by a head start agency, means a bus that is owned and operated by a
head start agency, is equipped with an automatically extended stop warning
sign of a type approved by the State Board of Education, is painted the color
and displays the markings described in R.C. § 4511.77, and is equipped with
amber and red visual signals meeting the requirements of R.C. § 4511.77,
irrespective of whether or not the bus has 15 or more children aboard at any
time. The term does not include a van owned and operated by a head start
agency, irrespective of its color, lights or markings.



(R.C. § 4511.75)



§ 72.81  VIOLATION OF REGULATIONS; REPORT; INVESTIGATION; CITATION; WARNING.



   (A)   As used in this section, LICENSE PLATE includes, but is not
limited to, any temporary license placard issued under R.C. § 4503.182 or
similar law of another jurisdiction.



   (B)   When the operator of a school bus believes that a motorist has
violated R.C. § 4511.75(A) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the operator shall report the license plate number and general
description of the vehicle and of the operator of the vehicle to the law
enforcement agency exercising jurisdiction over the area where the alleged
violation occurred.  The information contained in the report relating to the
license plate number and to the general description of the vehicle and the
operator of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation may be supplied
by any person with first-hand knowledge of the information.  Information of
which the operator of the school bus has first-hand knowledge also may be
corroborated by any other person.



   (C)   Upon receipt of the report of the alleged violation of R.C. §
4511.75(A) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the law
enforcement agency shall conduct an investigation to attempt to determine the
identity of the operator of the vehicle at the time of the alleged
violation.  If the identity of the operator at the time of the alleged
violation is established, the reporting of the license plate number of the
vehicle shall establish probable cause for the law enforcement agency to
issue a citation for the violation of R.C. § 4511.75(A) or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.  However, if the identity of the operator of
the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation cannot be established, the
law enforcement agency shall issue a warning to the owner of the vehicle at
the time of the alleged violation, except in the case of a leased or rented
vehicle when the warning shall be issued to the lessee at the time of the
alleged violation.



(R.C. § 4511.751)



§ 72.82  RESTRICTIONS ON THE OPERATION OF SCHOOL BUSES.



   (A)   No person shall operate a vehicle used for pupil
transportation within this municipality in violation of the rules of the
Department of Education of the Department of Public Safety.  No person,
being the owner thereof, or having the supervisory responsibility therefor,
shall permit the operation of a vehicle used for pupil transportation within
this municipality in violation of the rules of the Department of Education or
the Department of Public Safety.



   (B)   As used in this section, VEHICLE USED FOR PUPIL TRANSPORTATION
means any vehicle that is identified as such by the Department of Education
by rule and that is subject to O.A.C. Chapter 3301-83.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations
of this section or R.C. § 4511.76, or R.C. §§ 4511.63, 4511.761, 4511.762,
4511.764, 4511.77, or 4511.79 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to any of those sections, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 4511.76(C), (E), (F))



§ 72.83  SCHOOL BUS INSPECTION.



   (A)   No person shall operate, nor shall any person being the owner
thereof, or having supervisory responsibility therefor, permit the operation
of, a school bus within this municipality, unless there is displayed thereon
the decals issued by the state highway patrol bearing the proper date of
inspection for the calendar year for which the inspection decals were issued.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations
of this section or R.C. § 4511.761, or R.C. §§ 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.762,
4511.764, 4511.77, or 4511.79 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to any of those sections, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



   (C)   Whenever a person is found guilty in a court of record of a
violation of this section, the trial judge, in addition to or independent of
all other penalties provided by law, may suspend for any period of time not
exceeding three years, or cancel the license of any person, partnership,
association, or corporation, issued under R.C. § 4511.763.



(R.C. § 4511.761)



§ 72.84  SCHOOL BUS NOT USED FOR SCHOOL PURPOSES.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, no person
who is the owner of a bus that previously was registered as a school bus that
is used or is to be used exclusively for purposes other than the
transportation of children shall operate the bus or permit it to be operated
within this municipality unless the bus has been painted a color different
from that prescribed for school buses by R.C. § 4511.77 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance and painted in such a way that the words
"stop" and "school bus" are obliterated.



   (B)   Any church bus that previously was registered as a school bus
and is registered under R.C. § 4503.07 may retain the paint color prescribed
for school buses by R.C. § 4511.77 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance if the bus complies with all of the following:



      (1)   The words "school bus" required by R.C. § 4511.77 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance are covered or obliterated and
the bus is marked on the front and rear with the words "church bus" painted
in black lettering not less than ten inches in height.



      (2)   The automatically extending stop warning sign required
by R.C. § 4511.75 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance is
removed and the word "stop" required by R.C. § 4511.77 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance is covered or obliterated.



      (3)   The flashing red and amber lights required by R.C. §
4511.771 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance are covered or
removed.



      (4)   The inspection decal required by R.C. § 4511.761 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance is covered or removed.



      (5)   The identification number assigned under R.C. §
4511.764 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance and marked in
black lettering on the front and rear of the bus is covered or obliterated.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations
of this section or R.C. § 4511.762, or R.C. § 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761,
4511.764, 4511.77, or 4511.79 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to any of those sections, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



   (D)   Whenever a person is found guilty in a court of record of a
violation of this section, the trial judge, in addition to or independent of
all other penalties provided by law, may suspend for any period of time not
exceeding three years, or cancel the license of any person, partnership,
association, or corporation, issued under R.C. § 4511.763.



(R.C. § 4511.762)



§ 72.85  LICENSING BY DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY.



   (A)   No person, partnership, association, or corporation shall
transport pupils to or from school on a school bus or enter into a contract
with a board of education of any school district for the transportation of
pupils on a school bus without being licensed by the Department of Public
Safety.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within
one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.763)



§ 72.86  REGISTRATION AND IDENTIFICATION OF SCHOOL BUSES.



   (A)   No person shall operate, nor shall any person being the owner
thereof or having supervisory responsibility therefor, permit the operation
of a school bus within this municipality unless there is displayed thereon an
identifying number in accordance with R.C. § 4511.764.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations
of R.C. § 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.762, 4511.77, or 4511.79 or a
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of those
sections, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.



(R.C. § 4511.764)



§ 72.87  SCHOOL BUS MARKING.



   (A)   No person shall operate, nor shall any person being the owner
thereof or having supervisory responsibility therefor permit the operation
of, a school bus within this municipality unless it is painted national
school bus yellow and is marked on both front and rear with the words "school
bus" in black lettering not less than eight inches in height and on the rear
of the bus with the word "stop" in black lettering not less than ten inches
in height.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations
of this section or R.C. § 4511.77, or R.C. §§ 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761,
4511.762, 4511.764, or 4511.79 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to any of those sections, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



   (C)   Whenever a person is found guilty in a court of record of a
violation of this section, the trial judge, in addition to or independent of
all other penalties provided by law, may suspend, for any period of time not
exceeding three years, or cancel the license of any person, partnership,
association, or corporation issued under R.C. § 4511.763.



(R.C. § 4511.77)



§ 72.88  FLASHING LIGHT SIGNAL LAMPS.



   (A)   Every school bus shall, in addition to any other equipment and
distinctive markings required pursuant to R.C. §§ 4511.76, 4511.761,
4511.764 and 4511.77, and any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances,
be equipped with signal lamps mounted as high as practicable, which shall
display to the front two alternately flashing red lights and two alternately
flashing amber lights located at the same level and to the rear two
alternately flashing red lights and alternately flashing amber lights located
at the same level, and these lights shall be visible at 500 feet in normal
sunlight.  The alternately flashing red lights shall be spaced as widely as
practicable, and the alternately flashing amber lights shall be located next
to them.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within
one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.771)



§ 72.89  OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICE FOR OPERATOR.



   (A)   On and after May 6, 1986, no person, school board, or
governmental entity shall purchase, lease, or rent a new school bus unless
the school bus has an occupant restraining device, as defined in R.C. §
4513.263, installed for use in its operator's seat.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4511.772)



CHAPTER 73:  MOTOR VEHICLE CRIMES



Section



General Provisions



   73.01   Driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs



   73.011   Implied consent



   73.012   Arrestee to receive advice; submission or refusal to
submit; license suspension or seizure; officer's sworn report



   73.013   Deposit of fine for violation



   73.014   Physical control of vehicle while under the influence



   73.02   Driving commercial vehicle with impaired alertness or
ability; use of drugs



   73.03   Immobilizing or disabling device violation



Reckless Operation



   73.05   Reckless operation of vehicles



   73.06   Reckless operation off streets and highways; competitive
operation



   73.07   Operator to be in reasonable control



   73.08   Prohibition against text-based communication while driving



   73.09   Prohibition against person less than 18 years of age from
using electronic wireless communication device while driving



   73.095   Operation restricted for mini-trucks and low-speed,
under-speed, or utility vehicles



Speed Regulations



   73.10   Speed limits



   73.101   Duties upon approaching stationary public safety,
emergency, or road service vehicle displaying flashing lights



   73.11   Slow speed or stopping



   73.12   Emergency vehicles excepted from speed limitation



   73.13   Street racing defined; prohibited on public highways



   73.14   Speed regulations on bridges



Resisting Officer



   73.15   Prohibition against resisting officer



   73.16   Presenting false name or information to officer



Stopping After Accident



   73.20   Exchange of identity and vehicle registration



   73.21   Accident involving injury to persons or property



   73.22   Accident involving damage to realty



   73.23   Failure to report accident



Statutory reference:



   Notice of arrest of certain commercial drivers, see R.C. § 5577.14



   Vehicle accident reports, see O.A.C. Chapter 4501-31



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 73.01  DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL OR DRUGS.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate any vehicle within this
municipality, if, at the time of the operation, any of the following apply:



         (a)   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a
drug of abuse, or a combination of them.



         (b)   The person has a concentration of 0.08% or more
but less than 0.17% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person's
whole blood.



         (c)   The person has a concentration of 0.096% or more
but less than 0.204% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person's
blood serum or plasma.



         (d)   The person has a concentration of 0.08 grams or
more but less than 0.17 grams by weight of alcohol per 210 liters of the
person's breath.



         (e)   The person has a concentration of 0.11 grams or
more but less than 0.238 grams by weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of
the person's urine.



         (f)   The person has a concentration of 0.17% or more by
weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person's whole blood.



         (g)   The person has a concentration of 0.204% or more
by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person's blood serum or plasma.



         (h)   The person has a concentration of 0.17 grams or
more by weight of alcohol per 210 liters of the person's breath.



         (i)   The person has a concentration of 0.238 grams or
more by weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person's urine.



         (j)   Except as provided in division (K) of this
section, the person has a concentration of any of the following controlled
substances or metabolites of a controlled substance in the person's whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds any of the
following:



            1.   The person has a concentration of amphetamine
in the person's urine of at least 500 nanograms of amphetamine per milliliter
of the person's urine or has a concentration of amphetamine in the person's
whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 100 nanograms of amphetamine
per milliliter of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma.



            2.   The person has a concentration of cocaine in
the person's urine of at least 150 nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of the
person's urine or has a concentration of cocaine in the person's whole blood
or blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms of cocaine per milliliter
of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma.



            3.   The person has a concentration of cocaine
metabolite in the person's urine of at least 150 nanograms of cocaine
metabolite per milliliter of the person's urine or has a concentration of
cocaine metabolite in the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at
least 50 nanograms of cocaine metabolite per milliliter of the person's whole
blood or blood serum or plasma.



            4.   The person has a concentration of heroin in
the person's urine of at least 2,000 nanograms of heroin per milliliter of
the person's urine or has a concentration of heroin in the person's whole
blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms of heroin per
milliliter of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma.



            5.   The person has a concentration of heroin
metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) in the person's urine of at least ten
nanograms of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the
person's urine or has a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl
morphine) in the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least
ten nanograms of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of
the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma.



            6.   The person has a concentration of L.S.D. in
the person's urine of at least 25 nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the
person's urine or a concentration of L.S.D. in the person's whole blood or
blood serum or plasma of at least ten nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of
the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma.



            7.   The person has a concentration of marihuana
in the person's urine of at least ten nanograms of marihuana per milliliter
of the person's urine or has a concentration of marihuana in the person's
whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least two nanograms of marihuana
per milliliter of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma.



            8.   Either of the following applies:



               A.   The person is under the influence of
alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them, and, as measured by gas
chromatography mass spectrometry, the person has a concentration of marihuana
metabolite in the person's urine of at least 15 nanograms of marihuana
metabolite per milliliter of the person's urine or has a concentration of
marihuana metabolite in the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of
at least five nanograms of marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the
person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma.



               B.   As measured by gas chromatography mass
spectrometry, the person has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in the
person's urine of at least 35 nanograms of marihuana metabolite per
milliliter of the person's urine or has a concentration of marihuana
metabolite in the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least
50 nanograms of marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person's whole
blood or blood serum or plasma.



            9.   The person has a concentration of
methamphetamine in the person's urine of at least 500 nanograms of
methamphetamine per milliliter of the person's urine or has a concentration
of methamphetamine in the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at
least 100 nanograms of methamphetamine per milliliter of the person's whole
blood or blood serum or plasma.



            10.   The person has a concentration of
phencyclidine in the person's urine of at least 25 nanograms of phencyclidine
per milliliter of the person's urine or has a concentration of phencyclidine
in the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 10 nanograms
of phencyclidine per milliliter of the person's whole blood or blood serum or
plasma.



            11.   The State Board of Pharmacy has adopted a
rule pursuant to R.C. § 4729.041 that specifies the amount of salvia
divinorum and the amount of salvinorin A that constitute concentrations of
salvia divinorum and salvinorin A in a person's urine, in a person's whole
blood, or in a person's blood serum or plasma at or above which the person is
impaired for purposes of operating any vehicle within this state, the rule is
in effect, and the person has a concentration of salvia divinorum or
salvinorin A of at least that amount so specified by rule in the person's
urine, in the person's whole blood, or in the person's blood serum or plasma.



      (2)   No person who, within 20 years of the conduct described
in division (A)(2)(a) of this section, previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a violation of this division or a substantially equivalent
state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of division (A)(1) or (B) of
this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
or any other equivalent offense shall do both of the following:



         (a)   Operate any vehicle within this municipality while
under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them;



         (b)   Subsequent to being arrested for operating the
vehicle as described in division (A)(2)(a) of this section, being asked by a
law enforcement officer to submit to a chemical test or tests under R.C. §
4511.191 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and being
advised by the officer in accordance with R.C. § 4511.192 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance of the consequences of the
person's refusal or submission to the test or tests, refuse to submit to the
test or tests.



   (B)   No person under 21 years of age shall operate any vehicle
within this municipality, if, at the time of the operation, any of the
following apply:



      (1)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.02% but
less than 0.08% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person's whole
blood.



      (2)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.03% but
less than 0.096% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person's blood
serum or plasma.



      (3)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.02 grams
but less than 0.08 grams by weight of alcohol per 210 liters of the person's
breath.



      (4)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.028 grams
but less than 0.11 grams by weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the
person's urine.



   (C)   In any proceeding arising out of one incident, a person may be
charged with a violation of division (A)(1)(a) or (A)(2) and a violation of
division (B)(1), (B)(2), or (B)(3) of this section, but the person may not be
convicted of more than one violation of these divisions.



   (D)   (1)   (a)   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile
court proceeding for a violation of division (A)(1)(a) of this section or for
an equivalent offense that is vehicle-related, the result of any test of any
blood or urine withdrawn and analyzed at any health care provider, as defined
in R.C. § 2317.02, may be admitted with expert testimony to be considered
with any other relevant and competent evidence in determining the guilt or
innocence of the defendant.



         (b)   In any criminal prosecution for a violation of
division (A) or (B) of this section or for an equivalent offense that is
vehicle-related, the court may admit evidence on the concentration of
alcohol, drugs of abuse, controlled substances, metabolites of a controlled
substance, or a combination of them in the defendant’s whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, breath, urine, or other bodily substance at the time of the
alleged violation as shown by chemical analysis of the substance withdrawn
within three hours of the time of the alleged violation. The three-hour time
limit specified in this division regarding the admission of evidence does not
extend or affect the two-hour time limit specified in R.C. § 4511.192(A) as
the maximum period of time during which a person may consent to a chemical
test or tests as described in that section. The court may admit evidence on
the concentration of alcohol, drugs of abuse, or a combination of them as
described in this division when a person submits to a blood test at the
request of a law enforcement officer under R.C. § 4511.191 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or a blood or urine sample is
obtained pursuant to a search warrant. Only a physician, a registered nurse,
an emergency medical technician-intermediate, an emergency medical
technician-paramedic, or a qualified technician, chemist, or phlebotomist
shall withdraw a blood sample for the purpose of determining the alcohol,
drug, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled substance, or
combination content of the whole blood, blood serum, or blood plasma. This
limitation does not apply to the taking of breath or urine specimens. A
person authorized to withdraw blood under this division may refuse to
withdraw blood under this division, if in that person’s opinion, the
physical welfare of the person would be endangered by the withdrawing of
blood. The bodily substance withdrawn under this division (D)(1)(b) shall be
analyzed in accordance with methods approved by the Director of Health by an
individual possessing a valid permit issued by the Director pursuant to R.C.
§ 3701.143.



         (c)   As used in division (D)(1)(b) of this section,
EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-INTERMEDIATE and EMERGENCY MEDICAL
TECHNICIAN-PARAMEDIC have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4765.01.



      (2)   In a criminal prosecution for a violation of division
(A) of this section or for an equivalent offense that is vehicle-related, if
there was at the time the bodily substance was withdrawn a concentration of
less than the applicable concentration of alcohol specified in divisions
(A)(1)(b), (A)(1)(c), (A)(1)(d) and (A)(1)(e) of this section or less than
the applicable concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed
metabolite of a controlled substance specified for a violation of division
(A)(1)(j) of this section, that fact may be considered with other competent
evidence in determining the guilt or innocence of the defendant. This
division does not limit or affect a criminal prosecution for a violation of
division (B) of this section.



      (3)   Upon the request of the person who was tested, the
results of the chemical test shall be made available to the person or the
person's attorney, immediately upon the completion of the chemical test
analysis. If the chemical test was obtained pursuant to division (D)(1)(b) of
this section, the person tested may have a physician, a registered nurse, or
a qualified technician, chemist, or phlebotomist of the person's own choosing
administer a chemical test or tests, at the person's expense, in addition to
any administered at the request of a law enforcement officer. If the person
was under arrest as described in R.C. § 4511.191(A)(5), the arresting
officer shall advise the person at the time of the arrest that the person may
have an independent chemical test taken at the person's own expense. If the
person was under arrest other than described in R.C. § 4511.191(A)(5), the
form to be read to the person to be tested, as required under § 73.011,
shall state that the person may have an independent test performed at the
person's expense. The failure or inability to obtain an additional chemical
test by a person shall not preclude the admission of evidence relating to the
chemical test or tests taken at the request of a law enforcement officer.



      (4)   (a)   As used in division (D)(4)(b) and (D)(4)(c) of
this section, NATIONAL HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SAFETY ADMINISTRATION means the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration established as an
administration of the United States Department of Transportation under 96
Stat. 2415 (1983), 49 U.S.C. § 105.



         (b)   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court
proceeding for a violation of division (A) or (B) of this section, of a
municipal ordinance relating to operating a vehicle while under the influence
of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or alcohol and a drug of abuse, or of a
municipal ordinance relating to operating a vehicle with a prohibited
concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a
controlled substance in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or
urine, if a law enforcement officer has administered a field sobriety test to
the operator of the vehicle involved in the violation and if it is shown by
clear and convincing evidence that the officer administered the test in
substantial compliance with the testing standards for any reliable, credible,
and generally accepted field sobriety tests that were in effect at the time
the tests were administered, including but not limited to any testing
standards then in effect that were set by the National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration, all of the following apply:



            1.   The officer may testify concerning the
results of the field sobriety test so administered.



            2.   The prosecution may introduce the results of
the field sobriety test so administered as evidence in any proceedings in the
criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding.



            3.   If testimony is presented or evidence is
introduced under division (D)(4)(b)1. or (D)(4)(b)2. of this section and if
the testimony or evidence is admissible under the Rules of Evidence, the
court shall admit the testimony or evidence and the trier of fact shall give
it whatever weight the trier of fact considers to be appropriate.



         (c)   Division (D)(4)(b) of this section does not limit
or preclude a court, in its determination of whether the arrest of a person
was supported by probable cause or its determination of any other matter in a
criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding of a type described in that
division, from considering evidence or testimony that is not otherwise
disallowed by division (D)(4)(b) of this section.



   (E)   (1)   Subject to division (E)(3) of this section, in any
criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a violation of division
(A)(1)(b), (A)(1)(c), (A)(1)(d), (A)(1)(e), (A)(1)(f), (A)(1)(g), (A)(1)(h),
(A)(1)(i), or (A)(1)(j) or (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3), or (B)(4) of this section
or for an equivalent offense that is substantially equivalent to any of those
divisions, a laboratory report from any laboratory personnel issued a permit
by the Department of Health authorizing an analysis as described in this
division that contains an analysis of the whole blood, blood serum or plasma,
breath, urine, or other bodily substance tested and that contains all of the
information specified in this division shall be admitted as prima facie
evidence of the information and statements that the report contains. The
laboratory report shall contain all of the following:



         (a)   The signature, under oath, of any person who
performed the analysis;



         (b)   Any findings as to the identity and quantity of
alcohol, a drug of abuse, a controlled substance, a metabolite of a
controlled substance, or a combination of them that was found;



         (c)   A copy of a notarized statement by the laboratory
director of a designee of the director that contains the name of each
certified analyst or test performer involved with the report, the analyst's
or test performer's employment relationship with the laboratory that issued
the report, and a notation that performing an analysis of the type involved
is part of the analyst's or test performer's regular duties;



         (d)   An outline of the analyst's or test performer's
education, training, and experience in performing the type of analysis
involved and a certification that the laboratory satisfies appropriate
quality control standards in general and, in this particular analysis, under
rules of the Department of Health.



      (2)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law regarding the
admission of evidence, a report of the type described in division (E)(1) of
this section is not admissible against the defendant to whom it pertains in
any proceeding, other than a preliminary hearing or a grand jury proceeding,
unless the prosecutor has served a copy of the report on the defendant's
attorney or, if the defendant has no attorney, on the defendant.



      (3)   A report of the type described in division (E)(1) of
this section shall not be prima facie evidence of the contents, identity, or
amount of any substance if, within seven days after the defendant to whom the
report pertains or the defendant's attorney receives a copy of the report,
the defendant or the defendant's attorney demands the testimony of the person
who signed the report. The judge in the case may extend the seven-day time
limit in the interest of justice.



   (F)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, any
physician, registered nurse, emergency medical technician-intermediate,
emergency medical technician-paramedic, or qualified technician, chemist, or
phlebotomist who withdraws blood from a person pursuant to this section or
R.C. § 4511.19, 4511.191 or 4511.192, and any hospital, first-aid station,
or clinic at which blood is withdrawn from a person pursuant to this section
or R.C. § 4511.19, 4511.191 or 4511.192, is immune from criminal liability
and civil liability based upon a claim of assault and battery or any other
claim that is not a claim of malpractice, for any act performed in
withdrawing blood from the person. The immunity provided in this division
also extends to an emergency medical service organization that employs an
emergency medical technician-intermediate or emergency medical
technician-paramedic who withdraws blood under this section. The immunity
provided in this division is not available to a person who withdraws blood if
the person engages in willful or wanton misconduct.



      (2)   As used in division (F)(1), EMERGENCY MEDICAL
TECHNICIAN-INTERMEDIATE and EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-PARAMEDIC have the
same meanings as in R.C. § 4765.01.



   (G)   (1)   Whoever violates any provisions of divisions
(A)(1)(a) through (A)(1)(i) or (A)(2) of this section is guilty of operating
a vehicle under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination
of them. Whoever violates division (A)(1)(j) of this section is guilty of
operating a vehicle while under the influence of a listed controlled
substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance. The court shall
sentence the offender for either offense under R.C. Chapter 2929, except as
otherwise authorized or required by divisions (G)(1)(a) through (G)(1)(e) of
this section:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division
(G)(1)(b), (G)(1)(c), (G)(1)(d), or (G)(1)(e) of this section, the offender
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree, and the court shall sentence
the offender to all of the penalties and sanctions provided in R.C. §
4511.19(G)(1)(a)(i) through (G)(1)(a)(iv).



         (b)   Except as otherwise provided in division (G)(1)(e)
of this section, an offender who, within six years of the offense, previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of division (A) or
(B) of this section or one other equivalent offense is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all
of the penalties and sanctions provided in R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(b)(i)
through (G)(1)(b)(v).



         (c)   Except as otherwise provided in division (G)(1)(e)
of this section, an offender who, within six years of the offense, previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of division (A) or
(B) of this section or other equivalent offenses is guilty of a misdemeanor.
The court shall sentence the offender to all of the penalties and sanctions
provided in R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(c)(i) through (G)(1)(c)(vi).



         (d)   Except as otherwise provided in division (G)(1)(e)
of this section, an offender who, within six years of the offense, previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of
division (A) or (B) of this section or other equivalent offenses or an
offender who, within 20 years of the offense, previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to five or more violations of that nature is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



         (e)   An offender who previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) that was a felony,
regardless of when the violation and the conviction or guilty plea occurred,
is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (2)   An offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of division (A) of this section and who subsequently seeks
reinstatement of the driver's or occupational driver's license or permit or
nonresident operating privilege suspended under this section or R.C. §
4511.19 as a result of the conviction or guilty plea shall pay a
reinstatement fee as provided in R.C. § 4511.191(F)(2).



      (3)   (a)   If an offender is sentenced to a jail term
under R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(b)(i) or (G)(1)(b)(ii) or (G)(1)(c)(i) or
(G)(1)(c)(ii) and if, within 60 days of sentencing of the offender, the court
issues a written finding on the record that, due to the unavailability of
space at the jail where the offender is required to serve the term, the
offender will not be able to begin serving that term within the 60-day period
following the date of sentencing, the court may impose an alternative
sentence as specified in R.C. § 4511.19(G)(3) that includes a term of house
arrest with electronic monitoring, with continuous alcohol monitoring, or
with both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol monitoring.



         (b)   As an alternative to the mandatory jail terms as
required by R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1), the court may sentence the offender as
provided in R.C. § 4511.19(G)(3).



      (4)   If an offender's driver's or occupational driver's
license or permit or nonresident operating privilege is suspended under
division (G) of this section or R.C. § 4511.19(G) and if R.C. § 4510.13
permits the court to grant limited driving privileges, the court may grant
the limited driving privileges in accordance with that section. If division
(A)(7) of that section requires the court impose as a condition of the
privileges that the offender must display on the vehicle that is driven
subject to the privileges restricted license plates that are issued under
R.C. § 4503.231, except as provided in division (B) of that section, the
court shall impose that condition as one of the conditions of the limited
driving privileges granted to the offender, except as provided in R.C. §
4503.231(B).



      (5)   Fines imposed under this section for a violation of
division (A) of this section shall be distributed as provided in R.C. §
4511.19(G)(5).



      (6)   If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to an order
of criminal forfeiture under division (G)(1)(c), (G)(1)(d), or (G)(1)(e) of
this section is assigned or transferred and R.C. § 4503.234(B)(2) or (B)(3)
applies, in addition to or independent of any other penalty established by
law, the court may fine the offender the value of the vehicle as determined
by publications of the National Automobile Dealers Association. The proceeds
of any fine so imposed shall be distributed in accordance with division
(C)(2) of that section.



      (7)   In all cases in which an offender is sentenced under
division (G) of this section, the offender shall provide the court with proof
of financial responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender
fails to provide that proof of financial responsibility, the court, in
addition to any other penalties provided by law, may order restitution
pursuant to § 130.99(G) or R.C. § 2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not
exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision
that was the direct and proximate result of the offender’s operation of the
vehicle before, during, or after committing the offense for which the
offender is sentenced under division (G) of this section.



      (8)   As used in division (G) of this section, ELECTRONIC
MONITORING has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.



   (H)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
operating a motor vehicle after underage alcohol consumption and shall be
punished as follows:



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (H)(2) of this
section, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. In
addition to any other sanction imposed for the offense, the court shall
impose a class six suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial
driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or
nonresident operating privilege form the range specified in R.C. §
4510.02(A)(6).



      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations
of division (A) or (B) of this section or other equivalent offense or
offenses, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. In
addition to any other sanction imposed for the offense, the court shall
impose a class four suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial
driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or
nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. §
4510.02(A)(4).



      (3)   If the offender also is convicted of or also pleads
guilty to a specification of the type described in R.C. § 2941.1414 and if
the court imposes a jail term for the violation of division (B) of this
section, the court shall impose upon the offender an additional definite jail
term pursuant to R.C. § 2929.24(E).



      (4)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of
financial responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails
to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any
other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to
§ 130.99(G) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any
economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and
proximate result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during,
or after committing the violation of division (B) of this section.



   (I)   (1)   No court shall sentence an offender to an alcohol
treatment program under this section unless the treatment program complies
with the minimum standards for alcohol treatment programs adopted under R.C.
Chapter 5119 by the Director of Mental Health and Addiction Services.



      (2)   An offender who stays in a drivers' intervention program
or in an alcohol treatment program under an order issued under this section
shall pay the cost of the stay in the program. However, if the court
determines that an offender who stays in an alcohol treatment program under
an order issued under this section is unable to pay the cost of the stay in
the program, the court may order that the cost be paid from the court's
Indigent Drivers' Alcohol Treatment Fund.



   (J)   If a person whose driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit or nonresident operating privilege is suspended under this section or
R.C. § 4511.19 files an appeal regarding any aspect of the person's trial or
sentence, the appeal itself does not stay the operation of the suspension.



   (K)   Division (A)(1)(j) of this section does not apply to a person
who operates a vehicle while the person has a concentration of a listed
controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance in the
person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds
the amount specified in that division, if both of the following apply:



      (1)   The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to
a prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to
prescribe drugs.



      (2)   The person injected, ingested, or inhaled the controlled
substance in accordance with the health professional's directions.



   (L)   The prohibited concentrations of a controlled substance or a
metabolite of a controlled substance listed in division (A)(1)(j) of this
section also apply in a prosecution of a violation of R.C. § 2923.16(D) in
the same manner as if the offender is being prosecuted for a prohibited
concentration of alcohol.



   (M)   All terms defined in R.C. § 4510.01 apply to this section. If
the meaning of a term defined in R.C. § 4510.01 conflicts with the meaning
of the same term as defined in R.C. § 4501.01 or 4511.01, the term as
defined in R.C. § 4510.01 applies to this section.



(R.C. § 4511.19(A) - (M))



   (N)   As used in this section, § 73.011 and § 73.014:



      COMMUNITY RESIDENTIAL SANCTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 2929.01.



      CONTINUOUS ALCOHOL MONITORING. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2929.01.



      DRUG OF ABUSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4506.01.



      EQUIVALENT OFFENSE. Means any of the following:



         (a)   A violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B);



         (b)   A violation of a municipal OVI ordinance;



         (c)   A violation of R.C. § 2903.04 in a case in which
the offender was subject to the sanctions described in division (D) of that
section;



         (d)   A violation of R.C. § 2903.06 (A)(1) or R.C. §
2903.08 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to either
of those divisions;



         (e)   A violation of R.C. § 2903.06 (A)(2), (A)(3), or
(A)(4), R.C. § 2903.08(A)(2), or former R.C. § 2903.07, or a municipal
ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of those divisions or that
former section, in a case in which a judge or jury as the trier of fact found
that the offender was under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a
combination of them;



         (f)   A violation of R.C. § 1547.11(A) or (B);



         (g)   A violation of a municipal ordinance prohibiting a
person from operating or being in physical control of any vessel underway or
from manipulating any water skis, aquaplane, or similar device on the waters
of this state while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a
combination of them or prohibiting a person from operating or being in
physical control of any vessel underway or from manipulating any water skis,
aquaplane, or similar device on the waters of this state with a prohibited
concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a
controlled substance in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or
urine;



         (h)   A violation of an existing or former municipal
ordinance, law of another state, or law of the United States that is
substantially equivalent to R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B) or R.C. § 1547.11(A)
or (B);



         (i)   A violation of a former law of this state that was
substantially equivalent to R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B) or R.C. § 1547.11(A)
or (B).



      EQUIVALENT OFFENSE THAT IS VEHICLE-RELATED. Means an equivalent
offense that is any of the following:



         (a)   A violation described in division (a), (b), (c),
(d), or (e) of the definition for "equivalent offense" provided in this
division (N);



         (b)   A violation of an existing or former municipal
ordinance, law of another state, or law of the United States that is
substantially equivalent to R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B);



         (c)   A violation of a former law of this state that was
substantially equivalent to R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B).



      JAIL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.



      MANDATORY JAIL TERM. Means the mandatory term in jail of 3, 6,
10, 20, 30, or 60 days that must be imposed under R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(a),
(G)(1)(b), or (G)(1)(c) upon an offender convicted of a violation of division
(A) of that section and in relation to which all of the following apply:



         (a)   Except as specifically authorized under R.C. §
4511.19, the term must be served in a jail.



         (b)   Except as specifically authorized under R.C. §
4511.19, the term cannot be suspended, reduced, or otherwise modified
pursuant to R.C. §§ 2929.21 through 2929.28 or any other provision of the
Ohio Revised Code.



      MANDATORY PRISON TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.



      MANDATORY TERM OF LOCAL INCARCERATION. Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2929.01.



      MUNICIPAL OVI ORDINANCE and MUNICIPAL OVI OFFENSE. Mean any
municipal ordinance prohibiting a person from operating a vehicle while under
the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them or
prohibiting a person from operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration
of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance
in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine.



      PRISON TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.



      SANCTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.



(R.C. § 4511.181)



Cross-reference:



   Endangering children, see § 135.14



Statutory reference:



   Mandatory suspension periods; immobilizing or disabling device;
restricted license, see R.C. § 4510.13



   Mayor's Court to suspend or revoke driver's license, see R.C. §
1905.201



   Trial judge to suspend driver's license, see R.C. § 4510.05



§ 73.011  IMPLIED CONSENT.



   (A)   As used in this section:



      ALCOHOL MONITORING DEVICE. Means any device that provides for
continuous alcohol monitoring, any ignition interlock device, any
immobilizing or disabling device other than an ignition interlock device that
is constantly available to monitor the concentration of alcohol in a person's
system, or any other device that provides for the automatic testing and
periodic reporting of alcohol consumption by a person and that a court orders
a person to use as a sanction imposed as a result of the person's conviction
of or plea of guilty to an offense.



      COMMUNITY ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER.  Has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 5119.01.



      PHYSICAL CONTROL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.194.



   (B)   Any person who operates a vehicle upon a highway or any public
or private property used by the public for vehicular travel or parking within
this municipality or who is in physical control of a vehicle shall be deemed
to have given consent to a chemical test or tests of the person's whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine to determine the alcohol, drug
of abuse, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled substance, or
combination content of the person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma,
breath, or urine if arrested for a violation of § 73.01(A) or (B), §
73.014, R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, or any other municipal OVI ordinance.



   (C)   The chemical test or tests under division (B) of this section
shall be administered at the request of a law enforcement officer having
reasonable grounds to believe the person was operating or in physical control
of a vehicle in violation of a division, section, or ordinance identified in
division (B) of this section. The law enforcement agency by which the officer
is employed shall designate which of the tests shall be administered.



   (D)   Any person who is dead or unconscious, or who otherwise is in
a condition rendering the person incapable of refusal, shall be deemed to
have consented as provided in division (B) of this section, and the test or
tests may be administered, subject to R.C. §§ 313.12 through 313.16.



   (E)   (1)   If a law enforcement officer arrests a person for a
violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, or a municipal OVI ordinance and if the
person if convicted would be required to be sentenced under R.C. §
4511.19(G)(1)(c), (d), or (e), the law enforcement officer shall request the
person to submit, and the person shall submit, to a chemical test or tests of
the person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine for the
purpose of determining the alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance,
metabolite of a controlled substance, or combination content of the person's
whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine. A law enforcement
officer who makes a request pursuant to this division that a person submit to
a chemical test or tests is not required to advise the person of the
consequences of submitting to, or refusing to submit to, the test or tests
and is not required to give the person the form described in § 73.012, but
the officer shall advise the person at the time of the arrest that if the
person refuses to take a chemical test the officer may employ whatever
reasonable means are necessary to ensure that the person submits to a
chemical test of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma. The
officer shall also advise the person at the time of the arrest that the
person may have an independent chemical test taken at the person's own
expense. Divisions (C) and (D) of this section apply to the administration of
a chemical test or tests pursuant to this division.



      (2)   If a person refuses to submit to a chemical test upon a
request made pursuant to division (E)(1) of this section, the law enforcement
officer who made the request may employ whatever reasonable means are
necessary to ensure that the person submits to a chemical test of the
person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma. A law enforcement officer who
acts pursuant to this division to ensure that a person submits to a chemical
test of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma is immune from
criminal and civil liability based upon a claim for assault and battery or
any other claim for the acts, unless the officer so acted with malicious
purpose, in bad faith, or in a wanton or reckless manner.



(R.C. § 4511.191(A))



§ 73.012  ARRESTEE TO RECEIVE ADVICE; SUBMISSION OR REFUSAL TO SUBMIT;
LICENSE SUSPENSION OR SEIZURE; OFFICER'S SWORN REPORT.



   (A)   Except as provided in § 73.011(E), the arresting law
enforcement officer shall give advice in accordance with this section to any
person under arrest for a violation of § 73.01(A) or (B), § 73.014, R.C. §
4511.19(A) or (B), R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, or any other municipal OVI ordinance. The officer shall give that
advice in a written form that contains the information described in division
(B) of this section and shall read the advice to the person. The form shall
contain a statement that the form was shown to the person under arrest and
read to the person by the arresting officer. One or more persons shall
witness the arresting officer's reading of the form, and the witnesses shall
certify to this fact by signing the form. The person must submit to the
chemical test or tests, subsequent to the request of the arresting officer,
within two hours of the time of the alleged violation and, if the person does
not submit to the test or tests within that two-hour time limit, the failure
to submit automatically constitutes a refusal to submit to the test or tests.



   (B)   Except as provided in § 73.011(E), if a person is under
arrest as described in division (A) of this section, before the person may be
requested to submit to a chemical test or tests to determine the alcohol,
drug of abuse, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled substance, or
combination content of the person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma,
breath, or urine, the arresting officer shall read the following form to the
person:



You now are under arrest for (specifically state the offense under state law
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance for which the person was
arrested – operating a vehicle under the influence of alcohol, a drug, or a
combination of them; operating a vehicle while under the influence of a
listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance;
operating a vehicle after underage alcohol consumption; or having physical
control of a vehicle while under the influence).



If you refuse to take any chemical test required by law, your Ohio driving
privileges will be suspended immediately, and you will have to pay a fee to
have the privileges reinstated. If you have a prior conviction of OVI, OVUAC,
or operating a vehicle while under the influence of a listed controlled
substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance under state or
municipal law within the preceding 20 years, you are now under arrest for
state OVI, and, if you refuse to take a chemical test, you will face
increased penalties if you subsequently are convicted of the state OVI.



(Read this part unless the person is under arrest for solely having physical
control of a vehicle while under the influence.) If you take any chemical
test required by law and are found to be at or over the prohibited amount of
alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in
your whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine as set by law, your
Ohio driving privileges will be suspended immediately, and you will have to
pay a fee to have the privileges reinstated.



If you take a chemical test, you may have an independent chemical test taken
at your own expense.



   (C)   If the arresting law enforcement officer does not ask a person
under arrest as described in division (A) of this section or § 73.011(E) to
submit to a chemical test or tests under R.C. § 4511.191 or this section,
the arresting officer shall seize the Ohio or out-of-state driver's or
commercial driver's license or permit of the person and immediately forward
it to the court in which the arrested person is to appear on the charge. If
the arrested person is not in possession of the person's license or permit or
it is not in the person's vehicle, the officer shall order the person to
surrender it to the law enforcement agency that employs the officer within 24
hours after the arrest, and, upon the surrender, the agency immediately shall
forward the license or permit to the court in which the person is to appear
on the charge. Upon receipt of the license or permit, the court shall retain
it pending the arrested person's initial appearance and any action taken
under R.C. § 4511.196.



   (D)   (1)   If a law enforcement officer asks a person under
arrest as described in § 73.011(E) to submit to a chemical test or tests
under that division and the test results indicate a prohibited concentration
of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance
in the person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine at the
time of the alleged offense, or if a law enforcement officer asks a person
under arrest as described in division (A) of this section to submit to a
chemical test or tests under R.C. § 4511.191 or this section, if the officer
advises the person in accordance with this section of the consequences of the
person's refusal or submission, and if either the person refuses to submit to
the test or tests or, unless the arrest was for a violation of § 73.014,
R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the
person submits to the test or tests and the test results indicate a
prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite
of a controlled substance in the person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma,
breath, or urine at the time of the alleged offense, the arresting officer
shall do all of the following:



         (a)   On behalf of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles,
notify the person that, independent of any penalties or sanctions imposed
upon the person, the person's Ohio driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit or nonresident operating privilege is suspended immediately, that the
suspension will last at least until the person's initial appearance on the
charge, which will be held within five days after the date of the person's
arrest or the issuance of a citation to the person, and that the person may
appeal the suspension at the initial appearance or during the period of time
ending 30 days after that initial appearance;



         (b)   Seize the driver's or commercial driver's license
or permit of the person and immediately forward it to the Registrar. If the
arrested person is not in possession of the person's license or permit or it
is not in the person's vehicle, the officer shall order the person to
surrender it to the law enforcement agency that employs the officer within 24
hours after the person is given notice of the suspension, and, upon the
surrender, the officer's employing agency immediately shall forward the
license or permit to the Registrar;



         (c)   Verify the person's current residence and, if it
differs from that on the person's driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit, notify the Registrar of the change;



         (d)   Send to the Registrar, within 48 hours after the
arrest of the person, a sworn report that includes all of the following
statements:



            1.   That the officer had reasonable grounds to
believe that, at the time of the arrest, the arrested person was operating a
vehicle in violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B) or a municipal OVI
ordinance or for being in physical control of a stationary vehicle in
violation of R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance;



            2.   That the person was arrested and charged with
a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, or a municipal OVI ordinance;



            3.   Unless division (D)(1)(d)5. of this section
applies, that the officer asked the person to take the designated chemical
test or tests, advised the person in accordance with this section of the
consequences of submitting to, or refusing to take, the test or tests, and
gave the person the form described in division (B) of this section;



            4.   Unless division (D)(1)(d)5. of this section
applies, that either the person refused to submit to the chemical test or
tests or, unless the arrest was for a violation of R.C. § 4511.194 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the person submitted to the
chemical test or tests and the test results indicate a prohibited
concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a
controlled substance in the person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma,
breath, or urine at the time of the alleged offense.



            5.   If the person was under arrest as described
in § 73.011(E) and the chemical test or tests were performed in accordance
with that division, that the person was under arrest as described in that
division, that the chemical test or tests were performed in accordance with
that division, and that test results indicated a prohibited concentration of
alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in
the person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine at the time
of the alleged offense.



      (2)   Division (D)(1) of this section does not apply to a
person who is arrested for a violation of § 73.014, R.C. § 4511.194 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, who is asked by a law
enforcement officer to submit to a chemical test or tests under this section,
and who submits to the test or tests, regardless of the amount of alcohol, a
controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance that the test
results indicate is present in the person's whole blood, blood serum or
plasma, breath, or urine.



   (E)   The arresting officer shall give the officer's sworn report
that is completed under this section to the arrested person at the time of
the arrest, or the Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall send the report to the
person by regular first class mail as soon as possible after receipt of the
report, but not later than 14 days after receipt of it. An arresting officer
may give an unsworn report to the arrested person at the time of the arrest
provided the report is complete when given to the arrested person and
subsequently is sworn to by the arresting officer. As soon as possible, but
not later than 48 hours after the arrest of the person, the arresting officer
shall send a copy of the sworn report to the court in which the arrested
person is to appear on the charge for which the person was arrested.



   (F)   The sworn report of an arresting officer completed under this
section is prima facie proof of the information and statements that it
contains. It shall be admitted and considered as prima facie proof of the
information and statements that it contains in any appeal under R.C. §
4511.197 relative to any suspension of a person's driver's or commercial
driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege that results
from the arrest covered by the report.



(R.C. § 4511.192)



   (G)   (1)   A suspension of a person's driver's or commercial
driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege under this
section for the time described in R.C. § 4511.191(B) or (C) is effective
immediately from the time at which the arresting officer serves the notice of
suspension upon the arrested person. Any subsequent finding that the person
is not guilty of the charge that resulted in the person's being requested to
take the chemical test or tests under § 73.011 does not affect the
suspension.



      (2)   If a person arrested for operating a vehicle in
violation of § 73.01(A) or (B), R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), or any other
municipal OVI ordinance, or for being in physical control of a vehicle in
violation of § 73.014 or R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, regardless of whether the person's driver's or
commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege is
or is not suspended under R.C. § 4511.191(B) or (C) or R.C. Chapter 4510,
the person's initial appearance on the charge resulting from the arrest shall
be held within five days of the persons' arrest or the issuance of the
citation to him or her, subject to any continuance granted by the court
pursuant to R.C. § 4511.197 regarding the issues specified in that section.



(R.C. § 4511.191(D))



Statutory reference:



   Continuous alcohol monitoring, see R.C. § 4511.198



   Disposition of fines, immobilization of vehicle and impoundment of
license plates, criminal forfeiture for municipal ordinance conviction, see
R.C. § 4511.193



   Effect of refusal to submit to test, seizure of license, suspension
periods, appeal procedures, occupational driving privileges, and indigent
drivers alcohol treatment funds, see R.C. § 4511.191



   Judicial pretrial suspension, initial appearance, see R.C. § 4511.196



   Mandatory suspension periods; immobilizing or disabling device;
restricted license, see R.C. § 4510.13



   Seizure of vehicles upon arrest, see R.C. § 4511.195



§ 73.013  DEPOSIT OF FINE FOR VIOLATION.



   Twenty-five dollars of any fine imposed for a violation of a municipal
OVI ordinance shall be deposited into the municipal or county indigent
drivers alcohol treatment fund created pursuant to R.C. § 4511.191(H) in
accordance with this section and R.C. §§ 733.40, 1901.024(A) and (B),
1901.31(F), or 1907.20(C).  Regardless of whether the fine is imposed by a
municipal court, a mayor's court, or a juvenile court, if the fine was
imposed for a violation of an ordinance of a municipal corporation that is
within the jurisdiction of a municipal court, the $25 that is subject to this
section shall be deposited into the indigent drivers alcohol treatment fund
of the municipal corporation in which is located the municipal court that has
jurisdiction over that municipal corporation.  Regardless of whether the
fine is imposed by a county court, a mayor's court, or a juvenile court, if
the fine was imposed for a violation of an ordinance of a municipal
corporation that is within the jurisdiction of a county court, the $25 that
is subject to this section shall be deposited into the indigent drivers
alcohol treatment fund of the county in which is located the county court
that has jurisdiction over that municipal corporation.  The deposit shall be
made in accordance with R.C. §§ 733.40, 1901.024(A) and (B), 1901.31(F), or
1907.20(C).



(Ord. 19-2006, passed 10-4-06)



§ 73.014  PHYSICAL CONTROL OF VEHICLE WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE.



   (A)   As used in this section:



      NATIONAL HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SAFETY ADMINISTRATION has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 4511.19.



      PHYSICAL CONTROL means being in the driver's position of the
front seat of a vehicle and having possession of the vehicle's ignition key
or other ignition device.



   (B)   No person shall be in physical control of a vehicle if, at the
time of the physical control, any of the following apply:



      (1)   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of
abuse, or a combination of them.



      (2)   The person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath
or urine contains at least the concentration of alcohol specified in R.C. §
4511.19(A)(1)(b), (c), (d), or (e).



      (3)   Except as provided in division (E) of this section, the
person has a concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed
metabolite of a controlled substance in the person's whole blood, blood serum
or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds the concentration specified in §
73.01(A)(1)(j) or R.C. § 4511.19(A)(1)(j).



   (C)   (1)   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court
proceeding for a violation of this section or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, if a law enforcement officer has administered a field
sobriety test to the person in physical control of the vehicle involved in
the violation and if it is shown by clear and convincing evidence that the
officer administered the test in substantial compliance with the testing
standards for any reliable, credible, and generally accepted field sobriety
tests that were in effect at the time the tests were administered, including,
but not limited to, any testing standards then in effect that were set by the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, all of the following apply:



         (a)   The officer may testify concerning the results of
the field sobriety test so administered.



         (b)   The prosecution may introduce the results of the
field sobriety test so administered as evidence in any proceedings in the
criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding.



         (c)   If testimony is presented or evidence is
introduced under division (C)(1)(a) or (b) of this section and if the
testimony or evidence is admissible under the Rules of Evidence, the court
shall admit the testimony or evidence, and the trier of fact shall give it
whatever weight the trier of fact considers to be appropriate.



      (2)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not limit or
preclude a court, in its determination of whether the arrest of a person was
supported by probable cause or its determination of any other matter in a
criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding of a type described in that
division, from considering evidence or testimony that is not otherwise
disallowed by division (C)(1) of this section.



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of having physical
control of a vehicle while under the influence, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.  In addition to other sanctions imposed, the court may impose on the
offender a class seven suspension of the offender's driver's license,
commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C.
§ 4510.02(A)(7).



   (E)   Division (B)(3) of this section does not apply to a person who
is in physical control of a vehicle while the person has a concentration of a
listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance
in the person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine that equals or
exceeds the amount specified in R.C. § 4511.19(A)(1)(j), if both of the
following apply:



      (1)   The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to
a prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to
prescribe drugs.



      (2)   The person injected, ingested, or inhaled the controlled
substance in accordance with the health professional's directions.



(Ord. 19-2006, passed 10-4-06)



§ 73.02  DRIVING COMMERCIAL VEHICLE WITH IMPAIRED ALERTNESS OR ABILITY; USE
OF DRUGS.



   (A)   No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle, as defined
in R.C. § 4506.01, or a commercial car or commercial tractor, as defined in
R.C. § 4501.01, while the person's ability or alertness is so impaired by
fatigue, illness, or other causes that it is unsafe for the person to drive
such vehicle.  No driver shall use any drug which would adversely affect the
person's ability or alertness.



   (B)   No owner, as defined in R.C. § 4501.01, of a commercial motor
vehicle, commercial car or commercial tractor, or a person employing or
otherwise directing the driver of such vehicle, shall require or knowingly
permit a driver in any such condition described in division (A) of this
section to drive such vehicle upon any street or highway.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations
of this section or R.C. § 4511.79, or R.C. §§ 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761,
4511.762, 4511.764, or 4511.77 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to any of those sections, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 4511.79)



§ 73.03  IMMOBILIZING OR DISABLING DEVICE VIOLATION.



   (A)   (1)   No offender with limited driving privileges, during
any period that the offender is required to operate only a motor vehicle
equipped with an immobilizing or disabling device, shall request or permit
any other person to breathe into the device if it is an ignition interlock
device or another type of device that monitors the concentration of alcohol
in a person's breath or to otherwise start the motor vehicle equipped with
the device, for the purpose of providing the offender with an operable motor
vehicle.



      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (A)(2)(b) of
this section, no person shall breathe into an immobilizing or disabling
device that is an ignition interlock device or another type of device that
monitors the concentration of alcohol in a person's breath or otherwise start
a motor vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling device, for the
purpose of providing an operable motor vehicle to an offender with limited
driving privileges who is permitted to operate only a motor vehicle equipped
with an immobilizing or disabling device.



         (b)   Division (A)(2)(a) of this section does not apply
to a person in the following circumstances:



            1.   The person is an offender with limited
driving privileges.



            2.   The person breathes into an immobilizing or
disabling device that is an ignition interlock device or another type of
device that monitors the concentration of alcohol in a person's breath or
otherwise starts a motor vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling
device.



            3.   The person breathes into the device or starts
the vehicle for the purpose of providing the person with an operable motor
vehicle.



      (3)   No unauthorized person shall tamper with or circumvent
the operation of an immobilizing or disabling device.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of an immobilizing or
disabling device violation, a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 4510.44)



RECKLESS OPERATION



§ 73.05  RECKLESS OPERATION OF VEHICLES.



   (A)   No person shall operate a vehicle on any street or highway in
willful or wanton disregard of the safety of persons or property.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.20)



Cross-reference:



   License suspension, see § 71.15



§ 73.06  RECKLESS OPERATION OFF STREETS AND HIGHWAYS; COMPETITIVE OPERATION.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle on any public or
private property other than streets or highways in willful or wanton
disregard of the safety of persons or property.



      (2)   This section does not apply to the competitive operation
of vehicles on public or private property when the owner of such property
knowingly permits such operation thereon.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.201)



Cross-reference:



   License suspension, see § 71.15



§ 73.07  OPERATOR TO BE IN REASONABLE CONTROL.



   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, agricultural tractor,
or agricultural tractor that is towing, pulling, or otherwise drawing a unit
of farm machinery on any street, highway, or property open to the public for
vehicular traffic without being in reasonable control of the vehicle,
agricultural tractor, or unit of farm machinery.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a motor
vehicle or agricultural tractor without being in control of it, a minor
misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4511.202)



§ 73.08  PROHIBITION AGAINST TEXT-BASED COMMUNICATION WHILE DRIVING.



   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, trackless trolley, or
streetcar on any street, highway, or property open to the public for
vehicular traffic while using a handheld electronic wireless communications
device to write, send, or read a text-based communication



   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any of the
following:



      (1)   A person using a handheld electronic wireless
communications device in that manner for emergency purposes, including an
emergency contact with a law enforcement agency, hospital or health care
provider, fire department, or other similar emergency agency or entity;



      (2)   A person driving a public safety vehicle who uses a
handheld electronic wireless communications device in that manner in the
course of the person's duties;



      (3)   A person using a handheld electronic wireless
communications device in that manner whose motor vehicle is in a stationary
position and who is outside a lane of travel;



      (4)   A person reading, selecting, or entering a name or
telephone number in a handheld electronic wireless communications device for
the purpose of making or receiving a telephone call;



      (5)   A person receiving wireless messages on a device
regarding the operation or navigation of a motor vehicle; safety-related
information, including emergency, traffic, or weather alerts; or data used
primarily by the motor vehicle;



      (6)   A person receiving wireless messages via radio waves;



      (7)   A person using a device for navigation purposes;



      (8)   A person conducting wireless interpersonal communication
with a device that does not require manually entering letters, numbers, or
symbols or reading text messages, except to activate, deactivate, or initiate
the device or a feature or function of the device;



      (9)   A person operating a commercial truck while using a
mobile data terminal that transmits and receives data;



      (10)   A person using a handheld electronic wireless
communications device in conjunction with a voice-operated or hands-free
device feature or function of the vehicle.



   (C)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause an operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of division (A) of this section has been or
is being committed nor for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or
summons for a violation of that nature, or causing the arrest of, or
commencing a prosecution of, a person for a violation of that nature, and no
law enforcement officer shall view the interior or visually inspect any motor
vehicle being operated on any street or highway for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of that nature has been or is being committed.



   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.



   (E)   As used in this section:



      (1)   ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS DEVICE includes any
of the following:



         (a)   A wireless telephone;



         (b)   A text-messaging device;



         (c)   A personal digital assistant;



         (d)   A computer, including a laptop computer and a
computer tablet;



         (e)   Any other substantially similar wireless device
that is designed or used to communicate text.



      (2)   VOICE-OPERATED OR HANDS-FREE DEVICE means a device that
allows the user to vocally compose or send, or to listen to a text-based
communication without the use of either hand except to activate or deactivate
a feature or function.



      (3)   WRITE, SEND, OR READ A TEXT-BASED COMMUNICATION means to
manually write or send, or read a text-based communication using an
electronic wireless communications device, including manually writing or
sending, or reading communications referred to as text messages, instant
messages, or electronic mail.



(Ord. 1-2013, passed 1-2-13)



§ 73.09  PROHIBITION AGAINST PERSON LESS THAN 18 YEARS OF AGE FROM USING
ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATION DEVICE WHILE DRIVING.



   (A)   No holder of a temporary instruction permit who has not
attained the age of 18 years and no holder of a probationary driver's license
shall operate a motor vehicle on any street, highway, or property used by the
public for purposes of vehicular traffic or parking, while using in any
manner an electronic wireless communications device.



   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to either of the
following:



      (1)   A person using an electronic wireless communications
device for emergency purposes, including an emergency contact with a law
enforcement agency, hospital or health care provider, fire department, or
other similar emergency agency or entity;



      (2)   A person using an electronic wireless communications
device whose motor vehicle is in a stationary position and the motor vehicle
is outside a lane of travel;



      (3)   A person using a navigation device in a voice-operated
or hands-free manner who does not manipulate the device while driving.



   (C)   (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(2) of this
section, whoever violates division (A) of this section shall be fined up to
$150. In addition, the court shall impose a class seven suspension of the
offender's driver's license or permit for a definite period of 60 days.



      (2)   If the offender previously has been convicted of a
violation of this section, whoever violates this section shall be fined up to
$300. In addition, the court shall impose a class seven suspension of the
offender's driver's license or permit for a definite period of one year.



   (D)   As used in this section, ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS
DEVICE includes any of the following:



      (1)   A wireless telephone;



      (2)   A personal digital assistant;



      (3)   A computer, including a laptop computer and a computer
tablet;



      (4)   A text-messaging device;



      (5)   Any other substantially similar electronic wireless
device that is designed or used to communicate via voice, image, or written
word.



(Ord. 1-2013, passed 1-2-13)



§ 73.095  OPERATION RESTRICTED FOR MINI-TRUCKS AND LOW-SPEED, UNDER-SPEED,
OR UTILITY VEHICLES.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate a low-speed vehicle upon any
street or highway having an established speed limit greater than 35 miles per
hour.



      (2)   No person shall operate an under-speed or utility
vehicle or a mini-truck upon any street or highway except as follows:



         (a)   Upon a street or highway having an established
speed limit not greater than 35 miles per hour and only upon such streets or
highways where the municipality has granted permission for such operation in
accordance with division (E) of this section;



         (b)   A state park or political subdivision employee or
volunteer operating a utility vehicle exclusively within the boundaries of
state parks or political subdivision parks for the operation or maintenance
of state or political subdivision park facilities.



      (3)   No person shall operate a motor-driven cycle or motor
scooter upon any street or highway having an established speed limit greater
than 45 miles per hour.



   (B)   This section does not prohibit either of the following:



      (1)   A person operating a low-speed, under-speed, or utility
vehicle or a mini-truck from proceeding across an intersection of a street or
highway having a speed limit greater than 35 miles per hour;



      (2)   A person operating a motor-driven cycle or motor scooter
from proceeding across an intersection of a street or highway having a speed
limit greater than 45 miles per hour.



   (C)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the municipality from
adopting more stringent local ordinances, resolutions, or regulations
governing the operation of a low-speed vehicle or a mini-truck, or a
motor-driven cycle or motor scooter.



   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.214)



   (E)   By ordinance or resolution, the municipality may authorize the
operation of under-speed or utility vehicles or mini-trucks on a public
street or highway under its jurisdiction. The municipality shall do all of
the following:



      (1)   Limit the operation of those vehicles to streets and
highways having an established speed limit not greater than 35 miles per hour;



      (2)   Require the vehicle owner who wishes to operate an
under-speed or utility vehicle or a mini-truck on the public streets or
highways to submit the vehicle to an inspection conducted by a local law
enforcement agency that complies with inspection requirements established by
the Department of Public Safety under R.C. § 4513.02;



      (3)   Permit the operation on public streets or highways of
only those vehicles that successfully pass the required vehicle inspection,
are registered in accordance with R.C. Chapter 4503, and are titled in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 4505;



      (4)   Notify the Director of Public Safety, in a manner the
Director determines, of the authorization for the operation of under-speed or
utility vehicles or mini-trucks.



   (F)   The municipality may establish additional requirements for the
operation of under-speed or utility vehicles or mini-trucks on its streets
and highways.



(R.C. § 4511.215)



   (G)   (1)   Except as provided in this division (G) and divisions
(E) and (F) of this section, no person shall operate a mini-truck within this
municipality.



      (2)   A person may operate a mini-truck on a farm for
agricultural purposes only when the owner of the farm qualifies for the
current agricultural use valuation tax credit. A mini-truck may be operated
by or on behalf of such a farm owner on public roads and rights-of-way only
when traveling from one farm field to another.



      (3)   A person may operate a mini-truck on property owned or
leased by a dealer who sells mini-trucks at retail.



      (4)   Whoever violates this division (G) shall be penalized as
provided in division (D) of this section.



(R.C. § 4519.401)



   (H)   This section will take effect on January 1, 2017.



SPEED REGULATIONS



§ 73.10  SPEED LIMITS.



   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a speed greater or
less than is reasonable or proper, having due regard for the traffic,
surface, and width of the street or highway and any other conditions, and no
person shall drive any motor vehicle in and upon any street or highway at a
greater speed than will permit him or her to bring it to a stop within the
assured clear distance ahead.



   (B)   It is prima facie lawful, in the absence of a lower limit
declared or established pursuant to this section by the Director of
Transportation or local authorities, for the operator of a motor vehicle to
operate the same at a speed not exceeding the following:



      (1)   (a)   Twenty miles per hour in school zones during
school recess and while children are going to or leaving school during the
opening or closing hours, and when 20 miles per hour school speed limit signs
are erected, except that on controlled-access highways and expressways, if
the right-of-way line fence has been erected without pedestrian opening, the
speed shall be governed by division (B)(4) of this section, and on freeways,
if the right-of-way line fence has been erected without pedestrian opening,
the speed shall be governed by divisions (B)(9) and (B)(10) of this section.
The end of every school zone may be marked by a sign indicating the end of
the zone. Nothing in this section or in the Manual and Specifications for a
Uniform System of Traffic-Control Devices shall be construed to require
school zones to be indicated by signs equipped with flashing or other lights,
or giving other special notice of the hours in which the school zone speed
limit is in effect.



         (b)   As used in this section, SCHOOL means any school
chartered under R.C. § 3301.16 and any nonchartered school that during the
preceding year filed with the Department of Education in compliance with
O.A.C. § 3301-35-08, a copy of the school's report for the parents of the
school's pupils certifying that the school meets state minimum standards for
nonchartered, nontax-supported schools and presents evidence of this filing
to the jurisdiction from which it is requesting the establishment of a school
zone. The term also includes a special elementary school that in writing
requests the County Engineer to create a school zone at the location of the
school. Upon receipt of such written request, the County Engineer shall
create a school zone at that location by erecting appropriate signs.



         (c)   As used in this section, SCHOOL ZONE means that
portion of a street or highway passing a school fronting upon the street or
highway that is encompassed by projecting the school property lines to the
fronting street or highway, and also includes that portion of a state
highway. Upon request from local authorities for streets and highways under
their jurisdiction and that portion of a state highway under the jurisdiction
of the Director of Transportation or a request from a County Engineer in the
case of a school zone for a special elementary school, the Director may
extend the traditional school zone boundaries. The distances in divisions
(B)(1)(c)1. through (B)(1)(c)3. below shall not exceed 300 feet per approach
per direction, and are bounded by whichever of the following distances or
combination thereof the Director approves as most appropriate:



            1.   The distance encompassed by projecting the
school building lines normal to the fronting highway and extending a distance
of 300 feet on each approach direction;



            2.   The distance encompassed by projecting the
school property lines intersecting the fronting highway and extending a
distance of 300 feet on each approach direction;



            3.   The distance encompassed by the special
marking of the pavement for a principal school pupil crosswalk plus a
distance of 300 feet on each approach direction of the highway.



         (d)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to
invalidate the Director's initial action on August 9, 1976, establishing all
school zones at the traditional school zone boundaries defined by projecting
school property lines, except when those boundaries are extended as provided
in divisions (B)(1)(a) and (B)(1)(c) of this section.



         (e)   As used in this division, CROSSWALK has the
meaning given that term in R.C. § 4511.01(LL)(2).



         (f)   The Director may, upon request by resolution of
the Legislative Authority and upon submission by the municipality of such
engineering, traffic, and other information as the Director considers
necessary, designate a school zone on any portion of a state route lying
within the municipality that includes a crosswalk customarily used by
children going to or leaving a school during recess and opening and closing
hours, whenever the distance, as measured in a straight line, from the school
property line nearest the crosswalk to the nearest point of a crosswalk is no
more than 1,320 feet. Such a school zone shall include the distance
encompassed by the crosswalk and extending 300 feet in each appropriate
direction of the state route.



         (g)   As used in this section, SPECIAL ELEMENTARY SCHOOL
means a school that meets all of the following:



            1.   It is not chartered and does not receive tax
revenue from any source.



            2.   It does not educate children beyond the
eighth grade.



            3.   It is located outside the limits of a
municipal corporation.



            4.   A majority of the total number of students
enrolled at the school are not related by blood.



            5.   The principal or other person in charge of
the special elementary school annually sends a report to the superintendent
of the school district in which the special elementary school is located
indicating the total number of students enrolled at the school, but otherwise
the principal or other person in charge does not report any other information
or data to the superintendent.



      (2)   Twenty-five miles per hour in all other portions of the
municipality, except on state routes outside business districts, through
highways outside business districts, and alleys;



      (3)   Thirty-five miles per hour on all state routes or
through highways within the municipality outside business districts, except
as provided in divisions (B)(4) and (B)(6) of this section;



      (4)   Fifty miles per hour on controlled-access highways and
expressways within the municipality;



      (5)   Fifty-five miles per hour on highways outside the
municipality, other than highways within island jurisdictions as provided in
division (B)(8) of this section, highways as provided in division (B)(9) of
this section, and highways, expressways and freeways as provided in divisions
(B)(12), (B)(13), (B)(14) and (B)(16) of this section;



      (6)   Fifty miles per hour on state routes within the
municipality outside urban districts unless a lower prima facie speed is
established as further provided in this section;



      (7)   Fifteen miles per hour on all alleys within the
municipality;



      (8)   Thirty-five miles per hour on highways outside the
municipality that are within an island jurisdiction;



      (9)   Sixty miles per hour on two-lane state routes outside
municipal corporations as established by the Director under R.C. §
4511.21(H)(2);



      (10)   Fifty-five miles per hour at all times on freeways with
paved shoulders inside the municipality, other than freeways as provided in
divisions (B)(14) and (B)(16) of this section;



      (11)   Fifty-five miles per hour at all times on freeways
outside the municipality, other than freeways as provided in divisions
(B)(14) and (B)(16) of this section;



      (12)   Sixty miles per hour for operators of any motor vehicle
at all times on all portions of rural divided highways;



      (13)   Sixty-five miles per hour for operators of any motor
vehicle at all times on all rural expressways without traffic control signals;



      (14)   Seventy miles per hour for operators of any motor
vehicle at all times on all rural freeways;



      (15)   Fifty-five miles per hour for operators of any motor
vehicle at all times on all portions of freeways in congested areas as
determined by the Director and that are part of the interstate system and are
located within a municipal corporation or within an interstate freeway
outerbelt;



      (16)   Sixty-five miles per hour for operators of any motor
vehicle at all times on all portions of freeways in urban areas as determined
by the Director and that are part of the interstate system and are part of an
interstate freeway outerbelt.



   (C)   It is prima facie unlawful for any person to exceed any of the
speed limitations in divisions (B)(1)(a), (B)(2), (B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(6),
(B)(7) and (B)(8) of this section or any declared or established pursuant to
this section by the Director or local authorities and it is unlawful for any
person to exceed any of the speed limitations in division (D) of this
section. No person shall be convicted of more than one violation of this
section for the same conduct, although violations of more than one provision
of this section may be charged in the alternative in a single affidavit.



   (D)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon a street or
highway as follows:



      (1)   At a speed exceeding 55 miles per hour, except upon a
two-lane state route as provided in division (B)(9) of this section and upon
a highway, expressway or freeway as provided in divisions (B)(12), (B)(13),
(B)(14) and (B)(16) of this section;



      (2)   At a speed exceeding 60 miles per hour upon a two-lane
state route as provided in division (B)(9) of this section and upon a highway
as provided in division (B)(12) of this section;



      (3)   At a speed exceeding 65 miles per hour upon an
expressway as provided in division (B)(13) of this section or upon a freeway
as provided in division (B)(16) of this section, except upon a freeway as
provided in division (B)(14) of this section;



      (4)   At a speed exceeding 70 miles per hour upon a freeway as
provided in division (B)(14) of this section;



      (5)   At a speed exceeding the posted speed limit upon a
highway, expressway or freeway for which the Director has determined and
declared a speed limit pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(I)(2) or (L)(2).



   (E)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(E), in every charge of violating
this section, the affidavit and warrant shall specify the time, place and
speed at which the defendant is alleged to have driven, and in charges made
in reliance upon division (C) of this section also the speed which division
(B)(1)(a), (B)(2), (B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(6), (B)(7) or (B)(8) of, or a limit
declared or established pursuant to, this section or R.C. § 4511.21 declares
is prima facie lawful at the time and place of such alleged violation, except
that in affidavits where a person is alleged to have driven at a greater
speed than will permit the person to bring the vehicle to stop within the
assured clear distance ahead, the affidavit and warrant need not specify the
speed at which the defendant is alleged to have driven.



   (F)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(F), when a speed in excess of both
a prima facie limitation and a limitation in division (D) of this section is
alleged, the defendant shall be charged in a single affidavit, alleging a
single act, with a violation indicated of both division (B)(1)(a), (B)(2),
(B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(6), (B)(7) or (B)(8) of this section, or of a limit
declared or established pursuant to this section or R.C. § 4511.21 by the
Director or local authorities, and of the limitation in division (D) of this
section. If the court finds a violation of division (B)(1)(a), (B)(2),
(B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(6), (B)(7) or (B)(8) of, or a limit declared or
established pursuant to, this section or R.C. § 4511.21 has occurred, it
shall enter a judgment of conviction under such division and dismiss the
charge under division (D) of this section. If it finds no violation of
division (B)(1)(a), (B)(2), (B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(6), (B)(7) or (B)(8) of, or a
limit declared or established pursuant to, this section or R.C. § 4511.21,
it shall then consider whether the evidence supports a conviction under
division (D) of this section.



   (G)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(G), points shall be assessed for a
violation of a limitation under division (D) of this section in accordance
with R.C. § 4510.036.



(R.C. § 4511.21(A) - (G))



   (H)   Whenever, in accordance with R.C. § 4511.21(H) through (N),
the maximum prima facie speed limitations as established herein have been
altered, either higher or lower, and the appropriate signs giving notice have
been erected as required, operators of motor vehicles shall be governed by
the speed limitations set forth on such signs. It is prima facie unlawful for
any person to exceed the speed limits posted upon such signs.



   (I)   As used in this section:



      COMMERCIAL BUS. Means a motor vehicle designed for carrying more
than nine passengers and used for the transportation of persons for
compensation.



      INTERSTATE SYSTEM. Has the same meaning as in 23 U.S.C. § 101.



      NONCOMMERCIAL BUS. Includes but is not limited to a school bus,
or a motor vehicle operated solely for the transportation of persons
associated with a charitable or nonprofit organization.



      OUTERBELT. A portion of a freeway that is part of the interstate
system and is located in the outer vicinity of a major municipal corporation
or group of municipal corporations, as designated by the Director.



      RURAL. Outside urbanized areas, as designated in accordance with
23 U.S.C. § 101, and outside of a business or urban district.



(R.C. § 4511.21(O))



   (J)   Speed limits for private roads and driveways.



      (1)   The owner of a private road or driveway located in a
private residential area containing 20 or more dwelling units may establish a
speed limit on the road or driveway by complying with all of the following
requirements:



         (a)   The speed limit is not less than 25 miles per hour
and is indicated by a sign that is in a proper position, is sufficiently
legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person, and meets the
specifications for the basic speed limit sign included in the manual adopted
by the Department of Transportation pursuant to R.C. § 4511.09;



         (b)   The owner has posted a sign at the entrance of the
private road or driveway that is in plain view and clearly informs persons
entering the road or driveway that they are entering private property, a
speed limit has been established for the road or driveway, and the speed
limit is enforceable by law enforcement officers under state law.



      (2)   No person shall operate a vehicle upon a private road or
driveway as provided in division (J)(1) of this section at a speed exceeding
any speed limit established and posted pursuant to division (J)(1).



      (3)   When a speed limit is established and posted in
accordance with division (J)(1) of this section, a law enforcement officer
may apprehend a person violating the speed limit of the residential area by
utilizing any of the means described in R.C. § 4511.091 or by any other
accepted method of determining the speed of a motor vehicle and may stop and
charge the person with exceeding the speed limit.



      (4)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.211(D), points shall be
assessed for violation of a speed limit established and posted in accordance
with division (J)(1) of this section in accordance with R.C. § 4510.036.



      (5)   As used in this division (J):



         OWNER. Includes but is not limited to a person who holds
title to the real property in fee simple, a condominium owners' association,
a property owners' association, a board of directors or trustees of a private
community, and a nonprofit corporation governing a private community.



         PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL AREA CONTAINING 20 OR MORE DWELLING
UNITS. Does not include a Chautauqua assembly as defined in R.C. § 4511.90.



(R.C. § 4511.211(A) - (E))



   (K)   Penalties.



      (1)   Divisions (A) through (I).



         (a)   A violation of any provision of divisions (A)
through (I) of this section is one of the following:



            1.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions
(K)(1)(a)2., (K)(1)(a)3., (K)(1)(b), and (K)(1)(c) of this section, a minor
misdemeanor;



            2.   If, within one year of the offense, the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or two
violations of any provision of divisions (A) through (I) of this section,
R.C. § 4511.21, or any provision of any other municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to any provision of that section, a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.  (Ord. 3-2011, passed 4-6-11)



            3.   If, within one year of the offense, the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more
violations of any provision of divisions (A) through (I) of this section,
R.C. § 4511.21, or any provision of any other municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to any provision of that section, a misdemeanor of
the third degree.  (Ord. 3-2011, passed 4-6-11)



         (b)   If the offender has not previously been convicted
of or pleaded to a violation of any provision of division (A) through (I) of
this section, R.C. § 4511.21, or any other municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to any provision of that section, and operated a
motor vehicle in excess of 20 miles per hour of the posted speed limit, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  (Ord. 3-2011, passed 4-6-11)



         (c)   Notwithstanding division (K)(1)(a) of this
section, if the offender operated a motor vehicle in a construction zone
where a sign was then posted in accordance with R.C. § 4511.98, the court,
in addition to all other penalties provided by law, shall impose upon the
offender a fine of two times the usual amount imposed for the violation. No
court shall impose a fine of two times the usual amount imposed for the
violation upon an offender if the offender alleges, in an affidavit filed
with the court prior to the offender’s sentencing, that the offender is
indigent and is unable to pay the fine imposed pursuant to this division and
if the court determines that the offender is an indigent person and unable to
pay the fine.



(R.C. § 4511.21(P))



      (2)   Division (J). A violation of division (J)(2) of this
section is one of the following:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions
(K)(2)(b) and (K)(2)(c) of this section, a minor misdemeanor;



         (b)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of
division (J)(2) of this section, R.C. § 4511.211(B), or any other municipal
ordinance that is substantially equivalent to that division, a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree;



         (c)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more
violations of division (J)(2) of this section, R.C. § 4511.211(B), or any
other municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to that division,
a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.211(F))



Statutory reference:



   Alteration of speed limits with approval of Director, see R.C. §
4511.21(H) - (N)



   Arrest pending warrant when radar, electrical or mechanical timing
device used to determine violation, see R.C. § 4511.091



§ 73.101  DUTIES UPON APPROACHING STATIONARY PUBLIC SAFETY, EMERGENCY, OR
ROAD SERVICE VEHICLE DISPLAYING FLASHING LIGHTS.



   (A)   The driver of a motor vehicle, upon approaching a stationary
public safety vehicle, emergency vehicle, road service vehicle, vehicle used
by the public utilities commission to conduct motor vehicle inspections in
accordance with R.C. §§ 4923.04 and 4923.06, or a highway maintenance
vehicle that is displaying the appropriate visual signals by means of
flashing, oscillating, or rotating lights, as prescribed in R.C. § 4513.17,
shall do either of the following:



      (1)   If the driver of the motor vehicle is traveling on a
highway that consists of at least two lanes that carry traffic in the same
direction of travel as that of the driver's motor vehicle, the driver shall
proceed with due caution and, if possible and with due regard to the road,
weather, and traffic conditions, shall change lanes into a lane that is not
adjacent to that of the stationary public safety vehicle, emergency vehicle,
road service vehicle, vehicle used by the public utilities commission to
conduct motor vehicle inspections in accordance with R.C. §§ 4923.04 and
4923.06, or a highway maintenance vehicle.



      (2)   If the driver is not traveling on a highway of a type
described in division (A)(1) of this section, or if the driver is traveling
on a highway of that type but it is not possible to change lanes or if to do
so would be unsafe, the driver shall proceed with due caution, reduce the
speed of the motor vehicle, and maintain a safe speed for the road, weather,
and traffic conditions.



   (B)   This section does not relieve the driver of a public safety
vehicle, emergency vehicle, road service vehicle, vehicle used by the public
utilities commission to conduct motor vehicle inspections in accordance with
R.C. §§ 4923.04 and 4923.06, or a highway maintenance vehicle from the duty
to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the
highway.



   (C)   No person shall fail to drive a motor vehicle in compliance
with division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section when so required by division
(A) of this section.



   (D)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division,
whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within
one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If,
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



      (2)   Notwithstanding R.C. § 2929.28, upon a finding that a
person operated a motor vehicle in violation of division (C) of this section,
the court, in addition to all other penalties provided by law, may impose a
fine of up to two times the usual amount imposed for the violation.



(Ord. 7-2015, passed 10-7-15)



§ 73.11  SLOW SPEED OR STOPPING.



   (A)   No person shall stop or operate a vehicle at such an
unreasonably slow speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable
movement of traffic, except when stopping or reduced speed is necessary for
safe operation or to comply with law.



   (B)   Whenever the Director of Transportation or local authorities
determine on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that slow
speeds on any part of a controlled-access highway, expressway, or freeway
consistently impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, the
Director or such local authority may declare a minimum speed limit below
which no person shall operate a motor vehicle, except when necessary for safe
operation or in compliance with the law.  No minimum speed limit established
hereunder shall be less than 30 miles per hour, greater than 50 miles per
hour, nor effective until the provisions of R.C. § 4511.21 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, relating to appropriate signs,
have been fulfilled and local authorities have obtained the approval of the
Director.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.22)



§ 73.12  EMERGENCY VEHICLES EXCEPTED FROM SPEED LIMITATION.



   The prima facie speed limitations set forth in R.C. § 4511.21 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance do not apply to emergency
vehicles or public safety vehicles when they are responding to emergency
calls and are equipped with and displaying at least one flashing, rotating,
or oscillating light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a
distance of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle, and when the drivers
thereof sound audible signals by bell, siren, or exhaust whistle. This
section does not relieve the driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety
vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons
using the street or highway.



(R.C. § 4511.24)



§ 73.13  STREET RACING DEFINED; PROHIBITED ON PUBLIC HIGHWAYS.



   (A)   As used in this section, STREET RACING means the operation of
two or more vehicles from a point side by side at accelerating speeds in a
competitive attempt to outdistance each other, or the operation of one or
more vehicles over a common selected course, from the same point to the same
point, wherein timing is made of the participating vehicles involving
competitive accelerations or speeds. Persons rendering assistance in any
manner to such competitive use of vehicles shall be equally charged as the
participants. The operation of two or more vehicles side by side either at
speeds in excess of prima facie lawful speeds established by R.C. §
4511.21(B)(1)(a) through (B)(8) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, or rapidly accelerating from a common starting point to a speed in
excess of such prima facie lawful speeds shall be prima facie evidence of
street racing.



   (B)   No person shall participate in street racing upon any public
road, street, or highway in this municipality.



   (C)   In a case involving a violation of this section, the trier of
fact, in determining whether the vehicle was being operated at an
unreasonably slow speed, shall consider the capabilities of the vehicle and
its operator.



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of street racing, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition to any other sanctions, the
court shall suspend the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident
operating privileges for not less than 30 days or more than three years. No
judge shall suspend the first 30 days of any suspension of an offender's
license, permit, or privilege imposed under this division.



(R.C. § 4511.251)



§ 73.14  SPEED REGULATIONS ON BRIDGES.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle over any bridge or
other elevated structure constituting a part of a highway at a speed which is
greater than the maximum speed that can be maintained with safety to such
bridge or structure, when such structure is posted with signs as provided in
this section.



      (2)   The Department of Transportation upon request from any
local authority shall, or upon its own initiative may, conduct an
investigation of any bridge or other elevated structure constituting a part
of a highway, and if it finds that such structure cannot with safety
withstand traffic traveling at the speed otherwise permissible under this
Traffic Code, the Department shall determine and declare the maximum speed of
traffic which such structure can withstand, and shall cause or permit
suitable signs stating such maximum speed to be erected and maintained at a
distance of a least 100 feet before each end of the structure.



      (3)   Upon the trial of any person charged with a violation of
this section, proof of such determination of the maximum speed by the
Department and the existence of such signs shall constitute prima facie
evidence of the maximum speed which can be maintained with safety to such
bridge or structure.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If within one year of
the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.23)



RESISTING OFFICER



§ 73.15  PROHIBITION AGAINST RESISTING OFFICER.



   (A)   No person shall resist, hinder, obstruct, or abuse any
sheriff, constable, or other official while that official is attempting to
arrest offenders under any provisions of this Title.  No person shall
interfere with any person charged under any provision of this Title with the
enforcement of the law relative to public highways.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.36)



   (C)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the
hindrance, obstruction, resistance, or interference alleged consisted of
constitutionally protected speech only.



§ 73.16  PRESENTING FALSE NAME OR INFORMATION TO OFFICER.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly present, display, or orally
communicate a false name, social security number, or date of birth to a law
enforcement officer who is in the process of issuing to the person a traffic
ticket or complaint.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.



(R.C. § 4513.361)



STOPPING AFTER ACCIDENT



§ 73.20  EXCHANGE OF IDENTITY AND VEHICLE REGISTRATION.



   (A)   (1)   In case of accident to or collision with persons or
property upon any of the public roads or highways, due to the driving or
operation thereon of any motor vehicle, the person driving or operating the
motor vehicle, having knowledge of the accident or collision, immediately
shall stop the driver's or operator's motor vehicle at the scene of the
accident or collision and shall remain at the scene of the accident or
collision until the driver or operator has given the driver's or operator's
name and address and, if the driver or operator is not the owner, the name
and address of the owner of that motor vehicle, together with the registered
number of that motor vehicle, to any person injured in the accident or
collision or to the operator, occupant, owner, or attendant of any motor
vehicle damaged in the accident or collision, or to any police officer at the
scene of the accident or collision.



      (2)   In the event the injured person is unable to comprehend
and record the information required to be given by this section, the other
driver involved in the accident or collision forthwith shall notify the
nearest police authority concerning the location of the accident or
collision, and the driver's name, address, and the registered number of the
motor vehicle the driver was operating, and then remain at the scene of the
accident or collision until a police officer arrives, unless removed from the
scene by an emergency vehicle operated by a political subdivision or an
ambulance.



      (3)   If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or
unattended motor vehicle, the operator who collides with the motor vehicle
shall securely attach the information required to be given in this section,
in writing, to a conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or unattended
motor vehicle.



   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is
guilty of failure to stop after an accident, a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the accident or collision results in serious physical harm or
death to a person, failure to stop after an accident is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. The court, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a class five
suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(5). No
judge shall suspend the first six months of suspension of an offender’s
license, permit, or privilege required by this division.



      (2)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of
financial responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails
to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any
other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to
§ 130.99(G) or R.C. § 2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000
for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the
direct and proximate result of the offender’s operation of the motor
vehicle before, during, or after committing the offense charged under this
section.



(R.C. § 4549.02)



§ 73.21  ACCIDENT INVOLVING INJURY TO PERSONS OR PROPERTY.



   (A)   (1)   In case of accident or collision resulting in injury
or damage to persons or property upon any public or private property other
than public roads or highways, due to the driving or operation thereon of any
motor vehicle, the person driving or operating the motor vehicle, having
knowledge of the accident or collision, shall stop, and, upon request of the
person injured or damaged, or any other person, shall give that person the
driver's or operator's name and address, and, if the driver or operator is
not the owner, the name and address of the owner of that motor vehicle,
together with the registered number of that motor vehicle, and, if available,
exhibit the driver's or operator's driver's or commercial driver's license.



      (2)   If the owner or person in charge of the damaged property
is not furnished such information, the driver of the motor vehicle involved
in the accident or collision, within 24 hours after the accident or
collision, shall forward to the police department of the municipality the
same information required to be given to the owner or person in control of
the damaged property and give the date, time, and location of the accident or
collision.



      (3)   If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or
unattended motor vehicle, the operator who collides with the motor vehicle
shall securely attach the information required to be given in this section,
in writing, to a conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or unattended
motor vehicle.



   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is
guilty of failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident, a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the accident or collision results in serious physical
harm or death to a person, failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. The court, in addition
to any other penalties provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a
class five suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial
driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or
nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. §
4510.02(A)(5). No judge shall suspend the first six months of suspension of
an offender’s license, permit, or privilege required by this division.



      (2)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of
financial responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails
to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any
other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to
§ 130.99(G) or R.C. § 2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000
for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the
direct and proximate result of the offender’s operation of the motor
vehicle before, during, or after committing the offense charged under this
section.



(R.C. § 4549.021)



§ 73.22  ACCIDENT INVOLVING DAMAGE TO  REALTY.



   (A)   (1)   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident
resulting in damage to real property, or personal property attached to real
property, legally upon or adjacent to a public road or highway immediately
shall stop and take reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person
in charge of the property of that fact, of the driver's name and address, and
of the registration number of vehicle the driver is driving and, upon request
and if available, shall exhibit the driver's driver's or commercial driver's
license.



      (2)   If the owner or person in charge of the property cannot
be located after reasonable search, the driver of the vehicle involved in the
accident resulting in damage to the property, within 24 hours after accident,
shall forward to the police department of the municipality the same
information required to be given to the owner or person in control of the
property and give the location of the accident and a description of the
damage insofar as it is known.



   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is
guilty of failure to stop after an accident involving the property of others,
a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (2)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of
financial responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails
to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any
other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to
§ 130.99(G) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any
economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and
proximate result of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before,
during, or after committing the offense charged under this section.



(R.C. § 4549.03)



§ 73.23  FAILURE TO REPORT ACCIDENT.



   (A)   No person shall fail to report a motor vehicle accident as
required under state or local law.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4509.74)



CHAPTER 74:  EQUIPMENT AND LOADS



Section



Equipment



   74.01   Unsafe vehicles, prohibition against operation



   74.02   Bumpers on motor vehicles



   74.03   Lighted lights required



   74.04   Headlights



   74.05   Tail lights and illumination of rear license plate



   74.06   Red reflectors required



   74.07   Safety lighting of commercial vehicles



   74.08   Stoplight regulations



   74.09   Obscured lights on vehicles



   74.10   Red light or flag required



   74.11   Lights on parked vehicles



   74.12   Lights and emblem on slow-moving vehicles; lights and
reflectors on multi-wheel agricultural tractors or farm machinery



   74.13   Spotlight and auxiliary driving lights



   74.14   Cowl, fender, and back-up lights



   74.15   Two lights displayed



   74.16   Headlights required



   74.17   Lights of less intensity



   74.18   Number of lights permitted; red and flashing lights



   74.19   Standards for lights on snow removal equipment and oversize
vehicles



   74.20   Flashing lights permitted for certain types of vehicles



   74.21   Lights and sign on transportation for preschool children



   74.22   Focus and aim of headlights



   74.23   Brake equipment; specifications



   74.24   Brake fluid



   74.25   Minimum standards for brakes and components



   74.26   Horns, sirens, and warning devices



   74.27   Mufflers; excessive smoke or gas



   74.28   Rearview mirrors



   74.29   Windshields and wipers



   74.30   Solid tire requirements



   74.31   Requirements for safety glass in motor vehicles; use of
tinted glass or reflectorized material



   74.32   Directional signals



   74.33   Installation and sale of seat safety belts required;
definition



   74.34   Requirements for extra signal equipment



   74.35   Display of warning devices on disabled vehicles



   74.36   Requirements for vehicles transporting explosives



   74.37   Studded tires; seasonal use permitted



   74.38   Air bags



   74.39   Safety inspection decals for buses



Loads



   74.40   Permit required to exceed load limits



   74.41   Limitation of load extension on left side of vehicle



   74.42   All loads shall be properly secured



   74.43   Towing requirements; exception to size and weight
restrictions



   74.44   Weighing of vehicle; removal of excess load



   74.45   Operation of vehicle exceeding weight limits prohibited



   74.46   Load limits



   74.47   Maximum width, height, and length



   74.48   Statement of gross vehicle weight



   74.49   Wheel protectors required on heavy commercial vehicles



   74.50   Liability for damages; prosecution; application of monies



   74.51   Weight exceptions for certain vehicles



Commercial, Heavy and Public Vehicles



   74.60   Motor transportation companies and motor carriers



   74.61   Reduction of weight and speed during times of thaws and
moisture



   74.62   Classification of roads



   74.63   Rules and regulations



   74.64   Notice of arrest



   74.65   Fuel use permit and identification device



   74.66   Unlawful operation; Tax Commissioner to be notified



   74.67   Signs



   74.68   Exceptions



Statutory reference:



   Exemption of certain vehicles from emission, noise control and fuel
standards, see R.C. § 4513.41



   Exemption of collector's or historical vehicles from equipment
standards, see R.C. § 4513.38



   Motorcycles, protective eye devices required for operators and
passengers; helmets required for persons under 18 years of age, see O.A.C. §
4501-17-01



   Notice of arrest of certain commercial drivers, see R.C. § 5577.14



   Snowmobiles and all-purpose vehicles, equipment, see O.A.C. Chapter
4501-29



   Vehicle lighting, see O.A.C. Chapter 4501-15



EQUIPMENT



§ 74.01  UNSAFE VEHICLES, PROHIBITION AGAINST OPERATION.



   (A)   No person shall drive or move, or cause or knowingly permit to
be driven or moved, on any highway any vehicle or combination of vehicles
which is in such unsafe condition as to endanger any person.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.02(A), (H))



§ 74.02  BUMPERS ON MOTOR VEHICLES.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING means the manufacturer's gross
vehicle weight rating established for that vehicle.



      MANUFACTURER has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.



      MULTIPURPOSE PASSENGER VEHICLE means a motor vehicle with motive
power, except a motorcycle, designed to carry ten persons or less, that is
constructed either on a truck chassis or with special features for occasional
off-road operation.



      PASSENGER CAR means any motor vehicle with motive power, designed
for carrying ten persons or less, except a multipurpose passenger vehicle or
motorcycle.



      TRUCK means every motor vehicle, except trailers and
semitrailers, designed and used to carry property and having a gross vehicle
weight rating of 10,000 pounds or less.



   (B)   Rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety, in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 119, shall govern the maximum bumper height or, in the
absence of bumpers and in cases where bumper height have been lowered or
modified, the maximum height to the bottom of the frame rail of any passenger
car, multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck.



   (C)   No person shall operate upon a street or highway any passenger
car, multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck registered in this state that
does not conform to the requirements of this section or any applicable rule
adopted pursuant to R.C. § 4513.021.



   (D)   No person shall modify any motor vehicle registered in this
state in such a manner as to cause the vehicle body or chassis to come in
contact with the ground, expose the fuel tank to damage from collision, or
cause the wheels to come in contact with the body under normal operation, and
no person shall disconnect any part of the original suspension system of the
vehicle to defeat the safe operation of that system.



   (E)   Nothing contained in this section or in the rules adopted
pursuant to R.C. § 4513.021 shall be construed to prohibit either of the
following:



      (1)   The installation upon a passenger car, multipurpose
passenger vehicle or truck registered in this state of heavy duty equipment,
including shock absorbers and overload springs:



      (2)   The operation on a street or highway of a passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle, or truck registered in this state with normal
wear to the suspension system if the normal wear does not adversely affect
the control of the vehicle.



   (F)   This section and the rules adopted pursuant to R.C. §
4513.021 do not apply to any specially designed or modified passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle, or truck when operated off a street or
highway in races and similar events.



   (G)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.021)



Statutory reference:



   Maximum height on bumpers, see O.A.C. Chapter 4501-43



§ 74.03  LIGHTED LIGHTS REQUIRED.



   (A)   Every vehicle, other than a motorized bicycle, operated upon a
street or highway within this state shall display lighted lights and
illuminating devices as required by R.C. §§ 4513.04 to 4513.37 during all
of the following times:



      (1)   The time from sunset to sunrise;



      (2)   At any other time when, due to insufficient natural
light or unfavorable atmospheric conditions, persons, vehicles, and
substantial objects on the highway are not discernible at a distance of 1,000
feet ahead;



      (3)   At any time when the windshield wipers of the vehicle
are in use because of precipitation on the windshield.



   (B)   Every motorized bicycle shall display at such times lighted
lights meeting the rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety under
R.C. § 4511.521. No motor vehicle, during any time specified in this
section, shall be operated upon a street or highway within this state using
only parking lights as illumination.



   (C)   Whenever in such sections a requirement is declared as to the
distance from which certain lamps and devices shall render objects visible,
or within which such lamps or devices shall be visible, such distance shall
be measured upon a straight level unlighted highway under normal atmospheric
conditions unless a different condition is expressly stated.



   (D)   Whenever in such sections a requirement is declared as to the
mounted height of lights or devices, it shall mean from the center of such
light or device to the level ground upon which the vehicle stands.



   (E)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a vehicle being operated upon
a street or highway within this state to stop the vehicle solely because the
officer observes that a violation of division (A)(3) of this section has been
or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation,
or summons for a violation of that division, or causing the arrest of or
commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation of that division.



   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.03)



§ 74.04  HEADLIGHTS.



   (A)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, shall
be equipped with at least two headlights with at least one near each side of
the front of the motor vehicle.



      (2)   Every motorcycle shall be equipped with at least one and
not more than two headlights.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.04)



§ 74.05  TAIL LIGHTS AND ILLUMINATION OF REAR LICENSE PLATE.



   (A)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, pole
trailer or vehicle which is being drawn at the end of a train of vehicles
shall be equipped with at least one tail light mounted on the rear which,
when lighted, shall emit a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to
the rear, provided that in the case of a train of vehicles only the tail
light on the rearmost vehicle need be visible from the distance specified.



      (2)   Either a tail light or a separate light shall be so
constructed and placed as to illuminate with a white light the rear
registration plate, when such registration plate is required, and render it
legible from a distance of 50 feet to the rear. Any tail light, together with
any separate light for illuminating the rear registration plate, shall be so
wired as to be lighted whenever the headlights or auxiliary driving lights
are lighted, except where separate lighting systems are provided for trailers
for the purpose of illuminating such registration plate.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.05)



§ 74.06  RED REFLECTORS REQUIRED.



   (A)   (1)   Every new motor vehicle sold after September 6, 1941,
and operated on a highway, other than a commercial tractor to which a trailer
or semitrailer is attached, shall carry at the rear, either as a part of the
tail lamps or separately, two red reflectors meeting the requirements of this
section, except that vehicles of the type mentioned in R.C. § 4513.07 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance shall be equipped with
reflectors as required by the regulations provided for in that section.



      (2)   Every such reflector shall be of such size and
characteristics and so maintained as to be visible at night from all
distances within 300 feet to 50 feet from such vehicle.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.06)



§ 74.07  SAFETY LIGHTING OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.



   (A)   (1)   When the Director of Public Safety prescribes and
promulgates regulations relating to clearance lights, marker lights,
reflectors and stop lights on buses, trucks, commercial tractors, trailers,
semitrailers and pole trailers, when operated upon any highway, these
vehicles shall be equipped as required by such regulations, and such
equipment shall be lighted at all times mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, except that clearance lights
and side marker lights need not be lighted on any such vehicle when it is
operated within the municipality where there is sufficient light to reveal
any person or substantial object on the highway at a distance of 500 feet.



      (2)   Such equipment shall be in addition to all other lights
specifically required by R.C. §§ 4513.03 through 4513.16, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinances.



      (3)   Vehicles operated under the jurisdiction of the Public
Utilities Commission are not subject to this section.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.07)



§ 74.08  STOPLIGHT REGULATIONS.



   (A)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, and pole
trailer when operated upon a highway shall be equipped with two or more stop
lights, except that passenger cars manufactured or assembled prior to January
1, 1967, motorcycles, and motor-driven cycles shall be equipped with at least
one stop light. Stop lights shall be mounted on the rear of the vehicle,
actuated upon application of the service brake, and may be incorporated with
other rear lights. Such stop lights when actuated shall emit a red light
visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear; provided that in the case of
a train of vehicles only the stop lights on the rearmost vehicle need be
visible from the distance specified.



      (2)   Such stop lights when actuated shall give a steady
warning light to the rear of a vehicle or train of vehicles to indicate the
intention of the operator to diminish the speed of or stop a vehicle or train
of vehicles.



      (3)   When stop lights are used as required by this section,
they shall be constructed or installed so as to provide adequate and reliable
illumination and shall conform to the appropriate rules and regulations
established under R.C. § 4513.19.



      (4)   Historical motor vehicles as defined in R.C. §
4503.181, not originally manufactured with stop lights, are not subject to
this section.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.071)



§ 74.09  OBSCURED LIGHTS ON VEHICLES.



   Whenever motor and other vehicles are operated in combination during
the time that lights are required, any light, except tail lights, which by
reason of its location on a vehicle of the combination would be obscured by
another vehicle of the combination, need not be lighted, but this section
does not affect the requirement that lighted clearance lights be displayed on
the front of the foremost vehicle required to have clearance lights or that
all lights required on the rear of the rearmost vehicle of any combination
shall be lighted.



(R.C. § 4513.08)



§ 74.10  RED LIGHT OR FLAG REQUIRED.



   (A)   Whenever the load upon any vehicle extends to the rear four
feet or more beyond the bed or body of this vehicle, there shall be displayed
at the extreme rear end of the load, at the times specified in R.C. §
4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, a red light or
lantern plainly visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the sides and
rear. The red light or lantern required by this section is in addition to the
red rear light required upon every vehicle. At any other time there shall be
displayed at the extreme rear end of such load a red flag or cloth not less
than 16 inches square.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.09)



§ 74.11  LIGHTS ON PARKED VEHICLES.



   (A)   Except in case of an emergency, whenever a vehicle is parked
or stopped upon a roadway open to traffic or a shoulder adjacent thereto,
whether attended or unattended, during the times mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, such vehicle shall be
equipped with one or more lights which shall exhibit a white or amber light
on the roadway side visible from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such
vehicle, and a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear. No
lights need be displayed upon any such vehicle when it is stopped or parked
within the municipality where there is sufficient light to reveal any person
or substantial object within a distance of 500 feet upon such highway.  Any
lighted headlights upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed.



(R.C. § 4513.10) 



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.99)



§ 74.12  LIGHTS AND EMBLEM ON SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES; LIGHTS AND REFLECTORS
ON MULTI-WHEEL AGRICULTURAL TRACTORS OR FARM MACHINERY.



   (A)   All vehicles other than bicycles, including animal-drawn
vehicles and vehicles referred to in R.C. § 4513.02(G), not specifically
required to be equipped with lamps or other lighting devices by R.C. §§
4513.03 through 4513.10, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinances, shall, at the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, be equipped with at least one
lamp displaying a white light visible from a distance of not less than 1,000
feet to the front of the vehicle and also shall be equipped with two lamps
displaying red light visible from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet to
the rear of the vehicle, or as an alternative, one lamp displaying a red
light visible from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the rear and two
red reflectors visible from all distances of 600 feet to 100 feet to the rear
when illuminated by the lawful lower beams of headlamps. Lamps and reflectors
required by this section shall meet standards adopted by the Director of
Public Safety.



   (B)   All boat trailers, farm machinery and other machinery,
including all road construction machinery, upon a street or highway, except
when being used in actual construction and maintenance work in an area
guarded by a flagperson, or where flares are used, or when operating or
traveling within the limits of a construction area designated by the Director
of Transportation, a city or village engineer, or the county engineer of the
several counties, when such construction area is marked in accordance with
requirements of the Director and the Manual and Specifications for a Uniform
System of Traffic-Control Devices, as set forth in R.C. § 4511.09, which is
designed for operation at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less, shall be
operated at a speed not exceeding 25 miles per hour, and shall display a
triangular slow-moving vehicle emblem (SMV). The emblem shall be mounted so
as to be visible from a distance of not less than 500 feet to the rear. The
Director of Public Safety shall adopt standards and specifications for the
design and position of mounting the SMV emblem. The standards and
specifications for SMV emblems referred to in this section shall correlate
with and, so far as possible, conform with those approved by the American
Society of Agricultural Engineers. A unit of farm machinery that is designed
by its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour may
be operated on a street or highway at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour
provided it is operated in accordance with this section. As used in this
division, "machinery" does not include any vehicle designed to be drawn by an
animal.



   (C)   The use of the SMV emblem shall be restricted to animal-drawn
vehicles and to the slow-moving vehicles specified in division (B) of this
section operating or traveling within the limits of the highway. Its use on
slow-moving vehicles being transported upon other types of vehicles or on any
other type of vehicle or stationary object on the highway is prohibited.



   (D)   (1)   No person shall sell, lease, rent or operate any boat
trailer, farm machinery or other machinery defined as a slow-moving vehicle
in division (B) of this section, except those units designed to be completely
mounted on a primary power unit, which is manufactured or assembled on or
after April 1, 1966, unless the vehicle is equipped with a slow-moving
vehicle emblem mounting device as specified in division (B) of this section.



      (2)   No person shall sell, lease, rent, or operate on a
street or highway any unit of farm machinery that is designed by its
manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour unless the
unit displays a slow-moving vehicle emblem as specified in division (B) of
this section and a speed identification symbol that meets the specifications
contained in the American Society of Agricultural Engineers Standard
ANSI/ASAE S584 JAN2005, Agricultural Equipment: Speed Identification Symbol
(SIS).



   (E)   Any boat trailer, farm machinery or other machinery defined as
a slow-moving vehicle in division (B) of this section, in addition to the use
of the slow-moving vehicle emblem, and any unit of farm machinery that is
designed by its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per
hour, in addition to the display of a speed identification symbol, may be
equipped with a red flashing light that shall be visible from a distance of
not less than 1,000 feet to the rear at all times specified in R.C. §
4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance. When a
double-faced light is used, it shall display amber light to the front and red
light to the rear. In addition to the lights described in this division, farm
machinery and motor vehicles escorting farm machinery may display a flashing,
oscillating or rotating amber light, as permitted by R.C. § 4513.17 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and also may display
simultaneously flashing turn signals or warning lights, as permitted by that
section.



   (F)   (1)   Every animal-drawn vehicle upon a street or highway
shall at all times be equipped in one of the following ways:



         (a)   With a slow-moving vehicle emblem complying with
division (B) of this section;



         (b)   With alternate reflective material complying with
rules adopted under division (F)(2) below;



         (c)   With both a slow-moving vehicle emblem and
alternate reflective material as specified in division (F)(2) below.



      (2)   Rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety, subject
to R.C. Chapter 119, establishing standards and specifications for the
position of mounting of the alternate reflective material authorized by this
division, permit, as a minimum, the alternate reflective material to be
black, gray, or silver in color. The alternate reflective material shall be
mounted on the animal-drawn vehicle so as to be visible, at all times
specified in R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, from a distance of not less than 500 feet to the rear when
illuminated by the lawful lower beams of headlamps.



   (G)   (1)   Every unit of farm machinery that is designed by its
manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour shall
display a slow-moving vehicle emblem and a speed identification symbol that
meets the specifications contained in the American Society of Agricultural
Engineers Standard ANSI/ASAE S584 JAN2005, Agricultural Equipment: Speed
Identification Symbol (SIS) when the unit is operated upon a street or
highway, irrespective of the speed at which the unit is operated on the
street or highway. The speed identification symbol shall indicate the maximum
speed in miles per hour at which the unit of farm machinery is designed by
its manufacturer to operate. The display of the speed identification symbol
shall be in accordance with the standard prescribed in this division.



      (2)   If an agricultural tractor that is designed by its
manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour is being
operated on a street or highway at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour and
is towing, pulling, or otherwise drawing a unit of farm machinery, the unit
of farm machinery shall display a slow-moving vehicle emblem and a speed
identification symbol that is the same as the speed identification symbol
that is displayed on the agricultural tractor.



   (H)   When an agricultural tractor that is designed by its
manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour is being
operated on a street or highway at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour,
the operator shall possess some documentation published or provided by the
manufacturer indicating the maximum speed in miles per hour at which the
manufacturer designed the agricultural tractor to operate.



   (I)   As used in this section, BOAT TRAILER means any vehicle
designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage
and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or
highway for a distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of 25 miles
per hour or less.



(R.C. § 4513.11)



   (J)   Lights and reflector requirements for multi-wheel agricultural
tractors or farm machinery.



      (1)   (a)   Every multi-wheel agricultural tractor whose
model year was 2001 or earlier, when being operated or traveling on a street
or highway at the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, at a minimum shall be equipped with and
display reflectors and illuminated amber lamps so that the extreme left and
right projections of the tractor are indicated by flashing lamps displaying
amber light, visible to the front and the rear; by amber reflectors, all
visible to the front; and by red reflectors, all visible to the rear.



         (b)   The lamps displaying amber light need not flash
simultaneously and need not flash in conjunction with any directional signals
of the tractor.



         (c)   The lamps and reflectors required by division
(J)(1)(a) of this section and their placement shall meet standards and
specifications contained in rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 119. The rules governing the amber lamps, amber
reflectors, and red reflectors and their placement shall correlate with and,
as far as possible, conform with paragraphs 4.1.4.1, 4.1.7.1, and 4.1.7.2,
respectively, of the American Society of Agricultural Engineers Standard
ANSI/ASAE S279.10 OCT98, Lighting and Marking of Agricultural Equipment on
Highways.



      (2)   Every unit of farm machinery whose model year was 2002
or later, when being operated or traveling on a street or highway at the
times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, shall be equipped with and display markings and illuminated lamps
that meet or exceed the lighting, illumination, and marking standards and
specifications that are applicable to that type of farm machinery for the
unit's model year specified in the American Society of Agricultural Engineers
Standard ANSI/ASAE S279.11 APR01, Lighting and Marking of Agricultural
Equipment on Highways, or any subsequent revisions of that standard.



      (3)   The lights and reflectors required by division (J)(1) of
this section are in addition to the slow-moving vehicle emblem and lights
required or permitted by R.C. § 4513.11 or 4513.17, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, to be displayed on farm machinery being
operated or traveling on a street or highway.



      (4)   No person shall operate any unit of farm machinery on a
street or highway or cause any unit of farm machinery to travel on a street
or highway in violation of divisions (J)(1) or (J)(2) of this section.



(R.C. § 4513.111)



   (K)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. §§ 4513.11(I), 4513.111(E))



Statutory reference:



   Slow-moving vehicle emblem, see O.A.C. Chapter 4501-13



§ 74.13  SPOTLIGHT AND AUXILIARY DRIVING LIGHTS.



   (A)   (1)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than
one spotlight and every lighted spotlight shall be so aimed and used upon
approaching another vehicle that no part of the high-intensity portion of the
beam will be directed to the left of the prolongation of the extreme left
side of the vehicle, nor more than 100 feet ahead of the vehicle.



      (2)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than
three auxiliary driving lights mounted on the front of the vehicle. Any such
lights which do not conform to the specifications for auxiliary driving
lights and the regulations for their use prescribed by the Director of Public
Safety shall not be used.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.12)



§ 74.14  COWL, FENDER, AND BACK-UP LIGHTS.



   (A)   (1)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with side cowl or
fender lights which shall emit a white or amber light without glare.



      (2)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with lights on each
side thereof which shall emit a white or amber light without glare.



      (3)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with back-up lights,
either separately or in combination with another light. No back-up lights
shall be continuously lighted when the motor vehicle is in forward motion.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.13)



§ 74.15  TWO LIGHTS DISPLAYED.



   (A)   At all times mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, at least two lighted lights shall be
displayed, one near each side of the front of every motor vehicle, except
when such vehicle is parked subject to the regulations governing lights on
parked vehicles.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.14)



§ 74.16  HEADLIGHTS REQUIRED.



   (A)   Whenever a motor vehicle is being operated on a roadway or
shoulder adjacent thereto during the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the driver shall use a
distribution of light, or composite beam, directed high enough and of
sufficient intensity to reveal persons, vehicles and substantial objects at a
safe distance in advance of the vehicle, subject to the following
requirements:



      (1)   Whenever the driver of a vehicle approaches an oncoming
vehicle, such driver shall use a distribution of light, or composite beam, so
aimed that the glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of the oncoming
driver.



      (2)   Every new motor vehicle registered in this state which
has multiple-beam road lighting equipment shall be equipped with a beam
indicator, which shall be lighted whenever the uppermost distribution of
light from the headlights is in use, and shall not otherwise be lighted. This
indicator shall be so designed and located that, when lighted, it will be
readily visible without glare to the driver of the vehicle.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.15)



§ 74.17  LIGHTS OF LESS INTENSITY.



   (A)   Any motor vehicle may be operated under the conditions
specified in R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance when it is equipped with two lighted lights upon the front thereof
capable of revealing persons and substantial objects 75 feet ahead, in lieu
of lights required in R.C. § 4513.14 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, provided that such vehicle shall not be operated at a speed in
excess of 20 miles per hour.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.16)



§ 74.18  NUMBER OF LIGHTS PERMITTED; RED AND FLASHING LIGHTS.



   (A)   Whenever a motor vehicle equipped with headlights is also
equipped with any auxiliary lights or spotlight or any other light on the
front thereof projecting a beam of an intensity greater than 300 candlepower,
not more than a total of five of any such lights on the front of a vehicle
shall be lighted at any one time when the vehicle is upon a highway.



   (B)   Any lighted light or illuminating device upon a motor vehicle,
other than headlights, spotlights, signal lights, or auxiliary driving
lights, that projects a beam of light of an intensity greater than 300
candlepower shall be so directed that no part of the beam will strike the
level of the roadway on which the vehicle stands at a distance of more than
75 feet from the vehicle.



   (C)   (1)   Flashing lights are prohibited on motor vehicles,
except as a means for indicating a right or a left turn, or in the presence
of vehicular traffic hazard requiring unusual care in approaching, or
overtaking or passing. This prohibition does not apply to emergency vehicles,
road service vehicles servicing or towing a disabled vehicle, rural mail
delivery vehicles, vehicles as provided in R.C. § 4513.182 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, highway maintenance vehicles,
funeral hearses, funeral escort vehicles, and similar equipment operated by
the Department or local authorities, which shall be equipped with and
display, when used on a street or highway for the special purpose
necessitating such lights, a flashing, oscillating or rotating amber light,
but shall not display a flashing, oscillating or rotating light of any other
color, nor to vehicles or machinery permitted by R.C. § 4513.11 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to have a flashing red light.



      (2)   When used on a street or highway, farm machinery and
vehicles escorting farm machinery may be equipped with and display a
flashing, oscillating or rotating amber light, and the prohibition contained
in division (C)(1) of this section does not apply to such machinery or
vehicles. Farm machinery may also display the lights described in R.C. §
4513.11 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



   (D)   Except a person operating a public safety vehicle, as defined
in R.C. § 4511.01(E), or a school bus, no person shall operate, move, or
park upon or permit to stand within the right-of-way of any public street or
highway any vehicle or equipment that is equipped with and displaying a
flashing red or a flashing combination red and white light, or an oscillating
or rotating red light, or a combination red and white oscillating or rotating
light; and except a public law enforcement officer, or other person sworn to
enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state, operating a public safety
vehicle when on duty, no person shall operate, move or park upon or permit to
stand within the right-of-way of any street or highway any vehicle or
equipment that is equipped with, or upon which is mounted, and displaying a
flashing blue or a flashing combination blue and white light, or an
oscillating or rotating blue light, or a combination blue and white
oscillating or rotating light.



   (E)   This section does not prohibit the use of warning lights
required by law or the simultaneous flashing of turn signals on disabled
vehicles or on vehicles being operated in unfavorable atmospheric conditions
in order to enhance their visibility. This section also does not prohibit the
simultaneous flashing of turn signals or warning lights whether on farm
machinery or vehicles escorting farm machinery when used on a street or
highway.



(R.C. § 4513.17)



   (F)   (1)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a motor
vehicle operated by a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner's investigator may
be equipped with a flashing, oscillating or rotating red or blue light and
siren, whistle or bell capable of emitting sound audible under normal
conditions from a distance of not less than 500 feet. Such a vehicle may
display the flashing, oscillating or rotating red or blue light and may give
the audible signal of the siren, whistle or bell only when responding to a
fatality or a fatal motor vehicle accident on a street or highway and only at
those locations where the stoppage of traffic impedes the ability of the
coroner, deputy coroner or coroner's investigator to arrive at the site of
the fatality.



      (2)   This division (F) does not relieve the coroner, deputy
coroner or coroner's investigator operating a motor vehicle from the duty to
drive with due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the
highway.



(R.C. § 4513.171)



   (G)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. §§ 4513.17(F), 4513.171(B))



§ 74.19  STANDARDS FOR LIGHTS ON SNOW REMOVAL EQUIPMENT AND OVERSIZE
VEHICLES.



   (A)   It is unlawful to operate snow removal equipment on a highway
unless the lights thereon comply with and are lighted when and as required by
the standards and specifications adopted by the Director of Transportation
pursuant to R.C. § 4513.18.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.18)



§ 74.20  FLASHING LIGHTS PERMITTED FOR CERTAIN TYPES OF VEHICLES.



   Rural mail delivery vehicles, state highway survey vehicles, and
funeral escort vehicles are permitted to use flashing lights.



(R.C. § 4513.181)



§ 74.21  LIGHTS AND SIGN ON TRANSPORTATION FOR PRESCHOOL CHILDREN.



   (A)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle owned, leased, or
hired by a nursery school, kindergarten, or day-care center, while
transporting preschool children to or from such an institution unless the
motor vehicle is equipped with and displaying two amber flashing lights
mounted on a bar attached to the top of the vehicle, and a sign bearing the
designation "caution — children," which shall be attached to the bar
carrying the amber flashing lights in such a manner as to be legible to
persons both in front of and behind the vehicle.  The lights and sign shall
meet standards and specifications adopted by the Director of Public Safety.



   (B)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle displaying the lights
and sign required by this section for any purpose other than the
transportation of preschool children as provided in this section.



(R.C. § 4513.182) 



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.99)



§ 74.22  FOCUS AND AIM OF HEADLIGHTS.



   (A)   No person shall use any lights mentioned in R.C. §§ 4513.03
through 4513.18, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, upon
any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer unless these lights are equipped,
mounted and adjusted as to focus and aim in accordance with regulations which
are prescribed by the Director of Public Safety.



   (B)   The headlights on any motor vehicle shall comply with the
headlamp color requirements contained in Federal Motor Vehicle Safety
Standard Number 108, 49 C.F.R. § 571.108. No person shall operate a motor
vehicle in violation of this division.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.19)



§ 74.23  BRAKE EQUIPMENT; SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   The following requirements govern as to brake equipment on
vehicles:



      (1)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, when
operated upon a highway shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the
movement of and to stop and hold the motor vehicle, including two separate
means of applying the brakes, each of which means shall be effective to apply
the brakes to at least two wheels. If these two separate means of applying
the brakes are connected in any way, then on such motor vehicles,
manufactured or assembled after January 1, 1942, they shall be so constructed
that failure of any one part of the operating mechanism shall not leave the
motor vehicle without brakes on at least two wheels.



      (2)   Every motorcycle, when operated upon a highway shall be
equipped with at least one adequate brake, which may be operated by hand or
by foot.



      (3)   Every motorized bicycle shall be equipped with brakes
meeting the rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety under R.C. §
4511.521.



      (4)   When operated upon the highways, the following vehicles
shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop
and to hold the vehicle, designed to be applied by the driver of the towing
motor vehicle from its cab, and also designed and connected so that, in case
of a breakaway of the towed vehicle, the brakes shall be automatically
applied:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this section,
every trailer or semitrailer, except a pole trailer, with an empty weight of
2,000 pounds or more, manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1942;



         (b)   Every manufactured home or travel trailer with an
empty weight of 2,000 pounds or more, manufactured or assembled on or after
January 1, 2001.



      (5)   Every watercraft trailer with a gross weight or
manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of 3,000 pounds or more that is
manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 2008, shall have separate
brakes equipped with hydraulic surge or electrically operated brakes on two
wheels.



      (6)   In any combination of motor-drawn trailers or
semitrailers equipped with brakes, means shall be provided for applying the
rearmost brakes in approximate synchronism with the brakes on the towing
vehicle, and developing the required braking effort on the rearmost wheels at
the fastest rate; or means shall be provided for applying braking effort
first on the rearmost brakes; or both of the above means, capable of being
used alternatively, may be employed.



      (7)   Every vehicle and combination of vehicles, except
motorcycles and motorized bicycles, and except trailers and semitrailers of a
gross weight of less than 2,000 pounds, and pole trailers, shall be equipped
with parking brakes adequate to hold the vehicle on any grade on which it is
operated, under all conditions of loading, on a surface free from snow, ice,
or loose material. The parking brakes shall be capable of being applied in
conformance with the foregoing requirements by the driver's muscular effort
or by spring action or by equivalent means. Their operation may be assisted
by the service brakes or other source of power provided that failure of the
service brake actuation system or other power assisting mechanism will not
prevent the parking brakes from being applied in conformance with the
foregoing requirements. The parking brakes shall be so designed that when
once applied they shall remain applied with the required effectiveness
despite exhaustion of any source of energy or leakage of any kind.



      (8)   The same brake drums, brake shoes and lining assemblies,
brake shoe anchors, and mechanical brake shoe actuation mechanism normally
associated with the wheel brake assemblies may be used for both the service
brakes and the parking brakes. If the means of applying the parking brakes
and the service brakes are connected in any way, they shall be so constructed
that failure of any one part shall not leave the vehicle without operative
brakes.



      (9)   Every motor vehicle or combination of motor-drawn
vehicles shall, at all times and under all conditions of loading, be capable
of being stopped on a dry, smooth, level road free from loose material, upon
application of the service or foot brake, within the following specified
distances, or shall be capable of being decelerated at a sustained rate
corresponding to these distances:



         (a)   Vehicles or combinations of vehicles having brakes
on all wheels shall come to a stop in 30 feet or less from a speed of 20
miles per hour.



         (b)   Vehicles or combinations of vehicles not having
brakes on all wheels shall come to a stop in 40 feet or less from a speed of
20 miles per hour.



      (10)   All brakes shall be maintained in good working order
and shall be so adjusted as to operate as equally as practicable with respect
to the wheels on opposite sides of the vehicle.



(R.C. § 4513.20)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.99)



§ 74.24  BRAKE FLUID.



   (A)   No hydraulic brake fluid for use in motor vehicles shall be
sold in this municipality if the brake fluid is below the minimum standard of
specifications for heavy duty type brake fluid established by the society of
automotive engineers and the standard of specifications established by 49 CFR
571.116, as amended.



   (B)   All manufacturers, packers, or distributors of brake fluid
selling such fluid in this municipality shall state on the containers that
the brake fluid meets or exceeds the applicable minimum SAE standard of
specifications, and the standard of specifications established in 49 CFR
571.116, as amended.



(R.C. § 4513.201)



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.99)



§ 74.25  MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR BRAKES AND COMPONENTS.



   (A)   No brake lining, brake lining material, or brake lining
assemblies for use as repair and replacement parts in motor vehicles shall be
sold in this municipality if these items do not meet or exceed the minimum
standard of specifications established by the Society of Automotive Engineers
and the standard of specifications established in 49 CFR 571.105, as amended,
and 49 CFR 571.135, as amended.



   (B)   All manufacturers or distributors of brake lining, brake
lining material, or brake lining assemblies selling these items for use as
repair and replacement parts in motor vehicles shall state that the items
meet or exceed the applicable minimum standard of specifications.



   (C)   As used in this section, MINIMUM STANDARD OF SPECIFICATIONS
means a minimum standard for brake system or brake component performance that
meets the need for motor vehicle safety and complies with the applicable SAE
standards and recommended practices, and the federal motor vehicle safety
standards that cover the same aspect of performance for any brake lining,
brake lining material, or brake lining assemblies.



(R.C. § 4513.202)



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.99)



§ 74.26  HORNS, SIRENS, AND WARNING DEVICES.



   (A)   (1)   Every motor vehicle when operated upon a highway
shall be equipped with a horn which is in good working order and capable of
emitting sound audible, under normal conditions, from a distance of not less
than 200 feet.



      (2)   No motor vehicle shall be equipped with, nor shall any
person use upon a vehicle, any siren, whistle, or bell. Any vehicle may be
equipped with a theft alarm signal device which shall be so arranged that it
cannot be used as an ordinary warning signal. Every emergency vehicle shall
be equipped with a siren, whistle or bell, capable of emitting sound audible
under normal conditions from a distance of not less than 500 feet and of a
type approved by the Director of Public Safety. Such equipment shall not be
used except when such vehicle is operated in response to an emergency call or
is in the immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, in
which case the driver of the emergency vehicle shall sound such equipment
when it is necessary to warn pedestrians and other drivers of the approach
thereof.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.21)



§ 74.27  MUFFLERS; EXCESSIVE SMOKE OR GAS.



   (A)   (1)   Every motor vehicle and motorcycle with an internal
combustion engine shall at all times be equipped with a muffler which is in
good working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual
noise, and no person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar device
upon a motor vehicle on a highway. Every motorcycle muffler shall be equipped
with baffle plates.



      (2)   No person shall own, operate or have in the person's
possession any motor vehicle or motorcycle equipped with a device for
producing excessive smoke or gas, or so equipped as to permit oil or any
other chemical to flow into or upon the exhaust pipe or muffler of such
vehicle, or equipped in any way to produce or emit smoke or dangerous or
annoying gases from any portion of such vehicle, other than the ordinary
gases emitted by the exhaust of an internal combustion engine under normal
operation.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.22)



§ 74.28  REARVIEW MIRRORS.



   (A)   Every motor vehicle and motorcycle shall be equipped with a
mirror so located as to reflect to the operator a view of the highway to the
rear of such vehicle or motorcycle. Operators of vehicles and motorcycles
shall have a clear and unobstructed view to the front and to both sides of
their vehicles and motorcycles and shall have a clear view to the rear of
their vehicles and motorcycles by mirror.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.23)



§ 74.29  WINDSHIELDS AND WIPERS.



   (A)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle on a street or highway
in this municipality, other than a motorcycle or motorized bicycle, that is
not equipped with a windshield.



   (B)   (1)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle, other than a
bus, with any sign, poster, or other nontransparent material upon the front
windshield, sidewings, side, or rear windows of such vehicle other than a
certificate or other paper required to be displayed by law, except that there
may be in the lower left-hand or right-hand corner of the windshield a sign,
poster, or decal not to exceed four inches in height by six inches in width.
No sign, poster, or decal shall be displayed in the front windshield in such
a manner as to conceal the vehicle identification number for the motor
vehicle when, in accordance with federal law, that number is located inside
the vehicle passenger compartment and so placed as to be readable through the
vehicle glazing without moving any part of the vehicle.



      (2)   Division (B)(1) of this section does not apply to a
person who is driving a passenger car with an electronic device, including an
antenna, electronic tolling or other transponder, camera, directional
navigation device, or other similar electronic device located in the front
windshield if the device meets both of the following:



         (a)   It does not restrict the vehicle operator’s
sight lines to the road and highway signs and signals.



         (b)   It does not conceal the vehicle identification
number.



      (3)   Division (B)(1) of this section does not apply to a
person who is driving a commercial car with an electronic device, including
an antenna, electronic tolling or other transponder, camera, directional
navigation device, or other similar electronic device located in the front
windshield if the device meets both of the following:



         (a)   It does not restrict the vehicle operator’s
sight lines to the road and highway signs and signals.



         (b)   It is mounted not more than six inches below the
upper edge of the windshield and is outside the area swept by the vehicle’s
windshield wipers.



   (C)   The windshield on every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a
device for cleaning rain, snow, or other moisture from the windshield. The
device shall be maintained in good working order and so constructed as to be
controlled or operated by the operator of the vehicle.



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.24)



§ 74.30  SOLID TIRE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Every solid tire, as defined in R.C. § 4501.01, on a vehicle
shall have rubber or other resilient material on its entire traction surface
at least one inch thick above the edge of the flange of the entire periphery.



(R.C. § 4513.25)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.99)



§ 74.31  REQUIREMENTS FOR SAFETY GLASS IN MOTOR VEHICLES; USE OF TINTED
GLASS OR REFLECTORIZED MATERIAL.



   (A)   Safety glass.



      (1)   No person shall sell any new motor vehicle nor shall any
new motor vehicle be registered, and no person shall operate any motor
vehicle, which is registered in this state and which has been manufactured or
assembled on or after January 1, 1936, unless the motor vehicle is equipped
with safety glass, wherever glass is used in the windshields, doors,
partitions, rear windows, and windows on each side immediately adjacent to
the rear window.



      (2)   As used in this section, SAFETY GLASS means any product
composed of glass so manufactured, fabricated, or treated as substantially to
prevent shattering and flying of the glass when it is struck or broken, or
such other or similar product as may be approved by the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles.



      (3)   Glass other than safety glass shall not be offered for
sale, or sold for use in, or installed in any door, window, partition, or
windshield that is required by this section to be equipped with safety glass.



(R.C. § 4513.26)



   (B)   Tinted or reflectorized material.



      (1)   No person shall operate, on any highway or other public
or private property open to the public for vehicular travel or parking,
lease, or rent any motor vehicle that is registered in this state unless the
motor vehicle conforms to the requirements concerning tinted glass and
reflectorized material of R.C. § 4513.241 and of any applicable rule adopted
under that section.



      (2)   No person shall install in or on any motor vehicle, any
glass or other material that fails to conform to the requirements of R.C. §
4513.241 or of any rule adopted under that section.



      (3)   (a)   No used motor vehicle dealer or new motor
vehicle dealer, as defined in R.C. § 4517.01, shall sell any motor vehicle
that fails to conform to the requirements of R.C. § 4513.241 or of any rule
adopted under that section.



         (b)   No manufacturer, remanufacturer, or distributor,
as defined in R.C. § 4517.01, shall provide to a motor vehicle dealer
licensed under R.C. Chapter 4517 or to any other person, a motor vehicle that
fails to conform to the requirements of R.C. § 4513.241  or of any rule
adopted under that section.



      (4)   No reflectorized materials shall be permitted upon or in
any front windshield, side windows, sidewings, or rear window.



      (5)   This division (B) does not apply to the manufacturer’s
tinting or glazing of motor vehicle windows or windshields that is otherwise
in compliance with or permitted by Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard #205.



      (6)   With regard to any side window behind a driver’s seat
or any rear window other than any window on an emergency door, this division
(B) does not apply to any school bus used to transport a child with
disabilities pursuant to R.C. Chapter 3323, whom it is impossible or
impractical to transport by regular school bus in the course of regular route
transportation provided by a school district. As used in this division, CHILD
WITH DISABILITIES has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3323.01.



      (7)   This division (B) does not apply to any school bus that
is to be sold and operated outside the municipality.



      (8)   (a)   This division (B) does not apply to a motor
vehicle used by a law enforcement agency under either of the following
circumstances:



            1.   The vehicle does not have distinctive
markings of a law enforcement vehicle but is operated by or on behalf of the
law enforcement agency in an authorized investigation or other activity
requiring that the presence and identity of the vehicle occupants be
undisclosed.



            2.   The vehicle primarily is used by the law
enforcement canine unit for transporting a police dog.



         (b)   As used in this division, LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY
means a police department, the office of a sheriff, the State Highway Patrol,
a county prosecuting attorney, or a federal, state, or local governmental
body that enforces criminal laws and that has employees who have a statutory
power of arrest.



(R.C. § 4513.241(C) - (J))



   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.99)



      (2)   Whoever violates division (B)(1), (B)(3)(b) or (B)(4) of
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



      (3)   Whoever violates division (B)(3)(a) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor if the dealer or the dealer’s agent knew of
the nonconformity at the time of sale.



      (4)   (a)   Whoever violates division (B)(2) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, except that an
organization may not be convicted unless the act of installation was
authorized by the board of directors, trustees, partners, or by a high
managerial officer acting on behalf of the organization, and installation was
performed by an employee of the organization acting within the scope of the
person’s employment.



         (b)   In addition to any other penalty imposed under
this section, whoever violates division (B)(2) of this section is liable in a
civil action to the owner of a motor vehicle on which was installed the
nonconforming glass or material for any damages incurred by that person as a
result of the installation of the nonconforming glass or material, costs of
maintaining the civil action, and attorney fees.



         (c)   In addition to any other penalty imposed under
this section, if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (B)(2) of this section and the offender is
a motor vehicle repair operator registered under R.C. Chapter 4775 or a motor
vehicle dealer licensed under R.C. Chapter 4517, whoever violates division
(B)(2) of this section is subject to a registration or license suspension, as
applicable, for a period of not more than 180 days.



(R.C. § 4513.241(K))



Statutory reference:



   Administrative regulations, see O.A.C. Chapter 4501-41



   Recording and reporting violations, certain court requirements, see
R.C. § 4513.241(L)



§ 74.32  DIRECTIONAL SIGNALS.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle
manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1954, unless the vehicle is
equipped with electrical or mechanical directional signals.



      (2)   No person shall operate any motorcycle or motor-driven
cycle manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1968, unless the
vehicle is equipped with electrical or mechanical directional signals.



   (B)   DIRECTIONAL SIGNALS means an electrical or mechanical signal
device capable of clearly indicating an intention to turn either to the right
or to the left and which shall be visible from both the front and rear.



   (C)   All mechanical signal devices shall be self-illuminating
devices when in use at the times mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.261)



§ 74.33  INSTALLATION AND SALE OF SEAT SAFETY BELTS REQUIRED; DEFINITION.



   (A)   As used in this section and in R.C. § 4513.263 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the component parts of a SEAT
SAFETY BELT include a belt, anchor attachment assembly, and a buckle or
closing device.



   (B)   No person shall sell, lease, rent, or operate any passenger
car, as defined in R.C. § 4501.01(E), that is registered or to be registered
in this state and that is manufactured or assembled on or after January 1,
1962, unless the passenger car is equipped with sufficient anchorage units at
the attachment points for attaching at least two sets of seat safety belts to
its front seat.  Such anchorage units at the attachment points shall be of
such construction, design, and strength to support a loop load pull of not
less than 4,000 pounds for each belt.



   (C)   No person shall sell, lease, or rent any passenger car, as
defined in R.C. § 4501.01(E), that is registered or to be registered in this
state and that is manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1966,
unless the passenger car has installed in its front seat at least two seat
safety belt assemblies.



   (D)   After January 1, 1966, neither any seat safety belt for use in
a motor vehicle nor any component part of any such seat safety belt shall be
sold in this municipality unless the seat safety belt or the component part
satisfies the minimum standard of specifications established by the society
of automotive engineers for automotive seat belts and unless the seat safety
belt or component part is labeled so as to indicate that it meets those
minimum standard specifications.



   (E)   Each sale, lease, or rental in violation of this section
constitutes a separate offense.



   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.262)



Statutory reference:



   Child restraint systems, administrative regulations, see O.A.C. Chapter
4501-37



§ 74.34  REQUIREMENTS FOR EXTRA SIGNAL EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   No person shall operate any motor truck, bus, or commercial
tractor upon any highway at any time from sunset to sunrise unless there is
carried in such vehicle, except as provided in division (B) of this section,
the following equipment which shall be of the types approved by the Director
of Transportation.



      (1)   At least three flares or three red reflectors or three
red electric lanterns, each of which is capable of being seen and
distinguished at a distance of 500 feet under normal atmospheric conditions
at nighttime;



      (2)   At least three red-burning fusees, unless red reflectors
or red electric lanterns are carried;



      (3)   At least two red cloth flags, not less than two inches
square, with standards to support them;



      (4)   The type of red reflectors shall comply with such
standards and specifications in effect on September 16, 1963, or later
established by the Interstate Commerce Commission and must be certified as
meeting such standards by Underwriters Laboratories.



   (B)   No person shall operate at the time and under the conditions
stated in this section any motor vehicle used in transporting flammable
liquids in bulk, or in transporting compressed flammable gases, unless there
is carried in such vehicle three red electric lanterns or three red
reflectors meeting the requirements stated in division (A) of this section. 
There shall not be carried in any such vehicle any flare, fusee, or signal
produced by a flame.



   (C)   This section does not apply to any person who operates any
motor vehicle in a work area designated by protection equipment devices that
are displayed and used in accordance with the manual adopted by the
Department of Transportation under R.C. § 4511.09.



(R.C. § 4513.27)



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.99)



§ 74.35  DISPLAY OF WARNING DEVICES ON DISABLED VEHICLES.



   (A)   Whenever any motor truck, bus, commercial tractor, trailer,
semitrailer, or pole trailer is disabled upon any freeway, expressway,
thruway and connecting, entering, or exiting ramps within the municipality,
at any time when lighted lamps are required on vehicles, the operator of such
vehicle shall display the following warning devices upon the highway during
the time the vehicle is so disabled on the highway except as provided in
division (B) of this section:



      (1)   A lighted fusee shall be immediately placed on the
roadway at the traffic side of such vehicle, unless red electric lanterns or
red reflectors are displayed.



      (2)   Within the burning period of the fusee and as promptly
as possible, three lighted flares or pot torches, or three red reflectors or
three red electric lanterns shall be placed on the roadway as follows:



         (a)   One at a distance of 40 paces or approximately 100
feet in advance of the vehicle;



         (b)   One at a distance of 40 paces or approximately 100
feet to the rear of the vehicle, except as provided in this section, each in
the center of the lane of traffic occupied by the disabled vehicle;



         (c)   One at the traffic side of the vehicle.



   (B)   Whenever any vehicle used in transporting flammable liquids in
bulk, or in transporting compressed flammable gases, is disabled upon a
highway at any time or place mentioned in division (A) of this section, the
driver of such vehicle shall display upon the roadway the following warning
devices:



      (1)   One red electric lantern or one red reflector shall be
immediately placed on the roadway at the traffic side of the vehicle;



      (2)   Two other red electric lanterns or two other red
reflectors shall be placed to the front and rear of the vehicle in the same
manner prescribed for flares in division (A) of this section.



   (C)   When a vehicle of a type specified in division (B) of this
section is disabled, the use of flares, fusees, or any signal produced by
flame as warning signals is prohibited.



   (D)   Whenever any vehicle of a type referred to in this section is
disabled upon any freeway, expressway, thruway, and connecting, entering, or
exiting ramps within the municipality, at any time when the display of
fusees, flares, red reflectors, or electric lanterns is not required, the
operator of such vehicle shall display two red flags upon the roadway in the
lane of traffic occupied by the disabled vehicle, one at a distance of 40
paces or approximately 100 feet in advance of the vehicle, and one at a
distance of 40 paces or approximately 100 feet to the rear of the vehicle,
except as provided in this section.



   (E)   The flares, fusees, lanterns, red reflectors, and flags to be
displayed as required in this section shall conform with the applicable
requirements of R.C. § 4513.27 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.



   (F)   In the event the vehicle is disabled near a curve, crest of a
hill, or other obstruction of view, the flare, flag, reflector, or lantern in
that direction shall be placed as to afford ample warning to other users of
the highway, but in no case shall it be placed less than 40 paces or
approximately 100 feet nor more than 120 paces or approximately 300 feet from
the disabled vehicle.



   (G)   This section does not apply to the operator of any vehicle in
a work area designated by protection equipment devices that are displayed and
used in accordance with the manual adopted by the Department of
Transportation under R.C. § 4511.09.



   (H)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.28)



§ 74.36  REQUIREMENTS FOR VEHICLES TRANSPORTING EXPLOSIVES.



   (A)   Any person operating any vehicle transporting explosives upon
a highway shall at all times comply with the following requirements:



      (1)   The vehicle shall be marked or placarded on each side
and on the rear with the word "EXPLOSIVES" in letters not less than eight
inches high, or there shall be displayed on the rear of such vehicle a red
flag not less than 24 inches square marked with the word "DANGER" in white
letters six inches high, or shall be marked or placarded in accordance with
Section 177.823 of the United States Department of Transportation regulations.



      (2)   The vehicle shall be equipped with not less than two
fire extinguishers, filled and ready for immediate use, and placed at
convenient points on such vehicle.



(R.C. § 4513.29)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.99)



§ 74.37  STUDDED TIRES; SEASONAL USE PERMITTED.



   (A)   For the purposes of this section, STUDDED TIRE means any tire
designed for use on a vehicle and equipped with metal studs or studs of
wear-resisting material that project beyond the tread of the traction surface
of the tire.



   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) of this
section, no person shall operate any motor vehicle other than a public safety
vehicle or school bus that is equipped with studded tires on any street or
highway in this municipality, except during the period extending from the
first day of November of each year through the fifteenth day of April of the
succeeding year.



      (2)   A person may operate a motor vehicle that is equipped
with retractable studded tires with the studs retracted at any time of the
year, but shall operate the motor vehicle with the studs extended only as
provided in division (B)(1) of this section.



   (C)   This section does not apply to the use of tire chains when
there is snow or ice on the streets or highways where such chains are being
used, or the immediate vicinity thereof.



(R.C. § 5589.081)



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 5589.99(B))



§ 74.38  AIR BAGS.



   (A)   As used in this section:



      AIR BAG. Has the same meaning as in 49 C.F.R. § 579.4, as
amended.



      COUNTERFEIT AIR BAG. An air bag displaying a mark identical or
similar to the genuine mark of a motor vehicle manufacturer, without the
authorization of the motor vehicle manufacturer.



      NONFUNCTIONAL AIR BAG. Any of the following:



         (a)   A replacement air bag that has been previously
deployed or damaged;



         (b)   A replacement air bag that has an electrical fault
that is detected by the air bag diagnostic system of a vehicle after the air
bag is installed;



         (c)   A counterfeit air bag, air bag cover, or some
other object that is installed in a vehicle to deceive an owner or operator
of the vehicle into believing that a functional air bag has been installed.



   (B)   No person shall install or reinstall in any motor vehicle a
counterfeit or nonfunctional air bag or any object intended to fulfill the
function of an air bag other than an air bag that was designed in conformance
with or that is regulated by Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 208
for the make, model, and model year of the vehicle, knowing that the object
is not in accordance with that standard.



   (C)   No person shall knowingly manufacture, import, sell, or offer
for sale any of the following:



      (1)   A counterfeit air bag;



      (2)   A nonfunctional air bag;



      (3)   Any other object that is intended to be installed in a
motor vehicle to fulfill the function of an air bag and that is not in
conformance with Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 208 for the
make, model, and model year of the vehicle in which the object is intended to
be installed.



   (D)   No person shall knowingly sell, install, or reinstall a device
in a motor vehicle that causes the diagnostic system of a vehicle to
inaccurately indicate that the vehicle is equipped with a functional air bag.



   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates division (B) or (D) of this section
is guilty of improper replacement of a motor vehicle air bag, a misdemeanor
of the first degree on a first offense. On each subsequent offense, or if the
violation results in serious physical harm to an individual, the person is
guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (2)   A violation of division (C) of this section is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (3)   Each manufacture, importation, installation,
reinstallation, sale, or offer for sale in violation of this section shall
constitute a separate and distinct violation.



(R.C. § 4549.20)



§ 74.39  SAFETY INSPECTION DECALS FOR BUSES.



   (A)   Definitions. As used in this section:



      BUS.



         (a)   Means any vehicle used for the transportation of
passengers that meets at least one of the following:



            1.   Was originally designed by the manufacturer
to transport more than 15 passengers, including the driver;



            2.   Either the gross vehicle weight rating or the
gross vehicle weight exceeds 10,000 pounds.



         (b)   The term does not include a church bus as defined
in R.C. § 4503.07 or a school bus unless the church bus or school bus is
used in the transportation of passengers by a motor carrier.



         (c)   The term also does not include any of the
following:



            1.   Any vehicle operated exclusively on a rail or
rails;



            2.   A trolley bus operated by electric power
derived from a fixed overhead wire furnishing local passenger transportation
similar to street-railway service;



            3.   Vehicles owned or leased by government
agencies or political subdivisions.



      MOTOR CARRIER.   Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4923.01.



(R.C. § 4513.50)



   (B)   Safety inspection decals.



      (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) of this section,
on and after July 1, 2001, no person shall operate a bus, nor shall any
person being the owner of a bus or having supervisory responsibility for a
bus, permit the operation of any bus unless the bus displays a valid, current
safety inspection decal issued by the State Highway Patrol under R.C. §
4513.52.



      (2)   For the purpose of complying with the requirements of
this section and R.C. § 4513.52, the owner or other operator of a bus may
drive the bus directly to an inspection site conducted by the State Highway
Patrol and directly back to the person’s place of business without a valid
registration and without displaying a safety inspection decal, provided that
no passengers may occupy the bus during such operation.



(R.C. § 4513.51(A), (B))



   (C)   Whoever violates division (B)(1) of this section is guilty of
a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 4513.51(D))



LOADS



§ 74.40  PERMIT REQUIRED TO EXCEED LOAD LIMITS.



   (A)   No person shall operate or move a vehicle or combination of
vehicles of a size or weight or containing a load exceeding the maximums
specified in R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, inclusive, or otherwise not in
conformity with R.C. §§ 4513.01 to 4513.37, inclusive, upon any improved
public highways, streets, bridges or culverts of any state route, expressway
or freeway within the municipality, except pursuant to special written permit
issued by the Ohio Director of Transportation, or upon any truck route. 
Every such permit shall be carried in the vehicle or combination of vehicles
to which it refers and shall be open to inspection by any police officer for
purposes of enforcement.



   (B)   No holder of a permit issued by the Ohio Department of
Transportation shall be required to obtain any local permit or license, or
pay any local fee or charge, for movement on any state route within the
municipality; however, it shall be unlawful to operate any such vehicle or
combination of vehicles upon any improved public highways, streets, bridges
or culverts within the city which is not a state route.



(Ord. 2-1998, passed 2-4-98)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Special permits for vehicles, fees, see R.C. § 4513.34



   Oversized vehicles, state permit regulations, see O.A.C. Chapter
5501:2-1



§ 74.41  LIMITATION OF LOAD EXTENSION ON LEFT SIDE OF VEHICLES.



   (A)   No passenger-type vehicle shall be operated on a highway with
any load carried on the vehicle which extends more than six inches beyond the
line of the fenders on the vehicle's left side.



(R.C. § 4513.30)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.99)



§ 74.42  ALL LOADS SHALL BE PROPERLY SECURED.



   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any highway unless the
vehicle is so constructed, loaded, or covered as to prevent any of its load
from dropping, sifting, leaking, or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that
sand or other substances may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction,
or water or other substances may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or
maintaining the roadway.



   (B)   Except for a farm vehicle used to transport agricultural
produce or agricultural production materials or a rubbish vehicle in the
process of acquiring its load, no vehicle loaded with garbage, swill, cans,
bottles, waste paper, ashes, refuse, trash, rubbish, waste, wire, paper,
cartons, boxes, glass, solid waste, or any other material of an unsanitary
nature that is susceptible to blowing or bouncing from a moving vehicle shall
be driven or moved on any highway unless the load is covered with a
sufficient cover to prevent the load or any part of the load from spilling
onto the highway.



(R.C. § 4513.31)



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.99)



Cross-reference:



   Tracking mud, rocks or other debris onto streets and sidewalks, see §
94.19



§ 74.43  TOWING REQUIREMENTS; EXCEPTION TO SIZE AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   (1)   When one vehicle is towing another vehicle, the
drawbar or other connection shall be of sufficient strength to pull all the
weight towed thereby, and the drawbar or other connection shall not exceed 15
feet from one vehicle to the other, except the connection between any two
vehicles transporting poles, pipe, machinery, or other objects of structural
nature which cannot readily be dismembered.



      (2)   When one vehicle is towing another and the connection
consists only of a chain, rope, or cable, there shall be displayed upon such
connection a white flag or cloth not less than 12 inches square.



      (3)   In addition to such drawbar or other connection, each
trailer and each semitrailer which is not connected to a commercial tractor
by means of a fifth wheel shall be coupled with stay chains or cables to the
vehicle by which it is being drawn. These chains or cables shall be of
sufficient size and strength to prevent the towed vehicle's parting from the
drawing vehicle in case the drawbar or other connection should break or
become disengaged. In case of a loaded pole trailer, the connecting pole to
the drawing vehicle shall be coupled to the drawing vehicle with stay chains
or cables of sufficient size and strength to prevent the towed vehicle's
parting from the drawing vehicle.



      (4)   Every trailer or semitrailer, except pole and cable
trailers and pole and cable dollies operated by a public utility as defined
in R.C. § 5727.01, shall be equipped with a coupling device which shall be
so designed and constructed that the trailer will follow substantially in the
path of the vehicle drawing it, without whipping or swerving from side to
side. Vehicles used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural
production materials between a local place of storage and supply and the
farm, when drawn or towed on a street or highway at a speed of 25 miles per
hour or less, and vehicles designed and used exclusively to transport a boat
between a place of storage and a marina, or in and around a marina, when
drawn or towed on a street or highway for a distance of no more than ten
miles and at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less, shall have a drawbar or
other connection, including the hitch mounted on the towing vehicle, which
shall be of sufficient strength to pull all the weight towed thereby. Only
one such vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural
production materials as provided in this section may be towed or drawn at one
time except as follows:



         (a)   An agricultural tractor may tow or draw more than
one such vehicle;



         (b)   A pickup truck or straight truck designed by the
manufacturer to carry a load of notless than one-half ton and not more than
two tons may tow or draw not more than two such vehicles that are being used
to transport agricultural produce from the farm to a local place of storage.
No vehicle being so towed by such a pickup truck or straight truck shall be
considered to be a motor vehicle.



(R.C. § 4513.32)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.99)



   (C)   Exception to size and weight restrictions.



      (1)   The size and weight provisions of this chapter and R.C.
Chapter 5577 do not apply to a person who is engaged in the initial towing or
removal or a wrecked or disabled motor vehicle from the site of an emergency
on a public highway where the vehicle became wrecked or disabled to the
nearest site where the vehicle can be brought into conformance with the
requirements of this chapter and R.C. Chapter 5577 or to the nearest
qualified repair facility.



      (2)   Any subsequent towing of a wrecked or disabled vehicle
shall comply with the size and weight provisions of this chapter and R.C.
Chapter 5577.



      (3)   No court shall impose any penalty prescribed in R.C. §
5577.99, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or the civil
liability established in R.C. § 5577.12 upon a person towing or removing a
vehicle in the manner described in division (C)(1) of this section.



(R.C. § 5577.15)



§ 74.44  WEIGHING OF VEHICLE; REMOVAL OF EXCESS LOAD.



   (A)   Any police officer having reason to believe that the weight of
a vehicle and its load is unlawful may require the driver of the vehicle to
stop and submit to a weighing of it by means of a compact, self-contained,
portable, sealed scale specially adapted to determining the wheel loads of
vehicles on highways; a sealed scale permanently installed in a fixed
location, having a load-receiving element specially adapted to determining
the wheel loads of highway vehicles; a sealed scale, permanently installed in
a fixed location, having a load-receiving element specially adapted to
determining the combined load of all wheels on a single axle or on successive
axles of a highway vehicle; or a sealed scale adapted to weighing highway
vehicles, loaded or unloaded.



   (B)   The driver of the vehicle shall, if necessary, be directed to
proceed to the nearest available sealed scales to accomplish the weighing,
provided the scales are within three miles of the point where the vehicle is
stopped.



   (C)   Any vehicle stopped in accordance with this section may be
held by the police officer for a reasonable time only to accomplish the
weighing as prescribed by this section.



   (D)   All scales used in determining the lawful weight of a vehicle
and its load shall be annually compared by a municipal, county or state
sealer with the state standards or standards approved by the state, and the
scales shall not be sealed if they do not conform to the state standards or
standards approved by the state.



   (E)   At each end of a permanently installed scale, there shall be a
straight approach in the same plane as the platform, of sufficient length and
width to insure the level positioning of vehicles during weight
determinations.  During determination of weight by compact, self-contained,
portable, sealed scales, specially adapted to determining the wheel loads of
vehicles on highways, they shall always be used on a level terrain of
sufficient length and width to accommodate the entire vehicle being
weighed.  Such terrain shall be level, or if not level, it shall be of such
elevation that the difference in elevation between the wheels on any one axle
does not exceed two inches and the difference in elevation between axles
being weighed does not exceed one-quarter inch per foot of the distance
between such axles.



   (F)   In all determinations of all weights, except gross weight, by
compact, self-contained, portable, sealed scales, specially adapted to
determining the wheel loads of vehicles on highways, all successive axles, 12
feet or less apart, shall be weighed simultaneously by placing one such scale
under the outside wheel of each such axle.  In determinations of gross
weight by the use of compact, self-contained, portable, sealed scales,
specially adapted to determining the wheel loads of vehicles on highways, all
axles shall be weighed simultaneously by placing one such scale under the
outside wheel of each axle.



   (G)   Whenever an officer, upon weighing a vehicle and load,
determines that the weight is unlawful, he or she may require the driver to
stop the vehicle in a suitable place and remain standing until such portion
of the load is removed as is necessary to reduce the weight of the vehicle to
the limit permitted under R.C. §§ 5577.01 through 5577.14 and this chapter.



(R.C. § 4513.33)



Statutory reference:



   Alteration of weight limits, approval of Director required, see R.C. §
4513.33



§ 74.45  OPERATION OF VEHICLE EXCEEDING WEIGHT LIMITS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No traction engine, steam roller, or other vehicle, load,
object or structure, whether propelled by muscular or motor power, not
including vehicles run upon stationary rails or tracks, fire engines, fire
trucks, or other vehicles or apparatus belonging to or used by any municipal
or volunteer fire department in the discharge of its functions, shall be
operated or moved over or upon the improved public streets, highways,
bridges, or culverts in this municipality upon wheels, rollers or otherwise,
weighing in excess of the weights prescribed in this subchapter or R.C. §§
5577.01 et seq., including the weight of the vehicle, object, structure or
contrivance and load, except upon special permission granted as provided by
R.C. § 4513.34 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



(R.C. § 5577.02)



   (B)   Whoever violates the weight provisions of this section shall
be fined $80 for the first 2,000 pounds, or fraction thereof, of overload;
for overloads in excess of 2,000 pounds, but not in excess of 5,000 pounds,
such person shall be fined $100, and in addition thereto $1 per 100 pounds of
overload; for overloads in excess of 5,000 pounds but not in excess of 10,000
pounds, such person shall be fined $130, and in addition thereto $2 per 100
pounds of overload, or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both.  For all
overloads in excess of 10,000 pounds, such person shall be fined $160, and in
addition thereto $3 per 100 pounds of overload, or imprisoned not more than
30 days, or both.  Whoever violates the weight provisions of vehicle and
load relating to gross load limits shall be fined not less than $100.  No
penalty prescribed in this division (B)(2) shall be imposed on any vehicle
combination if the overload on any one axle does not exceed 1,000 pounds, and
if the immediately preceding or following axle, excepting the front axle of
the vehicle combination, is underloaded by the same or greater amount.  For
purposes of this division (B)(2), two axles on one vehicle less than eight
feet apart shall be considered as one axle.



(R.C. § 5577.99(A))



§ 74.46  LOAD LIMITS.



   (A)   Weight of load; width of tire.  No person, firm or
corporation shall transport over the improved public streets, alleys,
intercounty highways, state highways, bridges or culverts in this
municipality, in any vehicle propelled by muscular, motor or other power, any
burden, including weight of vehicle and load, greater than the following:



      (1)   (a)   In vehicles having metal tires three inches or
less in width, a load of 500 pounds for each inch of the total width of the
tire on all wheels;



         (b)   When the tires on such vehicles exceed three
inches in width, an additional load of 800 pounds shall be permitted for each
inch by which the total width of the tires on all wheels exceeds 12 inches.



      (2)   In vehicles having tires of rubber or other similar
substance, for each inch of the total width of tires on all wheels, as
follows:



 


Tire Width (in inches)

 

Load Limit (in pounds)




3

 

450




3½

 

450




4

 

500




5

 

600




6 and over

 

650




 



      (3)   The total width of tires on all wheels shall be, in the
case of solid tires of rubber or other similar substance, the actual width in
inches of all such tires between the flanges at the base of the tires, but in
no event shall that portion of tire coming in contact with the road surface
be less than two-thirds the width so measured between the flanges.



      (4)   In the case of pneumatic tires, of rubber or other
similar substance, the total width of tires on all wheels shall be the actual
width of all such tires, measured at the widest portion thereof when inflated
and not bearing a load.



      (5)   In no event shall the load, including the proportionate
weight of vehicle that can be concentrated on any wheel, exceed 650 pounds to
each inch in width of the tread as defined in this division (A) for solid
tires, for each inch in the actual diameter of pneumatic tires measured when
inflated and not bearing a load.



(R.C. § 5577.03)



   (B)   Vehicles with pneumatic tires, load limits.



      (1)   The maximum wheel load of any one wheel of any vehicle,
load, object or structure operated or moved upon improved public highways,
streets, bridges or culverts shall not exceed 650 pounds per inch width of
pneumatic tire, measured as prescribed by division (A) of this section.



      (2)   The weight of the vehicle and load imposed upon a road
surface that is part of the interstate system by vehicles with pneumatic
tires shall not exceed any of the following weight limitations:



         (a)   On any one axle, 20,000 pounds;



         (b)   On any tandem axle, 34,000 pounds;



         (c)   On any two or more consecutive axles, the maximum
weight as determined by application of the formula provided in division
(B)(3) of this section.



      (3)   (a)   For purposes of division (B)(2)(c) of this
section, the maximum gross weight on any two or more consecutive axles shall
be determined by application of the following formula:



   W = 500[(LN/–1) + 12N + 36]



         (b)   In this formula, W equals the overall gross weight
on any group of two or more consecutive axles to the nearest 500 pounds, L
equals the distance in rounded whole feet between the extreme of any group of
two or more consecutive axles, and N equals the number of axles in the group
under consideration.  However, two consecutive sets of tandem axles may
carry a gross load of 34,000 pounds each, provided the overall distance
between the first and last axles of such consecutive sets of tandem axles is
36 feet or more.



      (4)   Except as provided in division (B)(9) of this section,
the weight of vehicle and load imposed upon a road surface that is not part
of the interstate system by vehicles with pneumatic tires shall not exceed
any of the following weight limitations:



         (a)   On any one axle, 20,000 pounds.



         (b)   On any two successive axles:



            1.   Spaced four feet or less apart, and weighed
simultaneously, 24,000 pounds;



            2.   Spaced more than four feet apart, and weighed
simultaneously, 34,000 pounds, plus 1,000 pounds per foot or fraction
thereof, over four feet, not to exceed 40,000 pounds.



         (c)   On any three successive load-bearing axles
designed to equalize the load between such axles and spaced so that each such
axle of the three-axle group is more than four feet from the next axle in the
three-axle group and so that the spacing between the first axle and the third
axle in the three-axle group is no more than nine feet, and with such
load-bearing three-axle group weighed simultaneously as a unit:



            1.   48,000 pounds, with the total weight of the
vehicle and load not exceeding 38,000 pounds plus an additional 900 pounds
for each foot of spacing between the front axle and the rearmost axle of the
vehicle;



            2.   As an alternative to division (B)(4)(c)1. of
this section, 42,500 pounds, if part of a six-axle vehicle combination with
at least 20 feet of spacing between the front axle and rearmost axle, with
the total weight of the vehicle and load not exceeding 54,000 pounds plus an
additional 600 pounds per each foot of spacing between the front axle and the
rearmost axle of the vehicle.



         (d)   The total weight of the vehicle and load utilizing
any combination of axles, other than as provided for three-axle groups in
division (B)(4) of this section, shall not exceed 38,000 pounds plus an
additional 900 pounds for each foot of spacing between the front axle  and
the rearmost axle of the vehicle.



      (5)   Notwithstanding divisions (B)(2) and (B)(4) of this
section, the maximum overall gross weight of a vehicle and load imposed upon
the road surface shall not exceed 80,000 pounds.



      (6)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, when a
vehicle is towing another vehicle, such drawbar or other connection shall be
of a length such as will limit the spacing between nearest axles of the
respective vehicles to a distance not in excess of 12½ feet.



      (7)   As used in division (B)(2) of this section, TANDEM AXLE
means two or more consecutive axles whose centers may be included between
parallel transverse vertical planes spaced more than 40 inches but not more
than 96 inches apart, extending across the full width of the vehicle.



      (8)   This division (B) does not apply to passenger bus type
vehicles operated by a regional transit authority pursuant to R.C. §§
306.30 through 306.54.



      (9)   Either division (B)(2) or (B)(4) of this section applies
to the weight of a vehicle and its load imposed upon any road surface that is
not a part of the interstate system by vehicles with pneumatic tires. As
between divisions (B)(2) and (B)(4) of this section, only the division that
yields the highest total gross vehicle weight limit shall be applied to any
such vehicle. Once that division has been determined, only the limits
contained in the subdivisions of that division shall apply to that vehicle.



(R.C. § 5577.04)



   (C)   Axle and wheel load, gross weights and towing connection
length for solid rubber tires.



      (1)   No vehicle, load, object or structure having a maximum
axle load greater than 16,000 pounds when such vehicle is equipped with solid
rubber tires shall be operated or moved upon the improved public highways,
streets, bridges or culverts.  The maximum wheel load of any one wheel of
such vehicle shall not exceed 650 pounds per inch width of tire, measured as
prescribed by division (A) of this section, nor shall any solid tire or
rubber or other resilient material, on any wheel of any such vehicle, be less
than one inch thick when measure from the top of the flanges of the tire
channel.



      (2)   The weight of vehicle and load imposed upon the road
surface by any two successive axles, spaces four feet or less apart, shall
not exceed 19,000 pounds for solid tires; or by any two successive axles
spaced more than four feet but less than eight feet apart, shall not exceed
24,000 pounds for solid tires; or by any two successive axles, spaced eight
feet or more apart, shall not exceed 28,000 pounds for solid tires; nor shall
the total weight of vehicle and load exceed, for solid rubber tires, 28,000
pounds plus an additional 600 pounds for each foot or fraction thereof of
spacing between the front axle and the rear-most axle of the vehicle; nor
shall the weight of the vehicle and load imposed upon the road surface by any
vehicle equipped with solid rubber tires exceed 80% of the permissible weight
of vehicle and load as provided for pneumatic tires.



      (3)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, when a
vehicle is towing another vehicle, such drawbar or other connection shall be
of a length such as will limit the spacing between the nearest axles of the
respective vehicles to a distance not in excess of 12½ feet.  If the
provisions of this division (C) are held to exceed the weight limitations or
other provisions set forth in the Federal-Aid Highway Act of 1958, 72 Stat.
902, 23 USC 127, this division (C) shall become null and void to the extent
of such inconsistency.



(R.C. § 5577.041)



   (D)   Penalties.



      (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second or subsequent offense, such
person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 5577.99(C))



      (2)   Whoever violates the weight provisions of this section
shall be punished as set forth in § 74.45(B).



   (E)   Modification of load limits.  The load limits established in
this section may be modified or waived upon special permission granted as
provided in R.C. § 4513.34 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



§ 74.47  MAXIMUM WIDTH, HEIGHT, AND LENGTH.



   (A)   No vehicle shall be operated upon the public highways,
streets, bridges, and culverts within this municipality whose dimensions
exceed those specified in this section.



   (B)   No such vehicle shall have a width:



      (1)   In excess of 104 inches for passenger bus type vehicles
operated exclusively within the municipality.



      (2)   In excess of 102 inches, excluding such safety devices
as are required by law, for passenger bus type vehicles operated over
freeways, and such other state roads with minimum pavement widths of 22 feet,
except those roads or portions of roads over which operation of 102-inch
buses is prohibited by order of the Director of Transportation.



      (3)   In excess of 132 inches for traction engines.



      (4)   In excess of 102 inches for recreational vehicles,
excluding safety devices and retracted awnings and other appurtenances of six
inches or less in width and except that the Director may prohibit the
operation of 102-inch recreational vehicles on designated state highways or
portions of highways.



      (5)   In excess of 102 inches, including load, for all other
vehicles, except that the Director may prohibit the operation of 102-inch
vehicles on such state highways or portions of state highways as the Director
designates.



   (C)   No such vehicle shall have a length:



      (1)   In excess of 66 feet for passenger bus type vehicles and
articulated passenger bus type vehicles operated by a regional transit
authority pursuant to R.C. §§ 306.30 through 306.54.



      (2)   In excess of 45 feet for all other passenger bus type
vehicles.



      (3)   In excess of 53 feet for any semitrailer when operated
in a commercial tractor-semitrailer combination, with or without load, except
that the Director may prohibit the operation of any such commercial
tractor-semitrailer combination on such state highways or portions of state
highways as the Director designates.



      (4)   In excess of 28.5 feet for any semitrailer or trailer
when operated in a commercial tractor-semitrailer-trailer or commercial
tractor-semitrailer-semitrailer combination, except that the Director may
prohibit the operation of any such commercial tractor-semitrailer-trailer or
commercial tractor-semitrailer-semitrailer combination on such state highways
or portions of state highways as the Director designates.



      (5)   (a)   In excess of 97 feet for drive-away saddlemount
vehicle transporter combinations and drive-away saddlemount with fullmount
vehicle transporter combinations when operated on any interstate, United
States route, or state route, including reasonable access travel on all other
roadways for a distance not to exceed one road mile from any interstate,
United States route, or state route, not to exceed three saddlemounted
vehicles, but which may include one fullmount;



         (b)   In excess of 75 feet for drive-away saddlemount
vehicle transporter combinations and drive-away saddlemount with fullmount
vehicle transporter combinations when operated on any roadway not designated
as an interstate, United States route, or state route, not to exceed three
saddlemounted vehicles, but which may include one fullmount.



      (6)   In excess of 65 feet for any other combination of
vehicles coupled together, with or without load, except as provided in
division (C)(3) and (C)(4), and in division (E) below.



      (7)   In excess of 45 feet for recreational vehicles.



      (8)   In excess of 50 feet for all other vehicles, except
trailers and semitrailers, with or without load.



   (D)   No such vehicle shall have a height in excess of 13.5 feet,
with or without load.



   (E)   An automobile transporter or boat transporter shall be allowed
a length of 65 feet, and a stinger-steered automobile transporter or
stinger-steered boat transporter shall be allowed a length of 75 feet, except
that the load thereon may extend no more than four feet beyond the rear of
such vehicles and may extend no more than three feet beyond the front of such
vehicles, and except further that the Director may prohibit the operation of
a stinger-steered automobile transporter, stinger-steered boat transporter,
or a B-train assembly on any state highway or portion of any state highway
that the Director designates.



   (F)   (1)   The widths prescribed in division (B) of this section
shall not include side mirrors, turn signal lamps, marker lamps, handholds
for cab entry and egress, flexible fender extensions, mud flaps, splash and
spray suppressant devices, and load-induced tire bulge.



      (2)   The widths prescribed in division (B)(5) of this section
shall not include automatic covering devices, tarp and tarp hardware, and
tiedown assemblies, provided these safety devices do not extend more than
three inches from either side of the vehicle.



      (3)   The lengths prescribed in divisions (C)(2) through
(C)(7) shall not include safety devices, bumpers attached to the front or
rear of such bus or combination, non-property carrying devices or components
that do not extend more than 24 inches beyond the rear of the vehicle and are
needed for loading or unloading, B-train assembly used between the first and
second semitrailer of a commercial tractor-semitrailer-semitrailer
combination, energy conservation devices as provided in any regulations
adopted by the Secretary of the United States Department of Transportation,
or any noncargo-carrying refrigerator equipment attached to the front of
trailers and semitrailers. In special cases, vehicles that dimensions exceed
those prescribed by this section may operate in accordance with rules adopted
by the Director.



   (G)   (1)   This section does not apply to fire engines, fire
trucks, or other vehicles or apparatus belonging to the municipality or to
the volunteer fire department thereof or used by such department in the
discharge of its functions. This section does not apply to vehicles and pole
trailers used in the transportation of wooden and metal poles, nor to the
transportation of pipes or well-drilling equipment, nor to farm machinery and
equipment.



      (2)   The owner or operator of any vehicle, machinery, or
equipment not specifically enumerated in this section but the dimensions of
which exceed the dimensions provided by this section, when operating the same
on the highways and streets of the municipality, shall comply with the rules
of the Director governing such movement. Any person adversely affected shall
have the same right of appeal as provided in R.C. Chapter 119.



      (3)   This section does not require the municipality or any
railroad or other private corporation to provide sufficient vertical
clearance to permit the operation of such vehicle, or to make any changes in
or about existing structures now crossing streets, roads, and other public
thoroughfares.



   (H)   As used in this section, RECREATIONAL VEHICLE has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.



(R.C. § 5577.05)



   (I)   No person shall violate any rule or regulation promulgated by
the Director of Transportation in accordance with R.C. § 5577.05.



(R.C. § 5577.06)



   (J)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor
on a first offense; on a second or subsequent offense, such person is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 5577.99(C))



§ 74.48  STATEMENT OF GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT.



   (A)   No person shall issue or aid in issuing any bill of lading or
other document of like nature in lieu thereof, which bill or document is to
accompany a shipment of goods or property by truck, trailer, semitrailer,
commercial tractor, or any other commercial vehicle used for the
transportation of property, the gross weight of which, with load, exceeds
three tons, with intent to defraud by misrepresentation thereon the weight of
such goods or property to be so transported.



   (B)   Any driver or operator of a commercial car, trailer or
semitrailer may obtain from any person, firm, partnership, corporation or
association including the owner, lessee or operator of such commercial car,
trailer or semitrailer, owning and operating sealed scales in this state, a
written "statement of gross vehicle weight" showing the gross weight of the
vehicle including the cargo on the vehicle, the name and address of the
person issuing the statement, and the date and place where the vehicle and
its cargo were weighed. The driver or operator of the commercial car, trailer
or semitrailer shall retain such statement of gross vehicle weight on his or
her person, and any law enforcement officer of this state may request that
such driver or operator exhibit it to him or her. If, upon examining the
statement of gross vehicle weight, the law enforcement officer has reason to
believe that the information contained therein is correct in every respect,
he or she shall endorse it with his name and the date and place where it was
exhibited to him or her. The law enforcement officer may then permit such
driver or operator to proceed without weighing by law enforcement officer of
this state. No person shall willfully issue a written statement of gross
vehicle weight and knowingly give any false information in such statement.



(R.C. § 5577.10) (Ord. 2-1998, passed 2-4-98)



   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section shall be fined
not more than $5,000 or imprisoned for not less than 30 days nor more than
six months, or both.



(R.C. § 5577.99(D))



§ 74.49  WHEEL PROTECTORS REQUIRED ON HEAVY COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.



   (A)   No person shall drive or operate, or cause to be driven or
operated, any commercial car, trailer, or semitrailer, used for the
transportation of goods or property, the gross weight of which, with load,
exceeds three tons, upon the public highways, streets, bridges, and culverts
within the municipality, unless such vehicle is equipped with suitable metal
protectors or substantial flexible flaps on the rearmost wheels of such
vehicle or combination of vehicles to prevent, as far as practicable, the
wheels from throwing dirt, water, or other materials on the windshields of
following vehicles.  Such protectors or flaps shall have a ground clearance
of not more than one-third of the distance from the center of the rearmost
axle to the center of the flaps under any conditions of loading of the
vehicle, and they shall be at least as wide as the tires they are
protecting.  If the vehicle is so designed and constructed that such
requirements are accomplished by means of fenders, body construction, or
other means of enclosure, then no such protectors or flaps are required. 
Rear wheels not covered at the top by fenders, bodies, or other parts of the
vehicle shall be covered at the top by protective means extending at least to
the center line of the rearmost axle.



(R.C. § 5577.11)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than $25.



(R.C. § 5577.99(E))



§ 74.50  LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES; PROSECUTION; APPLICATION OF MONIES.



   Any person violating any law relating to or regulating the use of the
improved public roads shall be liable for all damage resulting to any such
street, highway, bridge or culvert by reason of such violation. In case of
any damage to such a street, highway, bridge or culvert, such monetary
damages shall be collected by civil action, brought in the name of the city,
on the relation of the Director of Transportation or the City Manager, or his
designee, with respect to highways under their jurisdiction, and the Law
Director shall institute such action, when requested by the City Manager, or
his designee, and prosecute it to final judgment. In case of any damage to an
improved public road, bridge or culvert of the city, by reason of the
violations of any of the rules or regulations made by the City Manager, or
his designee, the monetary damages may be recovered by a civil action
prosecuted by the City Manager, or his designee.



(R.C. § 5577.12) (Ord. 2-1998, passed 2-4-98)



§ 74.51  WEIGHT EXCEPTIONS FOR CERTAIN VEHICLES.



   (A)   As used in this section:



      COAL TRUCK. A truck transporting coal from the site where it is
mined when the truck is operated in accordance with this section.



      FARM COMMODITIES.   Includes live-stock, bulk milk, corn,
soybeans, tobacco and wheat.



      FARM MACHINERY.   Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.



      FARM TRUCK.   A truck used in the transportation from a farm of
farm commodities when the truck is operated in accordance with this section.



      LOG TRUCK.   A truck used in the transportation of timber from
the site of its cutting when the truck is operated in accordance with this
section.



      SOLID WASTE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3743.01.



      SOLID WASTE HAUL VEHICLE. A vehicle hauling solid waste for which
a bill of lading has not been issued.



   (B)   (1)   Notwithstanding R.C. §§ 5577.02 and 5577.04, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the following vehicles under
the described conditions may exceed by no more than 7.5% the weight
provisions of R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, and no penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, shall be imposed:



         (a)   A coal truck transporting coal, from the place of
production to the first point of delivery where title to the coal is
transferred;



         (b)   A farm truck or farm machinery transporting farm
commodities, from the place of production to the first point of delivery
where the commodities are weighed and title to the commodities is transferred;



         (c)   A log truck transporting timber, from the site of
its cutting to the first point of delivery where the timber is transferred;



         (d)   A solid waste haul vehicle hauling solid waste,
from the place of production to the first point of delivery where the solid
waste is disposed of or title to the solid waste is transferred.



      (2)   In addition, if any of the vehicles listed in division
(B)(1) of this section and operated under the conditions described in that
division does not exceed by more than 7.5% the gross vehicle weight
provisions of R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, and does not exceed the wheel or axle-load limits of
those sections by more than 7.5%, no penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, for a wheel or axle
overload shall be imposed.



   (C)   If any of the vehicles listed in division (B)(1) of this
section and operated under the conditions described in that division exceeds
the weight provisions of R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, by more than the percentage allowance of
either divisions (B)(1) or (B)(2) of this section, both of the following
apply without regard to the allowance provided by this division (B) of this
section:



      (1)   The applicable penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or
any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;



      (2)   The civil liability imposed by R.C. § 5577.12, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



   (D)   (1)   Division (B) of this section does not apply to the
operation of a farm truck, log truck, or farm machinery transporting farm
commodities during the months of February and March.



      (2)   Regardless of when the operation occurs, division (B) of
this section does not apply to the operation of a vehicle on either of the
following:



         (a)   A highway that is part of the interstate system;



         (b)   A highway, road, or bridge that is subject to
reduced maximum weights under R.C. § 4513.33, 5577.07, 5577.071, 5577.08,
5577.09, or 5591.42, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



(R.C. § 5577.042)



   (E)   Notwithstanding R.C. §§ 5577.02 and 5577.04, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the following vehicles under
the described conditions may exceed by no more than 7.5% the weight
provisions of R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, and no penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, shall be imposed:



      (1)   A surface mining truck transporting minerals from the
place where the minerals are loaded to any of the following:



         (a)   The construction site where the minerals are
discharged;



         (b)   The place where title to the minerals is
transferred;



         (c)   The place of processing.



      (2)   A vehicle transporting hot mix asphalt material from the
place where the material is first mixed to the paving site where the material
is discharged;



      (3)   A vehicle transporting concrete from the place where the
material is first mixed to the site where the material is discharged;



      (4)   A vehicle transporting manure, turf, sod, or silage from
the site where the material is first produced to the first place of delivery;



      (5)   A vehicle transporting chips, sawdust, mulch, bark,
pulpwood, biomass, or firewood from the site where the product is first
produced or harvested to first point where the product is transferred.



   (F)   In addition, if any of the vehicles listed in division (E) of
this section and operated under the conditions described in that division do
not exceed by more than 7.5% the gross vehicle weight provisions of R.C. §§
5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and
do not exceed the wheel or axle-load limits of those sections by more than
7.5%, no penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, for a wheel or axle overload shall be imposed.



   (G)   If any of the vehicles listed in division (E) of this section
and operated under the conditions described in that division exceed the
weight provisions of R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, by more than the percentage allowance of
either divisions (E) or (F) of this section, both of the following apply
without regard to the allowance provided by division (E) or (F) of this
section:



      (1)   The applicable penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or
any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;



      (2)   The civil liability imposed by R.C. § 5577.12, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



   (H)   Divisions (E) and (F) of this section do not apply to the
operation of a vehicle listed in division (E) of this section on either of
the following:



      (1)   A highway that is part of the interstate system;



      (2)   A highway, road, or bridge that is subject to reduced
maximum weights under R.C. § 4513.33, 5577.07, 5577.071, 5577.08, 5577.09,
or 5591.42, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



(R.C. § 5577.043)



   (I)   Notwithstanding R.C. §§ 5577.02 and 5577.04, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, a vehicle fueled solely by
compressed natural gas or liquid natural gas may exceed by not more than
2,000 pounds the gross vehicle weight provisions of R.C. §§ 5577.01 to
5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or the axle
load limits of those sections.



   (J)   If a vehicle described in division (I) of this section exceeds
the weight provisions of R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, by more than the allowance provided for in
division (I) of this section, both of the following apply:



      (1)   The applicable penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or
any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;



      (2)   The civil liability imposed by R.C. § 5577.12, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



   (K)   Division (I) of this section does not apply to the operation
of a vehicle on either of the following:



      (1)   A highway that is part of the interstate system;



      (2)   A highway, road, or bridge that is subject to reduced
maximum weights under R.C. § 4513.33, 5577.07, 5577.071, 5577.08, 5577.09,
or 5591.42, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



(R.C. § 5577.044)



COMMERCIAL, HEAVY AND PUBLIC VEHICLES



§ 74.60  MOTOR TRANSPORTATION COMPANIES AND MOTOR CARRIERS.



   (A)   Motor transportation companies.  In order for a motor
transportation company to commence or continue its operations within or
through the corporate limits of the city it shall first obtain from the
Public Utilities Commission of Ohio a certificate declaring that public
convenience and necessity require such operation. No person shall conduct
such operations without having first obtained such certificate.



   (B)   Motor carrier registration.  No motor carrier shall operate
motor vehicles upon any public highway in interstate commerce pursuant to
interstate authority until the motor carrier has registered the interstate
authority with the Public Utilities Commission of Ohio, has paid the
appropriate filing fee as provided under state law, and has issued an
acknowledgment by the Commission which shall remain in effect until amended,
suspended, cancelled or revoked. The interstate authority shall be
registered, and acknowledgments shall be issued in a manner to be prescribed
by the Commission.



      (1)   No motor carrier shall operate motor vehicles upon any
public highway for the transportation of property for hire in interstate
commerce unless it has registered with the Commission and complied with the
requirements of state law.



      (2)   Mutual exemptions in the payment of filing fees may be
authorized and granted by the Commission under reciprocal agreements with
other states.



   (C)   Private motor carriers.  No private motor carrier, officer,
agent or employee of a private motor carrier, or other corporation, company,
association, joint-stock association, person, firm or copartnership shall
violate, or procure, aid or abet the violation of R.C. §§ 4923.02 to
4923.17 or fail to comply with any order, decision, rule or regulation of the
Public Utilities Commission, or procure, aid or abet any private motor
carrier in its failure to comply with such order, decision, rule or
regulation. Information of a conviction of a violation of this subdivision
shall be reported to the Commission by the Clerk of the Court in which such
conviction was obtained or if there is no Clerk, by the presiding officer of
the Court. Such report shall be made a part of the records of the Commission
relating to such private motor carrier.  (R.C. § 4923.17)



   (D)   Motor transportation company violations. No motor
transportation company, officer, agent or employee of a motor transportation
company, or other corporation, company, association, joint stock association,
person, firm or copartnership, shall violate or procure, aid or abet the
violation of the R.C. §§ 4921.02 to 4921.32 or fail to comply with any
order, decision, rule or regulation of the Public Utilities Commission, or
procure, aid or abet any motor transportation company in its failure to
comply with such order, decision, rule or regulation.  Information of a
conviction of a violation of this subsection shall be reported to the
Commission by the Clerk of the Court in which such conviction was obtained,
or if there is no Clerk, then by presiding officer of the Court. Such report
shall be made a part of the records of the Commission relating to such motor
transportation company.



(R.C. § 4921.32)



   (E)   Whoever violates any provision of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.



(Ord. 2-1998, passed 2-4-98)



§ 74.61  REDUCTION OF WEIGHT AND SPEED DURING TIMES OF THAWS AND MOISTURE.



   (A)   When thaws or excessive moisture render the improved highways
of this city or any sections of them insufficient to bear the traffic
thereon, or when such highways would be damaged or destroyed by heavy traffic
during the period of thawing or excessive moisture, the maximum weight of
vehicle and load, or the maximum speed, or both, for motor vehicles, as
prescribed by law shall be reduced in the following manner:



      (1)   On state highways, within the Municipal Corporation, the
Director of Transportation or City Manager, or his designee shall prescribe
such reduction which shall not be more than 25%;



      (2)   On improved highways and all other roads in the city,
other than state highways, the City Manager, or his designee, shall prescribe
such reduction as the condition of the road or highway justifies, but in no
case shall the reduction be more than 50%.



   (B)   The schedule of the reduction of maximum weights and speeds
shall be filed, for the information of the public, in the office of the City
Manager, or his designee. The City Manager, or his designee, at least one day
before such reduction becomes effective, shall cause to be placed or retained
on such highways, at both ends and at the points of intersection by principal
roads, during the period of such reduced limitation of weight, speed or both,
signs, of substantial construction, which shall conspicuously indicate the
limitations of weight and speed, which are allowed on the highway and the
date on which such limitations shall go into effect. No person shall operate
upon any such highway, a motor vehicle whose maximum weight or speed is in
excess of the limitations prescribed.



(R.C. § 5577.07)  (Ord. 2-1998, passed 2-4-98) 



   (C)   Whoever violates the weight provisions of R.C. §§ 5577.01 to
5577.07 or the weight provisions in regard to highways under R.C. § 5577.04
or their comparable section in this Traffic Code shall be fined $80 for the
first 2,000 pounds, or fraction thereof, of overload; for overloads in excess
of 2,000 pounds, but not in excess of 5,000 pounds, such person shall be
fined $100, and in addition thereto $1 per 100 pounds of overload; for
overloads in excess of 5,000 pounds, but not in excess of 10,000 pounds, such
person shall be fined $130 and in addition thereto $2 per 100 pounds of
overload, or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. For all overloads in
excess of 10,000 pounds such person shall be fined $160, and in addition
thereto $3 per 100 pounds of overload, or imprisoned not more than 30 days,
or both. Whoever  violates the weight provisions of vehicle and load
relating to gross load limits shall be fined not less than $100. No penalty
prescribed in this division shall be imposed on any vehicle combination if
the overload on any axle does not exceed 1,000 pounds, and if the immediately
preceding or following axle, excepting the front axle of the vehicle
combination, is underloaded by the same or a greater amount. For purposes of
this division, two axles on one vehicle less than eight feet apart, shall be
considered as one axle.



   (D)   Whoever violates any other provision of R.C. §§ 5577.01 to
5577.09 or their comparable section in this Traffic Code shall be fined not
more than $25 for the first offense; for a second offense within one year
thereafter, such person shall be fined not less than $10 nor more than $100,
or imprisoned not more than ten days, or both; for a subsequent offense
within one year after the first offense, such person shall be fined not less
than $25 nor more than $200, or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both.



§ 74.62  CLASSIFICATION OF ROADS.



   (A)   The City Manager, or his designee, shall classify the improved
roads within the city limits, except state highways, with reference to the
maximum weights and speeds permitted on such roads.



   (B)   The classifications made by the City Manager, or his designee,
under this section shall not apply to vehicles of a weight of five tons or
less for vehicle and load or 30 feet or less for vehicle length.



   (C)   In making this classification the City Manager, or his
designee, shall take into consideration the nature of the roadbed,
construction and any other factors which are material in the proper
classification of such roads.



   (D)   The City Manager, or his designee, shall make rules and
regulations governing the weight of vehicle and load, the length of vehicle
and the speed permitted on the several classes of roads.



(R.C. § 5577.08)  (Ord. 2-1998, passed 2-4-98)



§ 74.63  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   All rules and regulations as provided by § 74.62 shall be
kept on file at the Municipal and Safety Center and open for inspection by
the public.



   (B)   At least two days before such rules and regulations become
effective, the City Manager, or his designee, shall cause to be placed and
retained on such improved highways or sections thereof, at both ends and at
the points of intersection, signs, of substantial construction, which shall
conspicuously indicate the limitations of weight of vehicle and load, length
or speed which shall be allowed on such highways.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful to operate upon such highway a vehicle
whose maximum weight, length or speed is in excess of the limitations
prescribed.



(R.C. § 5577.09)  (Ord. 2-1998, passed 2-4-98)



   (D)   Whoever violates the weight provisions of R.C. § 5577.071 or
R.C. § 5577.08 or the weight provisions in regard to bridges under R.C. §
5577.09, and whoever exceeds the carrying capacity specified under R.C. §
5591.42, or their comparable section in this Traffic Code, shall be fined $80
for the first 2,000 pounds, or fraction thereof, of overload; for overloads
in excess of 2,000 pounds, but not in excess of 5,000 pounds, the person
shall be fined $100, and in addition thereto $1 per 100 pounds of overload;
for overloads in excess of 5,000 pounds, but not in excess of 10,000 pounds,
the person shall be fined $130, and in addition thereto $2 per 100 pounds of
overload, or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. For all overloads in
excess of 10,000 pounds, the person shall be fined $160 and in addition
thereto $3 per 100 pounds of overload, or imprisoned not more than 30 days,
or both. Notwithstanding any other provision of the Revised Code that
specifies a procedure for the distribution of fines, all fines collected
pursuant to this section shall be paid into the treasury of the county and
credited to any fund for the maintenance and repair of roads, highways,
bridges or culverts.



   (E)   Whoever violates any other provision of R.C. §§ 5577.01 to
5577.09 or their comparable section in this Traffic Code shall be fined not
more than $25 for the first offense; for a second offense within one year
thereafter, such person shall be fined not less than $10 nor more than $100,
or imprisoned not more than ten days, or both; for a subsequent offense
within one year after the first offense, such person shall be fined not less
than $25 nor more than $200, or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both.



§ 74.64  NOTICE OF ARREST.



   Whenever the driver or operator of any truck, trailer, semitrailer,
commercial tractor or any other commercial vehicle used for the
transportation of goods or property, the gross weight of which, with load,
exceeds three tons, has been arrested for a violation of any provision of
this Traffic Code, or R.C. §§ 4511.01 to 4511.76, and R.C. §§ 4513.01 to
4513.40, or R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, the officer making such arrest
shall immediately notify, in writing, the person, firm, association or
corporation holding the certificate of public convenience and necessity or
permit under which such vehicle is being driven or operated, and in whose
name the vehicle is registered with a license by the Bureau of Motor
Vehicles, of the fact of such arrest. Such notification shall describe the
vehicle involved, the name of the driver or operator thereof, and the time,
place and nature of the offense committed. Copies of such notification shall
be immediately transmitted by the arresting officer to the Public Utilities
Commission and to the Superintendent of the State Highway Patrol.



(R.C. § 5577.14)  (Ord. 2-1998, passed 2-4-98)



§ 74.65  FUEL USE PERMIT AND IDENTIFICATION DEVICE.



   A fuel use permit identification device shall be displayed on the
commercial car or commercial tractor for which it was issued at all times in
the manner as the State of Ohio Tax Commissioner prescribes. The fuel use
permits and the identification device shall not be transferable.



(R.C. § 5728.02)  (Ord. 2-1998, passed 2-4-98)



§ 74.66  UNLAWFUL OPERATION; TAX COMMISSIONER TO BE NOTIFIED.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to operate a commercial car or a
commercial tractor that is subject to the tax imposed by R.C. § 5728.06 on a
public highway in two or more jurisdictions under either of the following
circumstances:



      (1)   Without a fuel use permit or single trip fuel use permit
for such commercial car or commercial tractor.



      (2)   With a suspended or surrendered fuel use permit for such
commercial car or commercial tractor.



   (B)   The judge or magistrate, finding any person guilty of
unlawfully operating a commercial car or commercial tractor as provided for
in this section, shall immediately notify the State of Ohio Tax Commissioner
of such violation and shall transmit to the him or her the name and the
permanent address of the owner of the commercial car or commercial tractor
operated in violation of this section, the registration number, the state of
registration, and the certificate of title number of the commercial car or
commercial tractor. The commercial car or commercial tractor involved in a
violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section may be detained until
a valid fuel use permit is obtained or reinstated.



(R.C. § 5728.04)  (Ord. 2-1998, passed 2-4-98)



   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(2) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 5728.99(B))



§ 74.67  SIGNS.



   The City Manager, or his designee, shall cause appropriate signs to be
erected to notify the public of the passage of any section contained in this
chapter, and shall request the assistance of the State Department of
Transportation in carrying out the prohibitions contained herein.



(Ord. 2-1998, passed 2-4-98)



§ 74.68  EXCEPTIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply when a vehicle is used
to deliver or pick up materials, equipment or parcels to or from property
located on any street, or segment thereof.



(Ord. 2-1998, passed 2-4-98)



CHAPTER 75:  BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES, AND OTHER VEHICLES



Section



General Provisions



   75.01   Definitions



   75.02   Applicability of sections 75.01 through 75.12



   75.03   Bicycles; application of Title VII



   75.04   Traffic-control devices



   75.05   Riding on sidewalks, playgrounds, etc.



   75.06   Bicycle paths and lanes



   75.07   Operation of motorized bicycle



   75.08   Rules for bicycles, motorcycles, and snowmobiles



   75.09   Prohibition against attaching bicycles and sleds to vehicles



   75.10   Riding bicycles; motorcycles abreast



   75.11   Equipment of bicycles



   75.12   Motorcycle, motor scooters, motor bikes and horses on
private property



   75.13   Toy vehicles, skateboards, roller-skates and roller-blades
on streets



Snowmobiles, Off-Highway Motorcycles, and All-Purpose Vehicles



   75.25   Definitions



   75.26   Equipment



   75.27   Code application; prohibited operation



   75.28   Permitted operation



   75.29   Licensing requirements of operator



   75.30   Maintenance of vehicles for hire



   75.31   Accident reports



   75.32   Impounding of vehicle



   75.33   Local control within police power



   75.34   Registration of vehicles



   75.35   Certificate of title; prohibitions



Horse-Drawn Carriages



   75.50   Definitions



   75.51   License requirements



   75.52   Emergency revocation of license



   75.53   Licensing restrictions



   75.54   Liability insurance requirements



   75.55   Carriage requirements



   75.56   Horse-drawn carriage stands



   75.57   Litter control for horse-drawn carriages



   75.58   Horse requirements



   75.59   Driver requirements



   75.60   Time of operation



 



   75.99   Penalty



Statutory reference:



   Bicycle regulations to be consistent with state law, see R.C. §
4511.07(A)(8)



   Protective eye devices required for motorcycle operators and
passengers; helmets required for persons under 18 years of age, see O.A.C. §
4501-17-01



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 75.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of §§ 75.01 through 75.11, the following phrases
shall have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively:



   BICYCLE LANE.  That portion of a roadway set aside for the use of
bicycles and so designated.



   BICYCLE PATH.  A pathway constructed for bicycles and so designated. 



('76 Code, § 74.10) (Ord. 7-1975, passed 5-7-75)



§ 75.02  APPLICABILITY OF SECTIONS 75.01 THROUGH 75.11.



   The regulations contained in §§ 75.01 through 75.11, shall apply to
the operation of bicycles upon any street, sidewalk, bicycle path or bicycle
lane unless by the context of any section, a less restrictive application is
imposed or implied. 



('76 Code, § 74.11) (Ord. 7-1975, passed 5-7-75)



§ 75.03  BICYCLES; APPLICATION OF TITLE VII.



   (A)   The provisions of this title that are applicable to bicycles
apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any highway or upon any path set
aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.



   (B)   Except as provided in division (D) of this section, a bicycle
operator who violates any provisions of this title described in division (A)
of this section that is applicable to bicycles may be issued a ticket,
citation, or summons by a law enforcement officer for the violation in the
same manner as the operator of a motor vehicle would be cited for the same
violation. A person who commits any such violation while operating a bicycle
shall not have any points assessed against the person's driver's license,
commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, or probationary
license under R.C. § 4510.036.



   (C)   Except as provided in division (D) of this section, in the
case of a violation of any provision of this title described in division (A)
of this section by a bicycle operator or by a motor vehicle operator when the
trier of fact finds that the violation by the motor vehicle operator
endangered the lives of bicycle riders at the time of the violation, the
court, notwithstanding any provision of the Ohio Revised Code to the
contrary, may require the bicycle operator or motor vehicle operator to take
and successfully complete a bicycling skills course approved by the court in
addition to or in lieu of any penalty otherwise prescribed by this Traffic
Code or the Ohio Revised Code for that violation.



   (D)   Divisions (B) and (C) of this section do not apply to
violations of R.C. § 4511.19, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.



(R.C. § 4511.52)  Penalty, see § 75.99



§ 75.04  TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.



   (A)   The City Manager may provide for and install upon any street,
sidewalk, bicycle path or bicycle lane such signs or traffic-control devices
as he or she deems necessary to implement the provisions of §§ 75.01
through 75.12, governing the operation of bicycles or reasonably necessary to
assure the public safety or the flow of traffic.



   (B)   No person shall disobey the instructions of any
traffic-control device placed in accordance with the provisions of this
section unless at the time otherwise directed by a police officer.



('76 Code, § 74.13) (Ord. 7-1975, passed 5-7-75)  Penalty, see § 75.99



§ 75.05  RIDING ON SIDEWALKS, PLAYGROUNDS, ETC.



   (A)   A person operating a bicycle on a sidewalk shall yield the
right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before
overtaking and passing such pedestrian.



   (B)   No person shall operate a bicycle, moped, or other motor
vehicle or motor-assisted vehicle upon any park, playground or schoolground
where children are playing without the permission of the persons having
supervision of the park, playground or schoolground.



('76 Code, § 74.16) (Ord. 7-1975, passed 5-7-75; Am. Ord. 29-1981, passed
11-4-81)  Penalty, see § 75.99



Cross-reference:



   Bicycles, mopeds, and motor vehicles prohibited in parks and
recreational facilities, see § 97.06



§ 75.06  BICYCLE PATHS AND LANES.



   (A)   A bicycle operator approaching a bike path or lane shall yield
the right-of-way to bicycles approaching on such path or lane.



   (B)   The operator of a motor vehicle approaching a bike path or
lane from a driveway, or public or private street, shall yield the
right-of-way to bicycles on such path or lane.



   (C)   No person shall operate a bicycle upon a roadway adjacent to
which or upon which bicycle paths or lanes have been designated except within
such lane or upon such path.



   (D)   No person operating a bicycle shall overtake and pass a moving
bicycle except at the left of the bicycle being passed. Passing shall not be
undertaken where the width of the path is insufficient to accommodate two
bicycles abreast or where any danger to the bicycle overtaken is occasioned
by such act.



   (E)   No person shall ride an animal or operate a motorized vehicle
on a bicycle path except when the motorist or rider is lawfully crossing the
path.



   (F)   Bicycle paths shall not be obstructed by garbage cans or other
objects or by parked cars or other motor vehicles.



('76 Code, § 74.18) (Ord. 7-1975, passed 5-7-75)  Penalty, see § 75.99



§ 75.07  OPERATION OF MOTORIZED BICYCLE.



   (A)   No person shall operate a motorized bicycle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking, unless all of the following conditions are met:



      (1)   The person is 14 or 15 years of age and holds a valid
probationary motorized bicycle license issued after the person has passed the
test provided for in this section, or the person is 16 years of age or older
and holds either a valid commercial driver's license issued under R.C.
Chapter 4506 or a driver's license issued under R.C. Chapter 4507 or a valid
motorized bicycle license issued after the person has passed the test
provided for in this section, except that if a person is 16 years of age, has
a valid probationary motorized bicycle license and desires a motorized
bicycle license, the person is not required to comply with the testing
requirements provided for in this section.



      (2)   The motorized bicycle is equipped in accordance with the
rules adopted under division (B) of this section and is in proper working
order.



      (3)   The person, if under 18 years of age, is wearing a
protective helmet on the person's head with the chin strap properly fastened
and the motorized bicycle is equipped with a rearview mirror.



      (4)   The person operates the motorized bicycle when
practicable within three feet of the right edge of the roadway obeying all
traffic rules applicable to vehicles.



   (B)   The Director of Public Safety, subject to R.C. Chapter 119,
shall adopt and promulgate rules concerning protective helmets, the equipment
of motorized bicycles, and the testing and qualifications of persons who do
not hold a valid driver's or commercial driver's license.  The test shall be
as near as practicable to the examination required for a motorcycle
operator's endorsement under R.C. § 4507.11.  The test shall also require
the operator to give an actual demonstration of the operator's ability to
operate and control a motorized bicycle by driving one under the supervision
of an examining officer.



   (C)   Every motorized bicycle license expires on the birthday of the
applicant in the fourth year after the date it is issued, but in no event
shall any motorized bicycle license be issued for a period longer than four
years.



   (D)   No person operating a motorized bicycle shall carry another
person upon the motorized bicycle.



   (E)   The protective helmet and rearview mirror required by division
(A)(3) of this section shall, on and after January 1, 1985, conform with
rules adopted by the Director under division (B) of this section.



   (F)   Each probationary motorized bicycle license or motorized
bicycle license shall be laminated with a transparent plastic material.



   (G)   Whoever violates division (A), (D), or (E) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4511.521)  Penalty, see § 75.99



Statutory reference:



   Revocation of probationary motorized bicycle license by the state, see
R.C. § 4510.34



§ 75.08  RULES FOR BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES, AND SNOWMOBILES.



   (A)   For purposes of this section, SNOWMOBILE has the same meaning
as given that term in R.C. § 4519.01.



   (B)   (1)   No person operating a bicycle shall ride other than
upon or astride the permanent and regular seat attached thereto or carry any
other person upon such bicycle other than upon a firmly attached and regular
seat thereon, and no person shall ride upon a bicycle other than upon such a
firmly attached and regular seat.



      (2)   No person operating a motorcycle shall ride other than
upon or astride the permanent and regular seat or saddle attached thereto, or
carry any other person upon such motorcycle other than upon a firmly attached
and regular seat or saddle thereon, and no person shall ride upon a
motorcycle other than upon such a firmly attached and regular seat or saddle.



      (3)   No person shall ride upon a motorcycle that is equipped
with a saddle other than while sitting astride the saddle, facing forward,
with one leg on each side of the motorcycle.



      (4)   No person shall ride upon a motorcycle that is equipped
with a seat other than while sitting upon the seat.



      (5)   No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package,
bundle, or article that prevents the driver from keeping at least one hand
upon the handlebars.



      (6)   No bicycle or motorcycle shall be used to carry more
persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped. 
No motorcycle shall be operated on a highway when the handlebars rise higher
than the shoulders of the operator when the operator is seated in the
operator’s seat or saddle.



   (C)   (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(3) of this
section, no person shall operate or be a passenger on a snowmobile or
motorcycle without using safety glasses or other protective eye device.
Except as provided in division (C)(3) of this section, no person who is under
the age of 18 years, or who holds a motorcycle operator’s endorsement or
license bearing a “novice” designation that is currently in effect as
provided in R.C. § 4507.13, shall operate a motorcycle on a highway, or be a
passenger on a motorcycle, unless wearing a protective helmet on the
person’s head, and no other person shall be a passenger on a motorcycle
operated by such a person unless similarly wearing a protective helmet. The
helmet, safety glasses, or other protective eye device shall conform with
rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety. The provisions of this
paragraph or a violation thereof shall not be used in the trial of any civil
action.



      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (C)(3) of this
section, no person shall operate a motorcycle with a valid temporary
instruction permit and temporary instruction permit identification card
issued by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles pursuant to R.C. § 4507.05 unless
the person, at the time of such operation, is wearing on the person’s head
a protective helmet that conforms with rules adopted by the Ohio Director of
Public Safety.



         (b)   No person shall operate a motorcycle with a valid
temporary instruction permit and temporary instruction permit identification
card issued by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles pursuant to R.C. § 4507.05 in
any of the following circumstances:



            1.   At any time when lighted lights are required
by R.C. § 4513.03(A)(1);



            2.   While carrying a passenger;



            3.   On any limited access highway.



      (3)   Divisions (C)(1) and (C)(2)(a) of this section do not
apply to a person who operates or is a passenger in a cab-enclosed motorcycle
when the occupant compartment top is in place enclosing the occupants.



   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the
carrying of a child in a seat or trailer that is designed for carrying
children and is firmly attached to the bicycle.



   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates division (B) or (C)(1) or (C)(2) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor
vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates division (B) or (C)(1) or (C)(2)
of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within
one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates division
(B) or (C)(1) or (C)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.53)



§ 75.09  PROHIBITION AGAINST ATTACHING  BICYCLES AND SLEDS TO VEHICLES.



   (A)   (1)   No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller
skates, sled, or toy vehicle shall attach the same or self to any vehicle
upon a roadway.



      (2)   No operator shall knowingly permit any person riding
upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, or toy vehicle to attach the
same or self to any vehicle while it is moving upon a roadway.



      (3)   This section does not apply to towing a disabled vehicle.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.54)



§ 75.10  RIDING BICYCLES; MOTORCYCLES  ABREAST.



   (A)   Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as
near to the right side of the roadway as practicable obeying all traffic
rules applicable to vehicles and exercising due care when passing a standing
vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.



   (B)   Persons riding bicycles or motorcycles upon a roadway shall
ride not more than two abreast in a single lane, except on paths or parts of
roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles or motorcycles.



   (C)   This section does not require a person operating a bicycle to
ride at the edge of the roadway when it is unreasonable or unsafe to do so.
Conditions that may require riding away from the edge of the roadway include
when necessary to avoid fixed or moving objects, parked or moving vehicles,
surface hazards, or if it otherwise is unsafe or impracticable to do so,
including if the lane is too narrow for the bicycle and an overtaking vehicle
to travel safely side by side within the lane.



   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.55)



§ 75.11  EQUIPMENT OF BICYCLES.



   (A)   Every bicycle when in use at the times specified in R.C. §
4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance shall be equipped
with the following:



      (1)   A lamp mounted on the front of either the bicycle or the
operator that shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least
500 feet to the front and 300 feet to the sides. A generator-powered lamp
that emits light only when the bicycle is moving may be used to meet this
requirement.



      (2)   A red reflector on the rear that shall be visible from
all distances from 100 feet to 600 feet to the rear when directly in front of
lawful lower beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle;



      (3)   A lamp emitting either flashing or steady red light
visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear shall be used in addition to
the red reflector. If the red lamp performs as a reflector in that it is
visible as specified in division (A)(2) of this section, the red lamp may
serve as the reflector and a separate reflector is not required.



   (B)   Additional lamps and reflectors may be used in addition to
those required under division (A) of this section, except that red lamps and
red reflectors shall not be used on the front of the bicycle and white lamps
and white reflectors shall not be used on the rear of the bicycle.



   (C)   A bicycle may be equipped with a device capable of giving an
audible signal, except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with nor shall
any person use upon a bicycle any siren or whistle.



   (D)   Every bicycle shall be equipped with an adequate brake when
used on a street or highway.



   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.56)



Cross-reference:



   Motorcycles, regulations concerning brakes, see § 74.23



§ 75.12  MOTORCYCLE, MOTOR SCOOTERS, MOTOR BIKES AND HORSES ON PRIVATE
PROPERTY.



   No person shall operate, or permit to be operated, a motorcycle, motor
scooter, mini-bike, trail bike or any motorized vehicle or lead or ride a
horse, on any private property not owned by the operator of the vehicle or
horse without the written consent of the owner of the property.



   (A)   This written consent shall be carried on the person of the
operator of such vehicle or horse at all times of said operation and shall be
provided by the operator on demand of any law enforcement officer.



   (B)   This written consent shall contain, or in the absence thereof
shall be deemed to contain, said owner's assumption of the joint, and joint
and separate, responsibility with the operator of said vehicle or horse for
noise, nuisance or other violation of this code created or occasioned by such
permitted use on the owner's property. 



('76 Code, § 74.24) (Ord. 22-1974, passed 12-4-74)  Penalty, see § 75.99
(C)



§ 75.13  TOY VEHICLES, SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER-SKATES AND ROLLER-BLADES ON
STREETS.



   No person on roller-skates or roller-blades, or riding in or by means
of any sled, toy vehicle, skateboard or similar device shall go upon any
roadway except while crossing a street within a crosswalk.



Penalty, see § 75.99



SNOWMOBILES, OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLES, AND ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLES



§ 75.25  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLE. Any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for
cross-country travel on land and water, or on more than one type of terrain,
and steered by wheels or caterpillar treads, or any combination thereof,
including vehicles that operate on a cushion of air, vehicles commonly known
as all-terrain vehicles, all season vehicles, mini-bikes and trail bikes. The
term does not include a utility vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4501.01 or any
vehicle principally used in playing golf, any motor vehicle or aircraft
required to be registered under R.C. Chapter 4503 or R.C. Chapter 4561, and
any vehicle excepted from definition as a motor vehicle by R.C. § 4501.01(B).



   DEALER.  Any person or firm engaged in the business of manufacturing
or selling snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, or all-purpose vehicles at
wholesale or retail, or who rents, leases or otherwise furnishes snowmobiles,
off-highway motorcycles, or all-purpose vehicles for hire.



   ELECTRONIC and ELECTRONIC RECORD.  Have the same meanings as in R.C.
§ 4501.01.



   ELECTRONIC DEALER. A dealer whom the Registrar of Motor Vehicles
designates under R.C. § 4519.511.



   INTERSTATE HIGHWAY.  Any part of the interstate system of highways as
defined in subsection (e), 90 Stat. 431 (1976), 23 USC 103, as amended.



   LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAY OR FREEWAY.  Have the same meanings as in R.C.
§ 5511.02.



   MINI-TRUCK. A vehicle that has four wheels, is propelled by an electric
motor with a rated power of 7,500 watts or less or an internal combustion
engine with a piston displacement capacity of 660 cubic centimeters or less,
has a total dry weight of 900 to 2,200 pounds, contains an enclosed cabin and
a seat for the vehicle operator, resembles a pickup truck or van with a cargo
area or bed located at the rear of the vehicle, and was not originally
manufactured to meet federal motor vehicle safety standards.



   OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLE.  Every motorcycle, as defined in R.C. §
4511.01, that is designed to be operated primarily on lands other than a
street or highway.



   OPERATOR.  Any person who operates or is in actual physical control of
a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle.



   OWNER.  Any person or firm other than a lienholder or dealer, having
title to a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle, or
other right to the possession thereof.



   SNOWMOBILE.  Any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for use on
snow or ice, and steered by skis, runners or caterpillar treads.



   STREET or HIGHWAY.  Have the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.



(R.C. § 4519.01)



§ 75.26  EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   In addition to any rules or regulations promulgated by the
Ohio Director of Public Safety pursuant to R.C. § 4519.20 and R.C. Chapter
119, equipment of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, and all-purpose
vehicles shall include but not necessarily be limited to requirements for the
following items of equipment:



      (1)   At least one headlight having a minimum candlepower of
sufficient intensity to reveal persons and objects at a distance of at least
100 feet ahead under normal atmospheric conditions during hours of darkness;



      (2)   At least one red tail light having a minimum candlepower
of sufficient intensity to be plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to
the rear under normal atmospheric conditions during hours of darkness;



      (3)   Every snowmobile, while traveling on packed snow, shall
be capable of carrying a driver who weighs 175 pounds or more, and, while
carrying such driver, be capable of stopping in no more than 40 feet from an
initial steady speed of 20 miles per hour, or locking its traction belt; and



      (4)   A muffler system capable of precluding the emission of
excessive smoke or exhaust fumes, and of limiting the engine noise of
vehicles.  On snowmobiles manufactured after January 1, 1973, such
requirement shall include sound dampening equipment such that noise does not
exceed 82 decibels on the "A" scale at 50 feet as measured according to SAE
J192 (September 1970).



   (B)   No person shall operate any snowmobile, off-highway
motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle in violation of this section, except that
equipment specified in division (A)(1) and (A)(2) of this section shall not
be required on snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, or all-purpose vehicles
operated during the daylight hours.



(R.C. § 4519.20(A), (B))



   (C)   No person shall sell, offer for sale, lease, rent or otherwise
furnish for hire in this municipality any new snowmobile, off-highway
motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle that fails to comply with any rule adopted
by the Ohio Director of Public Safety under R.C. § 4519.20 after the
effective date of the rule.



(R.C. § 4519.22(A))



   (D)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division,
whoever violates division (B) of this section shall be fined not more than
$50. If the offender within the preceding year previously has committed a
violation of division (B) of this section or of R.C. § 4519.20(B), whoever
violates division (B) of this section shall be fined not less than $15 nor
more than $100, imprisoned not more than three days, or both.



(R.C. § 4519.20(C))



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates division (C) of this section shall be fined not more than $50. If
the offender within the preceding year previously has committed a violation
of division (C) of this section or of R.C. § 4519.22(A), whoever violates
this section shall be fined not less than $15 nor more than $100, imprisoned
not more than three days, or both.



(R.C. § 4519.22(B))



§ 75.27  CODE APPLICATION; PROHIBITED OPERATION.



   (A)   The applicable provisions of this traffic code shall be
applied to the operation of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, and
all-purpose vehicles, except that no snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or
all-purpose vehicle shall be operated as follows:



      (1)   On any street, highway, limited access highway or
freeway or the right-of-way thereof, except for emergency travel only during
such time and in such manner as the Ohio Director of Public Safety or local
authority having jurisdiction shall designate, and except as provided in §
75.28;



      (2)   On any private property, or in any nursery or planting
area, without the permission of the owner or other person having the right to
possession of the property;



      (3)   On any land or waters controlled by the state, except at
those locations where a sign has been posted permitting such operation;



      (4)   On the tracks or right-of-way of any operating railroad;



      (5)   While transporting any firearm, bow or other implement
for hunting that is not unloaded and securely encased;



      (6)   For the purpose of chasing, pursuing, capturing or
killing any animal or wild fowl; or



      (7)   During the time from sunset to sunrise, unless
displaying lighted lights as required by R.C. § 4519.20 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $50
nor more than $500, imprisoned not less than 3 nor more than 30 days, or both.



(R.C. § 4519.40)



§ 75.28  PERMITTED OPERATION.



   Snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, and all-purpose vehicles may be
operated as follows:



   (A)   To make a crossing of a highway, other than a highway as
designated in R.C. § 4519.40(A)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, whenever the crossing can be made in safety and will not interfere
with the movement of vehicular traffic approaching from any direction on the
highway, and provided that the operator yields the right-of-way to any
approaching traffic that presents an immediate hazard;



   (B)   On highways in the county or township road systems whenever
the local authority having jurisdiction over such highways so permits;



   (C)   Off and alongside street or highway for limited distances from
the point of unloading from a conveyance to the point at which the
snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle is intended and
authorized to be operated;



   (D)   On the berm or shoulder of a highway, other than a highway as
designated in R.C. § 4519.40(A)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, when the terrain permits such operation to be undertaken safely
and without the necessity of entering any traffic lane;



   (E)   On the berm or shoulder or a county or township road, while
traveling from one area ofoperation of the snowmobile, off-highway
motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle to another such area.



(R.C. § 4519.41)



§ 75.29  LICENSING REQUIREMENTS OF OPERATOR.



   (A)   No person who does not hold a valid, current motor vehicle
driver's or commercial driver's license, motorcycle operator's endorsement or
probationary license, issued under R.C. Chapter 4506 or R.C. Chapter 4507 or
a valid, current driver's license issued by another jurisdiction, shall
operate a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle on any
street or highway in this municipality, on any portion of the right-of-way
thereof, or on any public land or waters.



   (B)   No person who is less than 16 years of age shall operate a
snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle on any land or
waters other than private property or waters owned by or leased to the
person's parent or guardian, unless accompanied by another person who is 18
years of age or older, and who holds a license as provided in division (A) of
this section, except that the Ohio Department of Natural Resources may permit
such operation on state controlled land under its jurisdiction when such
person is less than 16 years of age and is accompanied by a parent or
guardian who is a licensed driver 18 years of age or older.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $50
nor more than $500, imprisoned not less than 3 nor more than 30 days, or both.



(R.C. § 4519.44)



§ 75.30  MAINTENANCE OF VEHICLES FOR HIRE.



   (A)   Any dealer who rents, leases or otherwise furnishes a
snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle for hire shall
maintain the vehicle in safe operating condition.  No dealer, or agent or
employee of a dealer, shall rent, lease or otherwise furnish a snowmobile,
off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle for hire to any person who
does not hold a license as required by R.C. § 4519.44(A) or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, or to any person whom the dealer or an agent
or employee of the dealer has reasonable cause to believe is incompetent to
operate the vehicle in a safe and lawful manner.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than
$100 nor more than $500.



(R.C. § 4519.45)



§ 75.31  ACCIDENT REPORTS.



   (A)   The operator of a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or
all-purpose vehicle involved in any accident resulting in bodily injury to or
death of any person or damage to the property of any person in excess of $100
shall report the accident within 48 hours to the Chief of Police, and within
30 days shall forward a written report of the accident to the Ohio Registrar
of Motor Vehicles on a form prescribed by the Registrar.  If the operator is
physically incapable of making the reports and there is another participant
in the accident not so incapacitated, the participant shall make the
reports.  In the event there is no other participant, and the operator is
other than the owner, the owner, within the prescribed periods of time, shall
make the reports.



   (B)   Any law enforcement officer or other person authorized by R.C.
§§ 4519.42 and 4519.43 who investigates or receives information of an
accident involving a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose
vehicle shall forward to the Registrar a written report of the accident
within 48 hours.



(R.C. § 4519.46)



§ 75.32  IMPOUNDING OF VEHICLE.



   (A)   Whenever a person is found guilty of operating a snowmobile,
off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle in violation of any rule
authorized to be adopted under R.C. § 4519.21 or 4519.42, the trial judge of
any court of record, in addition to or independent of any other penalties
provided by law, may impound for not less than 60 days the certificate of
registration and license plate, if applicable, of that snowmobile,
off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle. The court shall send the
impounded certificate of registration and license plate, if applicable, to
the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, who shall retain the certificate of
registration and license plate, if applicable, until the expiration of the
period of impoundment.



   (B)   If a court impounds the certificate of registration and
license plate of an all-purpose vehicle pursuant to R.C. § 2911.21, the
court shall send the impounded certificate of registration and license plate
to the Registrar, who shall retain them until the expiration of the period of
impoundment.



(R.C. § 4519.47)



§ 75.33  LOCAL CONTROL WITHIN POLICE POWER.



   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall prevent the municipality
from regulating the operation of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycle, and
all-purpose vehicles on streets and highways and other public property under
municipal jurisdiction, and within the reasonable exercise of the police
power, except that no registration or licensing of any snowmobile,
off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle required to be registered or
titled under R.C. Chapter 4519 shall be required.



(R.C. § 4519.48)



§ 75.34  REGISTRATION OF VEHICLES.



   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B), (C) and (D) of
this section, no person shall operate any snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle,
or all-purpose vehicle within this municipality unless the snowmobile,
off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle is registered and numbered in
accordance with R.C. §§ 4519.03 and 4519.04.



      (2)   Except as provided in R.C. § 4511.215 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, no registration is required for
a mini-truck that is operated within this state. A mini-truck may be operated
only in accordance with R.C. § 4511.215 and R.C. § 4519.401, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance. This division (A)(2) shall take
effect on January 1, 2017.



   (B)   (1)   No registration is required for a snowmobile or
off-highway motorcycle that is operated exclusively upon lands owned by the
owner of the snowmobile or off-highway motorcycle, or on lands to which the
owner of the snowmobile or off-highway motorcycle has a contractual right.



      (2)   No registration is required for an all-purpose vehicle
that is used primarily for agricultural purposes when the owner qualifies for
the current agricultural use valuation tax credit, unless it is to be used on
any public land, trail, or right-of-way.



      (3)   Any all-purpose vehicle exempted from registration under
division (B)(2) of this section and operated for agricultural purposes may
use public roads and rights-of-way when traveling from one farm field to
another, when such use does not violate R.C. § 4519.41.



   (C)   No registration is required for a snowmobile, off-highway
motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in this state by a resident
of another state whenever that state has in effect a registration law similar
to R.C. Chapter 4519 and the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or
all-purpose vehicle is properly registered under that state's law. Any
snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in
this state by a resident of a state not having a registration law similar to
R.C. Chapter 4519 shall comply with R.C. § 4519.09.



   (D)   No registration is required for a snowmobile, off-highway
motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in this municipality by the
United States, another state or a political subdivision thereof, but the
snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle shall display the
name of the owner thereon.



   (E)   The owner or operator of any all-purpose vehicle operated or
used upon the waters in this municipality shall comply with R.C. Chapter 1547
and R.C. Chapter 1548 relative to the operation of watercraft.



   (F)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section shall be fined
not less than $50 nor more than $100.



(R.C. § 4519.02)



Statutory reference:



   Destruction or disposal of vehicle; transfer of ownership; change of
address; loss of certificate, see R.C. § 4519.05



   Registration of emergency vehicles, see R.C. § 4519.08



   Registration procedure, see R.C. § 4519.03



   Temporary license placards and fees, see R.C. § 4519.10



   Temporary operating permit for certain nonresidents, see R.C. § 4519.09



§ 75.35  CERTIFICATE OF TITLE; PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Operate in this state an off-highway motorcycle or
all-purpose vehicle without having a certificate of title for the off-highway
motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle if such a certificate is required by R.C.
Chapter 4519 to be issued for the off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle, or, if a physical certificate of title has not been issued for it,
operate an off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle knowing that the
ownership information related to the motorcycle or vehicle has not been
entered into the automated title processing system by a Clerk of a Court of
Common Pleas.



      (2)   Operate in this municipality an off-highway motorcycle
or all-purpose vehicle if a certificate of title to the off-highway
motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle has been issued and then has been canceled.



      (3)   Fail to surrender any certificate of title upon
cancellation of it by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles and notice of the
cancellation as prescribed in R.C. Chapter 4519.



      (4)   Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a Clerk of
a Court of Common Pleas as provided in R.C. Chapter 4519, in case of the
destruction or dismantling of, or change in, the off-highway motorcycle or
all-purpose vehicle described in the certificate of title.



      (5)   Violate any provision of R.C. §§ 4519.51 to 4519.70
for which no penalty is otherwise provided or any lawful rules adopted
pursuant to those sections.



      (6)   Operate in this state an off-highway motorcycle or
all-purpose vehicle knowing that the certificate of title to or ownership of
the motorcycle or vehicle as otherwise reflected in the automated title
processing system has been canceled.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than
$200, imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both.



(R.C. § 4519.66)



Statutory reference:



   Certificate of title: rules and procedures, see R.C. §§ 4519.51 et
seq.



   Stolen vehicles and restrictions on sale or transfer, felony
provisions, see R.C. § 4519.67



HORSE-DRAWN CARRIAGES



§ 75.50  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning.



   CARRIAGE. Any device designed to be drawn by a horse, in, upon or by
which any person may be transported or drawn upon a public way.



   COMPENSATION.  Any fare, reward, tip, donation or other thing of value
which a driver or owner of a horse-drawn carriage accepts or receives, or
offers to accept or receive, in return for furnishing such service.



   HORSE. An animal of genus equis.



   LICENSEE.  Any person to whom the city has issued a license pursuant
to this subchapter.



   OWNER OF A HORSE-DRAWN CARRIAGE.  The person who has good title
thereto or lawful bill of sale, or certificates of title, who conducts or
operates or rents such public carriage.



   PERSON.  Shall include person, firm, partnership, association and
corporation.



   VETERINARIAN. A practicing veterinarian licensed by the state.



(Ord. 2-2000, passed 7-5-00)



§ 75.51  LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Any person desiring to operate a horse drawn carriage within
the city shall submit an application for license to the office of the City
Manager, which application shall set forth the following:



      (1)   Name, address and phone number of the applicant.



      (2)   The trade name under which the business is to be
conducted.



      (3)   The route and hours during which the horse-drawn
carriage is proposed to be operated.



      (4)   The manufacturer's name, seating capacity and type of
brake system for each carriage that the applicant will use in the city.



      (5)   A copy of the applicant's policy of liability insurance.



      (6)   Identification of the animals to be used in the business
operation including the animal's name, description, age and date last
examined by a veterinarian.



      (7)   The names, address and Social Security Number and a copy
of the driver's license of each person intended by the applicant to operate
such carriage within the city.



   (B)   Each license application shall be accompanied by a license fee
of $25. This license fee shall be required in addition to any other fee which
may be required under the laws of the state. Such fee shall apply to each
separate business entity or person applying as a carriage business or
operator. A separate fee shall not be required for each carriage or driver
within one business or general operator.



   (C)   The City Manager shall review each application to determine
the accuracy of all information provided, and if the City Manager finds that
the carriage and the proposed operation are safe and fit for conveyance and
that the application complies with all other requirements of this Montgomery
City Code, the City Manager shall issue a license to the applicant, which
license shall be valid during the calendar year issued and which shall expire
January 15th in the subsequent calendar year. The City Manager also shall
review and establish the permitted route or routes for operation of such
carriages within the city. The permitted routes may be changed from time to
time upon advance written notice to the licensees if such changes are
necessary on a temporary or permanent basis for appropriate public safety.



(Ord. 2-2000, passed 7-5-00)  Penalty, see § 75.99



§ 75.52  EMERGENCY REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   When the City Manager determines that the public safety is
threatened by the continued operation of a horse-drawn carriage within the
city, the City Manager may immediately suspend the horse-drawn carriage
operator's license and notify the licensee of such suspension. The licensee
shall discontinue operation of the horse-drawn carriage at once.



   (B)   Upon notifying the license holder of the emergency suspension,
the City Manager shall set a time and place for hearing to determine if the
suspension shall continue. The hearing shall be conducted within five
business days of the order of suspension. If at the hearing the City Manager
determines that the public safety is not threatened, he or she shall
reinstate the license at no cost. If at the hearing the City Manager
determines that the public safety is threatened, he or she may continue the
license suspension until such time as he or she determines the public safety
is no longer threatened.



(Ord. 2-2000, passed 7-5-00)



§ 75.53  LICENSING RESTRICTIONS.



   No person, either as owner or agent, employee or driver for, or lessee
of, shall operate or be permitted to operate any horse-drawn carriage upon
the public streets of the city unless:



   (A)   The proper license has been issued to the owner thereof, such
license is in full force and effect, and such license is in the possession of
the carriage driver and displayed upon request; and



   (B)   Such operation is upon an approved route and during approved
times as established by the City Manager in granting the carriage operator's
license.



(Ord. 2-2000, passed 7-5-00)  Penalty, see § 75.99



§ 75.54  LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.



   No license to operate any horse-drawn carriage shall be issued or
renewed by the City Manager, and no person shall operate a horse-drawn
carriage upon the streets of the city, or permit such carriage to be operated
upon the streets of the city, unless and until the applicant shall present to
the City Manager a copy of a policy of liability insurance issued with a
minimum combined single limit of $500,000 for bodily injury and $250,000 for
property damage. The policy of insurance shall be reviewed by the Law
Director as to sufficiency and form. The policy of insurance shall be valid
and effective for the same period of time for which the license is issued. At
any time during the period the license is issued, the City Manager may
request evidence that such policy of insurance remains in full force and
effect.



(Ord. 2-2000, passed 7-5-00)  Penalty, see § 75.99



§ 75.55  CARRIAGE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Each horse-drawn carriage operator is required to maintain
carriages equipped with the following:



      (1)   A braking device capable of safely stopping the
horse-drawn carriage.



      (2)   Two headlamps capable of emitting a white light visible
a distance of at least 1,000 feet ahead of the carriage.



      (3)   Two tail lamps capable of emitting a red light visible
at least 1,000 feet from the rear of the carriage.



      (4)   A triangular slow-moving horse-drawn carriage emblem
(SMV) which is reflectorized and which shall be mounted so as to be visible
for a distance of 500 feet from the rear of the carriage.



      (5)   Reflective materials upon the shafts of the horse-drawn
carriage or other parts of the carriage, or the horse parallel thereto, so as
to render the carriage and horse visible from the front and side after dark
from a distance of 500 feet.



   (B)   All carriages and drivers shall comply with any applicable
requirements of the state and this Code of Ordinances including, but not
limited to, traffic laws and ordinances.



   (C)   No horse-drawn carriage shall carry more passengers than the
number designated as the seating capacity in the application on which the
license was issued.



   (D)   Whenever a horse-drawn carriage is found not to be in a safe
and sanitary operating condition or not to comply fully with all requirements
specified herein, the City Manager may suspend or revoke the license of the
carriage operator until the provisions herein are complied with.



(Ord. 2-2000, passed 7-5-00)  Penalty, see § 75.99



§ 75.56  HORSE-DRAWN CARRIAGE STANDS.



   (A)   No person shall park or allow to stand a horse-drawn carriage
anywhere within the city except where designated by the City Manager. The
City Manager shall designate on an individual basis the location of space and
the times of use for horse-drawn carriage parking stands. The driver of a
horse-drawn carriage shall remain on or beside the carriage when parked or
standing at a horse-drawn carriage stand.



   (B)   The driver of a horse-drawn carriage shall not stop such
carriage upon any street at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading
passengers other than at a designated horse-drawn carriage stand or
predetermined location where a safe entry or exit from the carriage can be
made other than in the case of an emergency.



   (C)   All horse-drawn carriage stands shall be continually
maintained by the driver and/or operator, clean and free of any litter or
animal refuse. Each carriage stand shall be equipped with waste receptacles
for the storage of litter, debris and animal waste. Each container shall have
an appropriate lid or other method to seal tight such container when any
litter, debris or animal waste is placed therein. It shall be the
responsibility of the carriage stand operator to remove any litter, debris or
animal waste from the carriage stand site each night at the close of
operations. Disposal of litter, refuse or animal waste is not permitted in
any city container or commercial container within the city other than such
commercial container owned or maintained by the horse-drawn carriage operator.



(Ord. 2-2000, passed 7-5-00)  Penalty, see § 75.99



§ 75.57  LITTER CONTROL FOR HORSE-DRAWN CARRIAGES.



   (A)   Each animal pulling a horse-drawn carriage operating on the
city streets shall be equipped with standard manure nets to catch and hold
such manure until such time as the operator is able to place the manure in a
standard wire-tie plastic bag which the operator shall carry on each carriage.



   (B)   Each horse-drawn carriage shall be equipped with such type and
quantity of chemical product approved by the Fire Chief which when poured
upon animal urine will neutralize the urine and eliminate accumulative agents
and odor.



   (C)   The driver and/or horse-drawn carriage operator shall clean up
any manure or other debris from the horses and carriage and any other
location within the city where it may be found.



(Ord. 2-2000, passed 7-5-00)  Penalty, see § 75.99



§ 75.58  HORSE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Veterinarian certificate.



      (1)   All animals used to pull licensed horse-drawn carriages
shall have medical examinations at yearly intervals by a licensed
veterinarian at the expense of the horse-drawn carriage license holder.
Written medical records including records of treatment and immunization
required by the state shall be kept for each animal. These records shall be
kept available for inspection at reasonable times upon request by the City
Manager. The medical examination shall encompass all matters which are
consistent with usual and customary veterinary practices in the community for
maintaining the health and well-being of animals used for the purpose of
pulling horse-drawn carriages. Such examination shall include, but not be
limited to, leg and hoof exams, dental exams, cardiovascular exam, and drug
analysis at intervals sufficient to detect inhumane treatment of the animal
at the discretion of the licensed veterinarian if drug abuse is suspected.



      (2)   At the completion of the examination, if the
veterinarian conducting the examination determines that the animal is fit for
pulling a licensed horse-drawn carriage, a certificate of fitness shall be
issued and filed with the City Manager. This certification shall state any
restrictions applicable to the animal covered by the certificate including,
but not limited to, hours of work, load limitations, temperature limitations
under which the animal may work and other matters which may affect the health
and wellbeing of the animal.



      (3)   No animal may be used to pull a licensed horsedrawn
carriage for which a current certificate of fitness is not on file with the
City Manager.



      (4)   Noncompliance with the veterinary certificate
requirements shall be grounds for the revocation of all public carriage
licenses for horse-drawn carriages held by the violator, in addition to any
criminal offense which may be imposed.



   (B)   Work limits.  No horse shall be placed into service for more
than eight hours per day. A rest break shall be given to each horse after a
maximum of four consecutive hours of service.



   (C)   Temperature limits.  No horse-drawn carriage shall be
operated when the wind-chill index, as reported by the National Weather
Service, is below 0° F., or above a heat index of 90° F., except where
tours have been prearranged and documented with the office of the City
Manager. When the wind-chill index is below 20° F., the horse shall be
blanketed during rest periods.



   (D)   Shoe requirements.  Any horse used on concrete, asphalt or
similar street surfaces shall be shod with metal shoes with boriurn heads.
Each shoe should have four to six small beads evenly distributed in such a
way that the shoe will be level between the hoof and street surface. Shoes
shall be refitted as necessary, but not less frequently than once every eight
weeks. Any shoe lost during the work period shall be replaced before the
horse is brought back into service.



   (E)   Carriage load limits.  Load limits shall not be more than
seven persons including chauffeur/driver except that a driver-trainee may
increase the number to eight per horse. There shall be no exceptions to the
load limit provided herein.



   (F)   Terrain limits.  Carriages shall not be placed in the service
when city streets are covered by ice or snow.



   (G)   Age and physical limitation.  All horses used in the
horse-drawn carriage service shall be at least 3 and no more than 20 years
old.



   (H)   Watering.  Cool, potable water shall be made available to the
horse at the carriage stand.



(Ord. 2-2000, passed 7-5-00)  Penalty, see § 75.99



§ 75.59  DRIVER REQUIREMENTS.



   Any horse upon a public street which shall be drawing a carriage shall
be driven at all times by a person licensed as a driver. To be licensed as a
driver of a horse-drawn carriage, a person must be 18 years of age, of good
moral character, and not have been convicted of any crime or misdemeanor
involving violence, physical abuse or moral turpitude and who has
successfully completed at least 20 hours of training with a horse-drawn
carriage, which training shall include: (1) the proper method of fitting a
harness to a horse and hitching/unhitching a properly harnessed horse; (2)
the proper handling and driving of a horse-drawn carriage and the handling of
emergency situations for unexpected animal behavior; and (3) actual operation
of a horse-drawn carriage in traffic under the supervision of a licensed
carriage driver for a minimum of 16 hours.



(Ord. 2-2000, passed 7-5-00)  Penalty, see § 75.99



§ 75.60  TIME OF OPERATION.



   No horse drawn carriage may be driven on any city street before 9:30
a.m. nor after 11:00 p.m.



(Ord. 2-2000, passed 7-5-00)  Penalty, see § 75.99



§ 75.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any provisions of this chapter for which a
specific penalty is not provided shall be subject to penalty as provided for
under § 70.99.



   (B)   Whoever violates any provisions of §§ 75.04 through 75.06 or
§ 75.12 shall be fined not more than $150 (minor misdemeanor) for the first
offense; for the second offense within one year thereafter, such person shall
be fined as for a fourth degree misdemeanor.



('76 Code, § 74.99) (Ord. 2-2004, passed 4-7-04)



   (C)   Whoever violates any section or any provision of §§ 75.50
through 75.60 may be punished by a fine not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment
for not more than 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment.  Each
separate day that a violation may occur or be allowed to continue may
constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 2-2000, passed 7-5-00)



Cross-reference:



   For misdemeanor penalty amounts, see § 130.99



CHAPTER 76:  PARKING REGULATIONS



Section



   76.01   Prohibition against parking on highways



   76.02   Condition when motor vehicle left unattended



   76.03   Police may remove illegally parked vehicle



   76.04   Parking prohibitions



   76.05   Parking near curb; privileges for persons with disabilities



   76.06   Parking spaces for the disabled



   76.07   Parking on private property in violation of posted
prohibition



   76.08   Standing or parking for sale, advertising or washing



   76.09   Limited parking; authority of City Manager



   76.10   Snow emergency parking



 



   76.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Unlawful furnishing of prescription to enable persons to be issued
handicapped parking  placards or license plates, see § 138.17



Statutory reference:



   Noncriminal parking infractions, local option to create, see R.C.
Chapter 4521



§ 76.01  PROHIBITION AGAINST PARKING ON HIGHWAYS.



   (A)   (1)   Upon any highway no person shall stop, park, or leave
standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the paved or main
traveled part of the highway if it is practicable to stop, park, or so leave
such vehicle off the paved or main traveled part of the highway.  In every
event a clear and unobstructed portion of the highway opposite such standing
vehicle shall be left for the free passage of other vehicles, and a clear
view of such stopped vehicle shall be available from a distance of 200 feet
in each direction upon such highway.



      (2)   This section does not apply to the driver of any vehicle
which is disabled while on the paved or improved or main traveled portion of
a highway in such manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid
stopping and temporarily leaving the disabled vehicle in such position.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.66)



§ 76.02  CONDITION WHEN MOTOR VEHICLE LEFT UNATTENDED.



   (A)   (1)   No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle
shall permit it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine,
locking the ignition, removing the key from the ignition, effectively setting
the parking brake, and, when the motor vehicle is standing upon any grade,
turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the highway.



      (2)   The requirements of this section relating to the
stopping of the engine, locking of the ignition, and removing the key from
the ignition of a motor vehicle shall not apply to an emergency vehicle or a
public safety vehicle.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.661)



§ 76.03  POLICE MAY REMOVE ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLE.



   (A)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a
highway in violation of R.C. § 4511.66 or a substantially equivalent
municipal  ordinance, such officer may move such vehicle, or require the
driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to move the same, to a
position off the paved or improved or main traveled part of such highway.



   (B)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon
any highway, bridge, or causeway, or in any tunnel, where such vehicles
constitutes an obstruction to traffic, such officer may provide for the
removal of such vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety.



(R.C. § 4511.67)



   (C)   Whenever any police officer finds a motor vehicle parked on a
public street, or public parking lot or garage in violation of any section of
the chapter, the officer may cause the motor vehicle to be removed to a safe
place of storage.



§ 76.04  PARKING PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   No person shall stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary
to avoid conflict with other traffic or to comply with the provisions of this
title, or while obeying the directions of a police officer or a
traffic-control device, in any of the following places:



      (1)   On a sidewalk, except as provided in division (B) of
this section;



      (2)   In front of a public or private driveway;



      (3)   Within an intersection;



      (4)   Within ten feet of a fire hydrant;



      (5)   On a crosswalk;



      (6)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;



      (7)   Within 30 feet of, and upon the approach to, any
flashing beacon, stop sign, or traffic-control device;



      (8)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30
feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone,
unless a different length is indicated by a traffic-control device;



      (9)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad
crossing;



      (10)   Within 20 feet of a driveway entrance to any fire
station and, on the side of the street opposite the entrance to any fire
station, within 75 feet of the entrance when it is properly posted with signs;



      (11)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or
obstruction when such standing or parking would obstruct traffic;



      (12)   Alongside any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street;



      (13)   Upon any bridge or elevated structure upon a highway,
or within a highway tunnel;



      (14)   At any place where signs prohibit stopping or parking;



      (15)   Within one foot of another parked vehicle;



      (16)   On the roadway portion of a freeway, expressway, or
thruway.



(R.C. § 4511.68)



      (17)   On a path or lane designated for bicycle use and so
marked, except a bicycle.



      (18)   Within ten feet, in either direction, of a mailbox.



      (19)   At any place posted "No Parking – Fire Lane".



      (20)   With the exception of two-wheel or three-wheel
non-motorized bicycles, on any grass area, lawn, landscape berm or other
unpaved area, whether in the front, side or rear of a lot in any residential,
business or commercial district within the city when there is a paved
driveway, established paved parking or established paved display lot on such
property or available parking upon another lot by approved agreement
consistent with the Land Use Code.



      (21)   Upon any street for a continuous period longer than 72
hours.



      (22)   Within any area of a divided roadway or boulevard,
which is a turnaround lane, left turn lane, or pass through area of the
divided roadway or boulevard.



   (B)   No person shall stand, park or store any recreational vehicle,
boat, or trailer, required to be licensed by the state and for travel upon
the streets or highway, unless parked or stored on a paved surface.  This
division (B) shall not be construed as affecting any other parking or zoning
regulation now in effect, or that may hereafter become effective, but this
division (B) shall be construed as an additional parking limitation.



('67 Code, § 74.01)  (Am. Ord. 12-1984, passed 5-2-84; Am. Ord. 26-1985,
passed 10-2-85; Am. Ord. 14-1999, passed 8-4-99; Am. Ord. 13-2001, passed
10-3-01; Am. Ord. 4-2011, passed 4-6-11)  Penalty, see § 76.99



§ 76.05  PARKING NEAR CURB; PRIVILEGES FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES.



   (A)   Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there is
an adjacent curb shall be stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of the
vehicle parallel with and not more than 12 inches from the right-hand curb,
unless it is impossible to approach so close to the curb; in such case the
stop shall be made as close to the curb as possible and only for the time
necessary to discharge and receive passengers or to load or unload
merchandise.  Local authorities by ordinance may permit angle parking on any
roadway under their jurisdiction, except that angle parking shall not be
permitted on a state route within the municipality unless an unoccupied
roadway width of not less than 25 feet is available for free-moving traffic.



   (B)   Local authorities by ordinance may permit parking of vehicles
with the left-hand wheels adjacent to and within 12 inches of the left-hand
curb of a one-way roadway.



   (C)   (1)   (a)   Except as provided in division (C)(1)(b) of
this section, no vehicle shall be stopped or parked on a road or highway with
the vehicle facing in a direction other than the direction of travel on that
side of the road or highway.



         (b)   The operator of a motorcycle may back the
motorcycle into an angled parking space so that when the motorcycle is parked
it is facing in a direction other than the direction of travel on the side of
the road or highway.



      (2)   The operator of a motorcycle may back the motorcycle
into a parking space that is located on the side of, and parallel to, a road
or highway. The motorcycle may face any direction when so parked. Not more
than two motorcycles at a time shall be parked in a parking space as
described in division (C)(2) of this section irrespective of whether or not
the space is metered.



   (D)   Notwithstanding any statute or any rule, regulation,
resolution, or ordinance, air compressors, tractors, trucks, and other
equipment, while being used in the construction, reconstruction,
installation, repair, or removal of facilities near, on, over, or under a
street or highway, may stop, stand, or park where necessary in order to
perform such work, provided a flagperson is on duty or warning signs or
lights are displayed as may be prescribed by the Director of Transportation.



   (E)   Special parking locations and privileges for persons with
disabilities that limit or impair the ability to walk, also known as
handicapped parking spaces or disability parking spaces, shall be provided
and designated by all political subdivisions and by the state and all
agencies and instrumentalities thereof at all offices and facilities where
parking is provided, whether owned, rented, or leased, and at all publicly
owned parking garages.  The locations shall be designated through the
posting of an elevated sign, whether permanently affixed or movable,
imprinted with the international symbol of access and shall be reasonably
close to exits, entrances, elevators, and ramps.  All elevated signs posted
in accordance with this division and R.C. § 3781.111(C) shall be mounted on
a fixed or movable post, and the distance from the ground to the bottom edge
of the sign shall measure not less than five feet.  If a new sign or a
replacement sign designating a special parking location is posted on or after
October 14, 1999, there also shall be affixed upon the surface of that sign
or affixed next to the designating sign a notice that states the fine
applicable for the offense of parking a motor vehicle in the special
designated parking location if the motor vehicle is not legally entitled to
be parked in that location.



   (F)   (1)   (a)   No person shall stop, stand, or park any
motor vehicle at special parking locations provided under division (E) of
this section, or at special clearly marked parking locations provided in or
on privately owned parking lots, parking garages, or other parking areas and
designated in accordance with that division, unless one of the following
applies:



            1.   The motor vehicle is being operated by or for
the transport of a person with a disability that limits or impairs the
ability to walk and



is displaying a valid removable windshield placard or special license plates;
or



            2.   The motor vehicle is being operated by or for
the transport of a handicapped person and is displaying a parking card or
special handicapped license plates.



         (b)   Any motor vehicle that is parked in a special
marked parking location in violation of division (F)(1)(a)1. or (F)(1)(a)2.
of this section may be towed or otherwise removed from the parking location
by the law enforcement agency of the municipality.  A motor vehicle that is
so towed or removed shall not be released to its owner until the owner
presents proof of ownership of the motor vehicle and pays all towing and
storage fees normally imposed by the municipality for towing and storing
motor vehicles.  If the motor vehicle is a leased vehicle, it shall not be
released to the lessee until the lessee presents proof that that person is
the lessee of the motor vehicle and pays all towing and storage fees normally
imposed by the municipality for towing and storing motor vehicles.



         (c)   If a person is charged with a violation  of
division (F)(1)(a)1. or (F)(1)(a)2. of this section, it is an affirmative
defense to the charge that the person suffered an injury not more than 72
hours prior to the time the person was issued the ticket or citation and
that, because of the injury, the person meets at least one of the criteria
contained in R.C. § 4503.44(A)(1).



      (2)    No person shall stop, stand, or park any motor vehicle
in an area that is commonly known as an access aisle, which area is marked by
diagonal stripes and is located immediately adjacent to a special parking
location provided under division (E) of this section or at a special clearly
marked parking location provided in or on a privately owned parking lot,
parking garage, or other parking area and designated in accordance with that
division.



   (G)   When a motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport
of a person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk and
is displaying a removable windshield placard or a temporary removable
windshield placard or special license plates, or when a motor vehicle is
being operated by or for the transport of a handicapped person, and is
displaying a parking card or special handicapped license plates, the motor
vehicle is permitted to park for a period of two hours in excess of the legal
parking period permitted by local authorities, except where local ordinances
or police rules provide otherwise or where the vehicle is parked in such a
manner as to be clearly a traffic hazard.



   (H)   No owner of an office, facility, or parking garage where
special parking locations are required to be designated in accordance with
division (E) of this section shall fail to properly mark the special parking
locations in accordance with that division or fail to maintain the markings
of the special locations, including the erection and maintenance of the fixed
or movable signs.



   (I)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require a person
or organization to apply for a removable windshield placard or special
license plates if the parking card or special license plates issued to the
person or organization under prior law have not expired or been surrendered
or revoked.



   (J)   As used in this section:



      HANDICAPPED PERSON means any person who has lost the use of one
or both legs or one or both arms, who is blind, deaf, or so severely
handicapped as to be unable to move without the aid of crutches or a
wheelchair, or whose mobility is restricted by a permanent cardiovascular,
pulmonary, or other handicapping condition.



      PERSON WITH A DISABILITY THAT LIMITS OR IMPAIRS THE ABILITY TO
WALK has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4503.44.



      SPECIAL LICENSE PLATES and REMOVABLE WINDSHIELD PLACARD mean any
license plates or removable windshield placard or temporary removable
windshield placard issued under R.C. §§ 4503.41 or 4503.44, and also mean
any substantially equivalent license plates or removable windshield placard
or temporary removable windshield placard issued by a state, district,
country, or sovereignty.



   (K)   Penalty.



      (1)   Whoever violates division (A) or (C) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates division (F)(1)(a)1. or
(F)(1)(a)2. of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished
as provided in division (K)(2)(a) and (K)(2)(b) of this section. Except as
otherwise provided in division (K)(2)(a) of this section, an offender who
violates division (F)(1)(a)1. or (F)(1)(a)2. of this section shall be fined
not less than $250 nor more than $500. An offender who violates division
(F)(1)(a)1. or (F)(1)(a)2. of this section shall be fined not more than $100
if the offender, prior to sentencing, proves either of the following to the
satisfaction of the court:



            1.   At the time of the violation of division
(F)(1)(a)1. of this section, the offender or the person for whose transport
the motor vehicle was being operated had been issued a removable windshield
placard that then was valid or special license plates that then were valid
but the offender or the person neglected to display the placard or license
plates as described in division (F)(1)(a) of this section.



            2.   At the time of the violation of division
(F)(1)(a)2. of this section, the offender or the person for whose transport
the motor vehicle was being operated had been issued a parking card that then
was valid or special handicapped license plates that then were valid but the
offender or the person neglected to display the card or license plates as
described in division (F)(1)(a)2. of this section.



         (b)   In no case shall an offender who violates division
(F)(1)(a)1. or (F)(1)(a)2. be sentenced to any term of imprisonment.



         (c)   An arrest or conviction for a violation of
division (F)(1)(a)1. or (F)(1)(a)2. of this section does not constitute a
criminal record and need not be reported by the person so arrested or
convicted in response to any inquiries contained in any application for
employment, license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection with
the person’s appearance as a witness.



         (d)   The clerk of the court shall pay every fine
collected under divisions (K)(2) and (K)(3) of this section to the
municipality. Except as provided in division (K)(2) of this section, the
municipality shall use the fine moneys it receives under divisions (K)(2) and
(K)(3) of this section to pay the expenses it incurs in complying with the
signage and notice requirements contained in division (E) of this section.
The municipality may use up to 50% of each fine it receives under divisions
(K)(2) and (K)(3) of this section to pay the costs of educational, advocacy,
support, and assistive technology programs for persons with disabilities, and
for public improvements within the municipality that benefit or assist
persons with disabilities, if governmental agencies or nonprofit
organizations offer the programs.



      (3)   Whoever violates division (F)(2) of this section shall
be fined not less than $250 nor more than $500. In no case shall an offender
who violates division (F)(2) of this section be sentenced to any term of
imprisonment. An arrest or conviction for a violation of division (F)(2) of
this section does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported
by the person so arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries contained
in any application for employment, license, or other right or privilege, or
made in connection with the person’s appearance as a witness.



      (4)   Whoever violates division (H) of this section shall be
punished as follows:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (K)(4) of
this section, the offender shall be issued a warning.



         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (H) of this section or of a
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to that division, the
offender shall not be issued a warning but shall be fined not more than $25
for each parking location that is not properly marked or whose markings are
not properly maintained.



(R.C. § 4511.69)



Cross-reference:



   Unlawful furnishing of prescription to enable persons to be issued
handicapped parking placards or license plates, see § 138.17



Statutory reference:



   Buildings, access for disabled persons, see R.C. § 3781.111



§ 76.06  PARKING SPACES FOR THE DISABLED.



   (A)   Any building, office or other facility, where parking is
provided, whether owned, rented or leased, presently designating specially
marked parking locations for handicapped persons, shall erect a permanently
affixed or moveable sign measured  five feet from the ground to the top edge
of the sign and printed with the international symbol of accessibility to
identify each handicapped parking spot.  Owners already designating
handicapped parking spaces will have 90 days from the effective date of this
section to comply with this section.



   (B)   Any building, office or other facility, where parking is
provided, whether owned, rented or leased, not presently designating
handicapped parking spots, but required to designate such parking spots
according to Ohio State law, shall have two years from the effective date of
this section to create and mark handicapped parking spaces with a permanently
affixed or movable sign measured five feet from the ground to the top edge of
the sign and printed with the international symbol of accessibility.



   (C)   Buildings and other facilities as defined in division (A) and
(B) required to provide handicapped parking shall designate the number of
locations as set forth below:



 

Total Number of Spaces in the Lot or Structure
 
Required Number of Handicap-Accessible Spaces


Under 15
 
No space needed


16 to 100
 
1 space per 16-35 parking spaces; 2 spaces per 36-70 spaces; and 3 spaces per
71-100 spaces


101 to 200
 
4 spaces plus 1 space per 50 parking spaces over 100


201 to 500
 
6 spaces plus 1 space per 75 parking spaces over 200


Over 500
 
10 spaces plus 1 space per 100 parking spaces over 500



 



   (D)   Buildings that shall not be required to designate handicapped
parking spaces shall be the following:



      (1)   Nontransient residential structures, including
industrialized units, 1-, 2-, or 3-family dwelling units;



      (2)   Townhouses.  For purposes of this section, townhouses
shall be defined as a multi-family building consisting of one or more units,
each unit of which is utilized by one tenant on all the levels of the unit
for the purpose of nontransient residential use, whether or not an individual
unit is owned or rented by the tenant; and



      (3)   Condominiums.  For purposes of this section,
condominiums shall be defined as an apartment building or a complex of
multiple-unit dwellings where the tenant holds full title to his unit and
joint ownership in the common grounds.



   (E)   A person will be considered handicapped if they meet the
definitional standards adopted in § 76.05(J) hereof. Whether a handicapped
person will be entitled to park in a designated handicapped parking spot will
be determined by § 76.05.



   (F)   No owner of any building, office or other facility where
specially marked parking for handicapped persons is required by Montgomery
Ordinance shall fail to properly mark or maintain the specially designated
parking locations and the signs set forth in this section.



(Ord. 5-1992, passed 4-1-92)



§ 76.07  PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY IN VIOLATION OF POSTED PROHIBITION.



   (A)   If an owner of private property posts on the property in a
conspicuous manner a prohibition against parking on the property or
conditions and regulations under which parking is permitted, no person shall
do either of the following:



      (1)   Park a vehicle on the property without the owner's
consent;



      (2)   Park a vehicle on the property in violation of any
condition or regulation posted by the owner.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4511.681)



§ 76.08  STANDING OR PARKING FOR SALE, ADVERTISING OR WASHING.



   No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any highway for the
principal purpose of:



   (A)   Displaying it for sale;



   (B)   Advertising;



   (C)   Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs
necessitated by an emergency. 



('67 Code, § 74.07)  Penalty, see § 76.99



§ 76.09  LIMITED PARKING; AUTHORITY OF CITY MANAGER.



   (A)   To promote safety or the efficient movement of traffic the
City Manager may establish regulations governing parking on the streets and
highways and on public parking lots in the municipality which do not
contravene the regulations contained in this chapter. The Manager may
eliminate parking or limit the hours of parking in designated areas,
prescribe additional rules for parking, and mark or post a warning of
municipal parking regulations as he deems appropriate.



   (B)   Notwithstanding provisions of division (A) hereof, the City
Manager shall not modify existing regulations governing parking on Montgomery
Road between Cooper Road and Remington Road without the approval of the
council.



(Ord. 12-1984, passed 5-2-84)  Penalty, see § 76.99



§ 76.10  SNOW EMERGENCY PARKING.



   (A)   SNOW EMERGENCY means a period of time declared by the City
Manager, or his or her designee, when the United States Weather Bureau
forecasts snow or ice with the prospect of ice and/or snow accumulations to
the extent that it could or will impair the safe movement of vehicular
traffic within the city.  Special parking restrictions become effective when
these weather conditions exist and a snow emergency is declared.  The snow
emergency shall exist from the time it is formally announced until the time
it is formally cancelled.



   (B)   Whenever a snow emergency is declared, the City Manager, or
his or her designee, shall request the local news media to announce the snow
emergency and the time of the declaration, and/or notice of declaration shall
be provided through the city's emergency notification network and city
website.  A snow emergency shall be deemed to be in effect and owners and
operators of motor vehicles shall be deemed to have notice of the snow
emergency two hours after the official declaration from the City Manager is
sent to the media and/or posted on the city website and broadcast through the
city's emergency notification network.  After that two-hour time period,
motor vehicle owners and/or operators are subject to the prohibitions of this
section.  Cancellation shall be effected in the same manner.



   (C)   (1)   Whenever a snow emergency is in effect, no person
shall stop or allow to be stopped, abandoned, or leave unattended any motor
vehicle on a public street in the city.



      (2)   Any motor vehicle found stopped in a prohibited area
during a snow emergency may be removed by order of the police.



   (D)   The City Manager, or his or her designee, shall designate by
administrative regulation streets, parts of streets, or areas of the city for
which stopping shall be prohibited during the snow emergency time.  The City
Manager shall designate locations for the posting of "No Stopping During Snow
Emergency" signs.



   (E)   The owner or operator of a motor vehicle found in violation of
the prohibitions of this section shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor
parking infraction, and in addition to any fine which may be imposed, the
owner or operator of a motor vehicle found in violation of this section shall
be responsible for all towing and storage costs for such vehicle during the
snow emergency.



(Ord. 20-2008, passed 12-3-08)



§ 76.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   (1)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter or any
parking regulation imposed by the City Manager shall be guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.  Whenever the city shall incur any cost in order to remove a
vehicle illegally parked, such cost shall also be assessed.



      (2)   Whenever a violation is categorized as a minor
misdemeanor, the penalty for such minor misdemeanor violation shall provide a
maximum penalty for such minor misdemeanor at $150 per violation.



('76 Code, § 76.99) (Ord. 12-1984, passed 5-2-84; Am. Ord. 2-2004, passed
4-7-04)



   (B)   Whoever violates any provision of § 76.07 shall be penalized
as follows:



      (1)   A written warning for the first offense (Offender will
be given seven days from issuance of warning to comply);



      (2)   A fine of not more than $25 for each parking location
that is not properly marked or maintained according to the requirements of
this chapter for a second offense; and



      (3)   A fine of not more than $50 for each parking location
that is not properly marked or maintained according to the requirements of
this chapter for a third offense; each day from the date that the citation
for a third offense is issued shall constitute a separate offense. 



(Ord. 5-1992, passed 4-1-92)



   (C)   Whoever violates § 76.04(A)(21) shall be guilty of a minor
misdemeanor for the first offense. Each separate vehicle improperly parked or
standing on such property and each day that such violation occurs may be the
subject of a separate citation and criminal conviction.



(Ord. 14-1999, passed 8-4-99; Am. Ord. 4-2011, passed 4-6-11)



CHAPTER 77:  PARADES



Section



   77.01   Driving animals upon highways



   77.02   Permit required for parades



   77.03   Breaking into procession



   77.04   Parking on parade route



   77.05   Demonstrations on or near highway



§ 77.01  DRIVING ANIMALS UPON HIGHWAYS.



   No person shall drive or cause to be driven any drove of animals upon
or through a highway or public ground unless a permit to do so has been
obtained from the City Manager. 



('67 Code, § 75.01) (Am. Ord. 28-1981, passed 10-7-81)  Penalty, see §
70.99



§ 77.02  PERMIT REQUIRED FOR PARADES.



   No person shall conduct or knowingly participate in any street
assemblage, parade or procession, other than a funeral procession, upon any
way unless a permit authorizing such parade has been issued by the Chief of
Police and approved by the City Manager.



('67 Code, § 75.02) (Am. Ord. 28-1981, passed 10-7-81)  Penalty, see §
70.99



§ 77.03  BREAKING INTO PROCESSION.



   No operator of any vehicle shall drive between moving vehicles
comprising a funeral or other authorized procession, but passage for cross
traffic shall be provided through parades at intervals not exceeding 10
minutes. 



('67 Code, § 75.03)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 77.04  PARKING ON PARADE ROUTE.



   (A)   Council is authorized, whenever in its judgment it is
necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or
part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade or a procession,
and to erect temporary traffic signs to that effect.



   (B)   No person shall park or leave unattended any vehicle in
violation of such signs. 



('67 Code, § 75.04)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 77.05  DEMONSTRATIONS ON OR NEAR HIGHWAY.



   No person in or upon any sidewalk or in or upon any premises abutting
thereon, shall make any speech or harangue, or demonstrate, sell or offer for
sale goods, wares or merchandise or display any sign, device, information, or
exhibition, in consequence of which there is caused or created such a
gathering of persons on such sidewalk as to interfere with pedestrian traffic
thereon. 



('67 Code, § 75.05)  Penalty, see § 70.99



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



      Chapter




         90.   ANIMALS





         91.   INTOXICATING LIQUORS





         92.   GARBAGE DISPOSAL





         93.   NUISANCES; ABATEMENT





         94.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS





         95.   UNCLAIMED AND ABANDONED VEHICLES





         96.   FIRE PREVENTION CODE





         97.   PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES





         98.   CEMETERIES





         99.   BURGLARY AND EMERGENCY ALARM SYSTEMS





         100.   TREE MAINTENANCE





         101.   HUNTING




CHAPTER 90:  ANIMALS



Section



   90.01   Animals roaming at large prohibited



   90.02   Annoying residents prohibited



   90.03   Vicious animals prohibited



   90.04   Restraints upon animals; dog leashes



   90.05   Apprehension and incarceration of animals at large



   90.06   Office of dog warden



   90.07   Interference with dog warden prohibited



   90.08   Nuisance prohibited



   90.09   Racing animals



   90.10   Kennels prohibited



   90.11   Feces removal



   90.12   Farm animals prohibited



   90.13   Exotic animals prohibited



 



   90.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Horse-drawn carriages, see §§ 75.50 et seq.



§ 90.01  ANIMALS ROAMING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.



   No owner, keeper or harborer of a dog shall permit or allow the dog to
roam at large on, over or across public streets, parks or grounds within the
corporate limits. 



(‘67 Code, § 90.01)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.02  ANNOYING RESIDENTS PROHIBITED.



   No owner, keeper or harborer of a dog shall permit or allow such dog to
annoy or disturb the public peace and quiet by frequent or habitual howling,
yelping, barking or the making of any other such noise by such dog within the
corporate limits. It is a disturbance of the public peace and quiet if such
animal noise can be heard by a person of reasonable sensibilities on an
adjacent property or greater distance from the property on which the dog is
located.



(‘67 Code, § 90.02)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.03  VICIOUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall own, keep or harbor a dog that notoriously
exhibits a vicious or harmful disposition toward life, limb or property of
residents of the municipality.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.



(‘67 Code, § 90.03)  (Ord. 10-2012, passed 11-7-12)  Penalty, see §
90.99



§ 90.04  RESTRAINTS UPON ANIMALS; DOG LEASHES.



   All dogs kept on the property of a dog's owner, keeper, or harborer
shall be leashed, tied, fenced or otherwise secured in such manner so that
the dog will not be able to attack, annoy, bite, or worry any invitee or
licensee entering the property.  A dog which is not leashed, tied, or fenced
but which is maintained on the property of its owner, keeper or harborer in
the visual presence of and subject to the immediate physical control of such
owner, keeper or harborer shall be deemed "otherwise secured" within the
meaning of this section.



(Ord. 27-1976, passed 11-3-76; Am. Ord. 4-2009, passed 7-1-09)  Penalty, see
§ 90.99



§ 90.05  APPREHENSION AND INCARCERATION OF ANIMALS AT LARGE.



   (A)   All dogs found running or roaming at large within the
municipality shall be apprehended and incarcerated in a suitable place until
properly released by the dog warden or other responsible municipal official.



   (B)   There shall be charged the sum of $4 per day for the care and
keep of each dog incarcerated as above set forth, which sum shall be paid
prior to the release of the dog to the owner.  In cases of hardship, the dog
warden may reduce the charges to a sum of not less than $10.



   (C)   All sums received for the apprehension and care of
incarcerated dogs shall be paid into the office of the municipal treasurer
and deposited in the general fund of the municipality.



   (D)   Any dog incarcerated for 10 continuous days may be disposed of
or destroyed according to methods and means prescribed by the Society for
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals.  Any dog incarcerated for 10 consecutive
days and not claimed by the owner may be sold by the dog warden to any
suitable person at a price of $10 or at such other price established by the
municipal administrative assistant, considering the cost of upkeep of such
animals and proper disposition of such animals.



   (E)   Upon incarcerating a licensed dog, the dog warden shall
forthwith notify the owner of the incarceration by sending written notice to
the owner at his address shown on the dog's registration application.  Such
notice shall state that the dog shall be sold or destroyed, as herein
provided, unless the dog is redeemed by the owner.  Diseased or injured dogs
may be destroyed by the dog warden without notice or time limitation but only
after obtaining a certificate attesting to such disease or injury signed by a
licensed veterinarian if the dog is licensed.  Any dog not licensed may be
disposed of by the dog warden without notice and delay, as provided by
general law.



(‘67 Code, § 90.05)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.06  OFFICE OF DOG WARDEN.



   (A)   There is created the post of municipal dog warden, whose
duties and responsibilities shall be the enforcement of this chapter and the
general laws of the state, county and municipality pertaining to dogs.  The
warden shall be appointed by the City Manager and shall be under the control
of and responsible to the Director of Public Safety.



   (B)   The dog warden is authorized to file complaints before the
mayor and other magistrates in order to enforce compliance with this chapter
and all laws in general pertaining to dogs.



   (C)   The dog warden is empowered to apprehend and incarcerate all
unlicensed dogs, stray dogs, dogs running at large, or dogs whose actions are
contrary to the provisions of this chapter or the general laws of the state
pertaining to dogs.



   (D)   The dog warden is granted any and all other powers necessary
for the proper enforcement of this chapter and for the general regulation of
dogs within the municipality, and he is authorized to exercise and use
reasonable force in apprehending and controlling dogs and the right of
reasonable entry on private property for pursuit and seizure of dogs thereon,
and shall have the power of a police officer in such capacity. 



(‘67 Code, § 90.06; Am. Ord. 28-1981, passed 10-7-81)



§ 90.07  INTERFERENCE WITH DOG WARDEN PROHIBITED.



   No person shall hinder, impede or interfere with the dog warden in his
duties or responsibilities in apprehending and incarcerating dogs within the
municipality. 



(‘67 Code, § 90.08)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.08  NUISANCE PROHIBITED.



   In accordance with the statutes of the state and pursuant to the powers
granted by the same, the keeping or maintenance of an animal nuisance in the
municipality is prohibited. 



(‘67 Code, § 90.09)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.09  RACING ANIMALS.



   No person shall run or race any animal, or ride or drive any animal on
public sidewalks or on paved portions of any street or way or on private
property in this municipality without first obtaining permission of the owner
of same, or shall run, race, ride or drive any animal in a manner so as to
endanger the body or property of another person. 



(‘67 Code, § 90.10)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.10  KENNELS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   The maintenance of a kennel within the city is prohibited. 
For purposes of this section, KENNEL shall be defined as the maintaining of
more than three dogs for overnight purposes outside of a principal dwelling
or building upon a parcel of real property. This prohibition against kennels
shall apply to all properties zoned for residential use within the city.



   (B)   There shall be no limit to the number of dogs which may be
housed within a dwelling in the city but the prohibition against kennels
shall apply to the maintaining for overnight purposes of more than three dogs
in any accessory structure or other structure upon the property outside of
the dwelling or principal building, including, but not limited to, dog
houses, tool or storage sheds, garages or any other permanent or temporary
structures.



   (C)   This section shall not limit the number of handicapped
assistance animals which may be housed outside of the principal dwelling so
long as there is no more than one handicapped assistance animal for any one
disabled person upon the premises requiring the use of such animal. This
exception is intended to provide equal accessibility for all owners of
animals that are trained as assistance animals in a manner that is no less
than that required by the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, being 42
USC 12101 et seq. For purposes of this section, a HANDICAPPED ASSISTANCE
ANIMAL shall be defined to be a guide dog, a signal dog or a service dog.



      (1)   A GUIDE DOG means a seeing eye dog or other dog that
meets the definitional criteria under federal regulations adopted to
implement Title III of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990.



      (2)   A SIGNAL DOG means any dog trained to alert a deaf
person or a person who is hearing impaired to intruders or sound.



      (3)   A SERVICE DOG means any dog individually trained to do
work or perform tasks for the benefit of an individual with a disability,
including but not limited to minimal protective work, rescue work, pulling a
wheelchair, fetching dropped items, or seizure detection.



   (D)   Nothing contained herein shall be construed as allowing for
the creation, establishment or maintenance of any commercial facility housing
dogs, cats or any other animals, regardless of their numbers.



(Ord. 23-1992, passed 10-8-92)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.11  FECES REMOVAL.



   (A)   The owner or person in charge of every dog, except guide dogs
for blind individuals, shall be responsible for the immediate removal of any
feces deposited by his or her dog or dogs on property, public or private, not
owned or possessed by such person who is the owner or person in charge of
such dog or dogs.



   (B)   No person, being the owner or person in charge of any dog
except guide dogs for blind individuals, shall fail to immediately remove
feces deposited by his or her dog or dogs on property, public or private, not
owned or possessed by such person who is the owner or person in charge of
such dog.



   (C)   Any violation of this section shall be a minor misdemeanor
punishable by a fine not to exceed $150 exclusive of the cost of court.



(Ord. 6-1998, passed 5-6-98; Am. Ord. 2-2004, passed 4-7-04)



§ 90.12  FARM ANIMALS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall shelter, maintain, keep or harbor live horses,
mules, cattle, sheep, geese, ducks, turkeys, chickens, pigs, goats, or other
farm-type animals within the municipal limits of the city. This section shall
not apply to the following:



      (1)   Animals which are permitted and licensed upon properties
as provided by Chapter 151 of the code;



      (2)   Animals which are located on the premises of a public or
non-public school located within the city which is chartered by the Ohio
Department of Education and provided such animals are used in the instruction
of students;



      (3)   Animals which are caged and/or confined during actual
transport by vehicle in or through the city; or



      (4)   Prohibited animals which are part of a performance or
exhibition under the direction, control, and/or sponsorship of the Department
of Parks and Recreation, or a contractor to the Department of Parks and
Recreation.



   (B)   All horses, mules, cattle, sheep, geese, ducks, turkeys,
chickens, pigs, goats, or other farm-type animals, which are not otherwise
prohibited, shall be fenced, confined, tethered, or otherwise suitably
restrained by a physical device on the property of the owner, keeper,
harborer or other person having control of such animal.



   (C)   Any person who violates any provision of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor on the first conviction.  If within one year
of the offense a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a subsequent
violation of this section, the person who violates this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(Ord. 4-2009, passed 7-1-09; Am. Ord. 1-2010, passed 1-6-10)



§ 90.13  EXOTIC ANIMALS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall shelter, maintain, keep, harbor, have charge
of, maintain or have control of, within the city a live, exotic, wild or
potentially dangerous animal.  Such exotic, wild or potentially dangerous
animals include, but are not limited to, the following:



      (1)   Any animal listed under the Endangered Species Act as
threatened or endangered or listed on the state's endangered wildlife list.



      (2)   Any animal, the keeping of which is prohibited by state
or federal law.



      (3)   Primates (apes, gibbons, gorillas, orangutans, simangs,
baboons, monkeys and lemurs).



      (4)   Bears.



      (5)   Non-domestic felines of the family Felidae (lions,
tigers, jaguars, leopards, cougars, ocelots, cheetahs, and lynxs) or
domestic-wild cat hybrids.



      (6)   Non-domestic canids, coyotes, foxes or wolves.



      (7)   Alligators, crocodiles, caimans, and related
crocodilians.



      (8)   Beavers, groundhogs, porcupines, skunks, badgers,
martens, minks, weasels, otters, wolverines and fishers.



      (9)   Raccoons.



      (10)   Any large herbivore considered non-domestic or
non-indigenous to Ohio.



      (11)   Deer, antelope, elk, moose, bison.



      (12)   Hyenas.



      (13)   Large or venomous reptiles, komodo dragons, monitor
lizards, gila monsters.



      (14)   Snakes:



         (a)   Any in the family Boidae (all species of boas,
pythons, and anacondas);



         (b)   Venomous snakes; and



         (c)   Snakes that are more than eight feet long
regardless of species.



      (15)   Scorpions, insects and spiders with venom sufficiently
potent to cause serious physical harm to a person.



   (B)   This section shall not apply to the following:



      (1)   Prohibited animals which are caged and/or confined
during actual transport by vehicle in or through the city;



      (2)   Prohibited animals which are located on the premises of
a public or non-public school located within the city which is chartered by
the Ohio Department of Education and provided such animals are used in the
instruction of students and are appropriately caged and/or confined for
safekeeping; and



      (3)   Prohibited animals which are a part of a performance or
exhibition under the direction, control, and/or sponsorship of the Department
of Parks and Recreation or a contractor to the Department of Parks and
Recreation.



   (C)   Any person who violates any provision of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor on the first conviction.  If within one year
of the offense a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a subsequent
violation of this section, the person who violates this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(Ord. 14-2009, passed 12-2-09)



§ 90.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates any section of this chapter, unless otherwise
provided, shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor on the first conviction. 
If within one year of the offense a person is convicted of or pleads guilty
to a subsequent violation of this chapter, the person who violates this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(Ord. 10-2012, passed 11-7-12)



CHAPTER 91:  INTOXICATING LIQUORS



Section



   91.01   Definitions



   91.02   Exemptions from chapter



   91.03   Restrictions applicable to sale of beer and intoxicating
liquor for consumption on the premises



   91.04   Restrictions on sale of beer and liquor



   91.05   Permit required; activities prohibited without permit



   91.06   Illegal transportation prohibited



   91.07   Open container prohibited; exception



   91.08   Underage person shall not purchase intoxicating liquor or
beer



   91.09   Prohibitions; minors under 18 years; low-alcohol beverages



   91.10   Alcohol vaporizing devices prohibited



   91.11   Misrepresentation to obtain alcoholic beverage for a minor
prohibited



   91.12   Misrepresentation by a minor under 21 years



   91.13   [Reserved]



   91.14   Posting of card



   91.15   Good faith acceptances of spurious identification



   91.16   Prohibition against consumption in motor vehicle



   91.17   Hours of sale or consumption



   91.18   Obstructing search of premises prohibited



   91.19   Illegal possession of intoxicating liquor prohibited



   91.20   Prohibition against sale or possession of diluted liquor and
refilled containers



   91.21   Offenses involving underage persons



   91.22   Keeping place where beer or intoxicating liquors are sold in
violation of law



   91.23   Intoxicating liquors shall not be sold in brothels



   91.24   Use of intoxicating liquor in a public dance hall
prohibited; exceptions



   91.25   Poisonously adulterated liquors



   91.26   Tavern keeper permitting rioting or drunkenness



   91.27   Notice of action to prohibit liquor business



   91.28   [Reserved]



   91.29   Procedure when injunction violated



   91.30   Liquor transaction scans



   91.31   Affirmative defenses



 



   91.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Driving while intoxicated or drugged, implied consent, see §§ 73.01
and 73.011



Statutory reference:



   Administrative regulations, see O.A.C. Chapter 4301:1-1



   Liquor permits, see R.C. Chapter 4303



   Local option elections, see R.C. §§ 4301.32 et seq.



   Use of license to violate liquor laws; suspension; procedures, see R.C.
§ 4510.33



§ 91.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALCOHOL.  Ethyl alcohol, whether rectified or diluted with water or
not, whatever its origin may be, and includes synthetic ethyl alcohol.  The
term does not include denatured alcohol and wood alcohol.



   AT RETAIL.  For use or consumption by the purchaser and not for resale.



   BEER.



      (1)   Includes all beverages brewed or fermented wholly or in
part from malt products and containing 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume.



      (2)   Beer, regardless of the percent of alcohol by volume, is
not intoxicating liquor for purposes of this code, the Ohio Revised Code, or
any rules adopted under it.



   CIDER.  All liquids that are fit to use for beverage purposes that
contain 0.5% of alcohol by volume, but not more than 6% of alcohol by weight
that are made through the normal alcoholic fermentation of the juice of
sound, ripe apples, including, without limitation, flavored, sparkling, or
carbonated cider and cider made from pure condensed apple must.



   CLUB.  A corporation or association of individuals organized in good
faith for social, recreational, benevolent, charitable, fraternal, political,
patriotic, or athletic purposes, which is the owner, lessor, or occupant of a
permanent building or part of a permanent building operated solely for such
purposes, membership in which entails the prepayment of regular dues, and
includes the place so operated.



   CONTROLLED ACCESS ALCOHOL AND BEVERAGE CABINET.  A closed container,
either refrigerated, in whole or in part, or nonrefrigerated, access to the
interior of which is restricted by means of a device that requires the use of
a key, magnetic card, or similar device and from which beer, intoxicating
liquor, other beverages, or food may be sold.



   HOTEL.  The same meaning as in R.C. § 3731.01, subject to the
exceptions mentioned in R.C. § 3731.03.



   INTOXICATING LIQUOR and LIQUOR.   All liquids and compounds, other
than beer, containing 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume which are fit to use
for beverage purposes, from whatever source and by whatever process produced,
by whatever name called, and whether they are medicated, proprietary, or
patented.  INTOXICATING LIQUOR and LIQUOR include cider and alcohol, and all
solids and confections which contain 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume.



   LOW-ALCOHOL BEVERAGE.   Any brewed or fermented malt product or any
product made from the fermented juices of grapes, fruits, or other
agricultural products that contains either no alcohol or less than 0.5% of
alcohol by volume.  The beverages described in this definition do not
include a soft drink such as root beer, birch beer, or ginger beer.



   MANUFACTURE.   All processes by which beer or intoxicating liquor is
produced, whether by distillation, rectifying, fortifying, blending,
fermentation, brewing, or in any other manner.



   MANUFACTURER.   Any person engaged in the business of manufacturing
beer or intoxicating liquor.



   MIXED BEVERAGES.   Include bottled and prepared cordials, cocktails,
highballs, and solids and confections that are obtained by mixing any type of
whiskey, neutral spirits, brandy, gin or other distilled spirits with, or
over, carbonated or plain water, pure juices from flowers and plants, and
other flavoring materials.  The completed product shall contain not less
than 0.5% of alcohol by volume and not more than 21% of alcohol by volume.



   NIGHTCLUB.  A place habitually operated for profit, where food is
served for consumption on the premises, and one or more forms of amusement
are provided or permitted for a consideration that may be in the form of a
cover charge or may be included in the price of the food and beverages, or
both, purchased by patrons.



   PERSON.  Includes firms and corporations.



   PHARMACY.  An establishment as defined in R.C. § 4729.01, that is
under the management or control of a licensed pharmacist in accordance with
R.C. § 4729.27.



   RESIDENCE DISTRICT.  Two or more contiguous election precincts located
within the same county and also located within this municipality, as
described by a petition authorized by R.C. § 4301.33, 4301.332, 4303.29 or
4305.14.



   RESTAURANT.  A place located in a permanent building provided with
space and accommodations wherein, in consideration of the payment of money,
hot meals are habitually prepared, sold, and served at noon and evening, as
the principal business of the place.  The term does not include pharmacies,
confectionery stores, lunch stands, nightclubs, and filling stations.



   SALE and SELL.  The exchange, barter, gift, offer for sale, sale,
distribution, and delivery of any kind, and the transfer of title or
possession of beer and intoxicating liquor either by constructive or actual
delivery by any means or devices whatever, including the sale of beer or
intoxicating liquor by means of a controlled access alcohol and beverage
cabinet pursuant to R.C. § 4301.21.  Such terms do not include the mere
solicitation of orders for beer or intoxicating liquor from the holders of
permits issued by the Division of Liquor Control authorizing the sale of the
beer or intoxicating liquor, but no solicitor shall solicit any orders until
the solicitor has been registered with the Division pursuant to R.C. §
4303.25.



   SALES AREA OR TERRITORY. An exclusive geographic area or territory that
is assigned to a particular A or B permit holder and that either has one or
more political subdivisions as its boundaries or consists of an area of land
with readily identifiable geographic boundaries. SALES AREA OR TERRITORY does
not include, however, any particular retail location in an exclusive
geographic area or territory that had been assigned to another A or B permit
holder before April 9, 2001.



   SEALED CONTAINER.  Any container having a capacity of not more than
128 fluid ounces, the opening of which is closed to prevent the entrance of
air.



   SPIRITUOUS LIQUOR.  All intoxicating liquors containing more than 21%
of alcohol by volume.



   VEHICLE.  All means of transportation by land, by water, or by air,
and everything made use of in any way for such transportation.



   WHOLESALE DISTRIBUTOR and DISTRIBUTOR.  A person engaged in the
business of selling to retail dealers for purposes of resale.



   WINE.  All liquids fit to use for beverage purposes containing not
less than 0.5% of alcohol by volume and not more than 21% of alcohol by
volume, which is made from the fermented juices of grapes, fruits, or other
agricultural products.  Except as provided in R.C. § 4301.01(B)(3), the
term does not include cider.



(R.C. §§ 4301.01, 4301.244)



§ 91.02  EXEMPTIONS FROM CHAPTER.



   The provisions of this chapter do not prevent the following:



   (A)   The storage of intoxicating liquor in bonded warehouses,
established in accordance with the Acts of Congress and under the regulation
of the United States, located in the municipality, or the transportation of
intoxicating liquor to or from bonded warehouses of the United States
wherever located.



   (B)   A bona fide resident of this state who is the owner of a
warehouse receipt from obtaining or transporting to the resident's residence
for the resident's own consumption and not for resale spirituous liquor
stored in a government bonded warehouse in this state or in another state
prior to December 1933, subject to such terms as are prescribed by the
Division of Liquor Control.



   (C)   The manufacture of cider from fruit for the purpose of making
vinegar, and nonintoxicating cider and fruit juices for use and sale.



   (D)   A licensed physician or dentist from administering or
dispensing intoxicating liquor or alcohol to a patient in good faith in the
actual course of the practice of the physician's or dentist's profession.



   (E)   The sale of alcohol to physicians, dentists, druggists,
veterinary surgeons, manufacturers, hospitals, infirmaries, or medical or
educational institutions using the alcohol for medicinal, mechanical,
chemical or scientific purposes.



   (F)   The sale, gift, or keeping for sale by druggists and others of
any of the medicinal preparations manufactured in accordance with the
formulas prescribed by the United States Pharmacopoeia and National
Formulary, patent or proprietary preparations, and other bona fide medicinal
and technical preparations, which contain no more alcohol than is necessary
to hold the medicinal agents in solution and to preserve the same, which are
manufactured and sold as medicines and not as beverages, are unfit for use
for beverage purposes, and the sale of which does not require the payment of
a United States liquor dealer's tax.



   (G)   The manufacture and sale of tinctures or of toilet, medicinal
and antiseptic preparations and solutions not intended for internal human use
nor to be sold as beverages, and which are unfit for beverage purposes, if
upon the outside of each bottle, box, or package of which there is printed in
English, conspicuously and legibly, the quantity by volume of alcohol in the
preparation or solution.



   (H)   The manufacture and keeping for sale of the food products
known as flavoring extracts when manufactured and sold for cooking, culinary
or flavoring purposes, and which are unfit for use for beverage purposes.



   (I)   The lawful sale of wood alcohol or of ethyl alcohol for
external use when combined with other substances as to make it unfit for
internal use.



   (J)   The manufacture, sale, and transport of ethanol or ethyl
alcohol for use as fuel. As used in this division, ETHANOL has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 5733.46.



   (K)   The purchase and importation into the municipality or the
purchase at wholesale from A or B permit holders in this state of beer and
intoxicating liquor for use in manufacturing processes of nonbeverage food
products under terms prescribed by the Division, provided that the terms
prescribed by the Division shall not increase the cost of the beer or
intoxicating liquor to any person, firm or corporation purchasing and
importing it into this municipality or purchasing it from an A or B permit
holder for that use.



   (L)   Any resident of this state or any member of the armed forces
of the United States who has attained the age of 21 years from bringing into
this municipality for personal use and not for resale not more than one liter
of spirituous liquor, 4.5 liters of wine, or 288 ounces of beer in any 30-day
period, and the same is free of any tax consent fee when the resident or
member of the armed forces physically possesses and accompanies the
spirituous liquor, wine or beer on returning from a foreign country, another
state, or an insular possession of the United States.



   (M)   Persons at least 21 years of age who collect ceramic
commemorative bottles containing spirituous liquor that have unbroken federal
tax stamps on them from selling or trading the bottles to other collectors.
The bottles shall originally have been purchased at retail from the Division,
legally imported under division (L) of this section, or legally imported
pursuant to a supplier registration issued by the Division. The sales shall
be for the purpose of exchanging a ceramic commemorative bottle between
private collectors and shall not be for the purpose of selling the spirituous
liquor for personal consumption. The sale or exchange authorized by this
division shall not occur on the premises of any permit holder, shall not be
made in connection with the business of any permit holder, and shall not be
made in connection with any mercantile business.



   (N)   The sale of beer or intoxicating liquor without a liquor
permit at a private residence, not more than five times per calendar year at
a residence address, at an event that has the following characteristics:



      (1)   The event is for a charitable, benevolent, or political
purpose, but shall not include any event the proceeds of which are for the
profit or gain of any individual;



      (2)   The event has in attendance not more than 50 people;



      (3)   The event shall be for a period not to exceed 12 hours;



      (4)   The sale of beer and intoxicating liquor at the event
shall not take place between 2:30 a.m. and 5:30 a.m.;



      (5)   No person under 21 years of age shall purchase or
consume beer or intoxicating liquor at the event and no beer or intoxicating
liquor shall be sold to any person under 21 years of age at the event; and



      (6)   No person at the event shall sell or furnish beer or
intoxicating liquor to an intoxicated person.



   (O)   The possession or consumption of beer or intoxicating liquor
by a person who is under 21 years of age and who is a student at an
accredited college or university, provided that both of the following apply:



      (1)   The person is required to taste and expectorate the beer
or intoxicating liquor for a culinary, food service, or hospitality course.



      (2)   The person is under the direct supervision of the
instructor of the culinary, food service, or hospitality course.



(R.C. § 4301.20)



§ 91.03  RESTRICTIONS APPLICABLE TO SALE OF BEER AND INTOXICATING LIQUOR
FOR CONSUMPTION ON THE PREMISES.



   (A)   The sale of beer or intoxicating liquor for consumption on the
premises is subject to the following restrictions, in addition to those
imposed by the rules and orders of the Division of Liquor Control:



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C.
Chapter 4301, beer or intoxicating liquor may be served to a person not
seated at a table unless there is reason to believe that the beer or
intoxicating liquor so served will be consumed by a person under 21 years of
age.



      (2)   Beer or intoxicating liquor may be served by a hotel in
the room of a bona fide guest, and may be sold by a hotel holding a D-5a
permit, or a hotel holding a D-3 or D-5 permit that otherwise meets all of
the requirements for holding a D-5a permit, by means of a controlled access
alcohol and beverage cabinet that shall be located only in the hotel room of
a registered guest.  A hotel may sell beer or intoxicating liquor as
authorized by its permit to a registered guest by means of a controlled
access alcohol and beverage cabinet in accordance with the following
requirements:



         (a)   Only a person 21 years of age or older who is a
guest registered to stay in a guestroom shall be provided a key, magnetic
card, or other similar device necessary to obtain access to the contents of a
controlled access alcohol and beverage cabinet in that guestroom.



         (b)   The hotel shall comply with § 91.04 and R.C. §
4301.22 in connection with the handling, restocking, and replenishing of the
beer and intoxicating liquor in the controlled access alcohol and beverage
cabinet.



         (c)   The hotel shall replenish or restock beer and
intoxicating liquor in any controlled access alcohol and beverage cabinet
only during the hours during which the hotel may serve or sell beer and
intoxicating liquor.



         (d)   The registered guest shall verify in writing that
the guest has read and understands the language that shall be posted on the
controlled access alcohol and beverage cabinet as required by division
(A)(2)(e) of this section.



         (e)   A hotel authorized to sell beer and intoxicating
liquor pursuant to division (A)(2) of this section shall post on the
controlled access alcohol and beverage cabinet, in conspicuous language, the
following notice:



            "The alcoholic beverages contained in this cabinet
shall not be removed from the premises."



         (f)   The hotel shall maintain a record of each sale of
beer or intoxicating liquor made by the hotel by means of a controlled access
alcohol and beverage cabinet for any period in which the permit holder is
authorized to hold the permit pursuant to R.C. §§ 4303.26 and 4303.27 and
any additional period during which an applicant exercises its right to appeal
a rejection by the Division of Liquor Control to renew a permit pursuant to
R.C. § 4303.271.  The records maintained by the hotel shall comply with
both of the following:



            1.   Include the name, address, age, and signature
of each hotel guest who is provided access by the hotel to a controlled
access alcohol and beverage cabinet pursuant to division (A)(2)(a) of this
section;



            2.   Be made available during business hours to
authorized agents of the Division of Liquor Control pursuant to R.C. §
4301.10(A)(6) or to enforcement agents of the Department of Public Safety
pursuant to R.C. §§ 5502.13 to 5502.19.



         (g)   The hotel shall observe all other applicable rules
adopted by the Division of Liquor Control and the Liquor Control Commission.



      (3)   The seller shall not require the purchase of food with
the purchase of beer or intoxicating liquor; nor shall the seller of beer or
intoxicating liquor give away food of any kind in connection with the sale of
beer or intoxicating liquor, except as authorized by rule of the state Liquor
Control Commission.



      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 4301.62(B)(8),
the seller shall not permit the purchaser to remove beer or intoxicating
liquor so sold from the premises.



      (5)   A hotel authorized to sell beer and intoxicating liquor
pursuant to division (A)(2) of this section shall provide a registered guest
with the opportunity to refuse to accept a key, magnetic card, or other
similar device necessary to obtain access to the contents of a controlled
access alcohol and beverage cabinet in that guest room.  If a registered
guest refuses to accept such key, magnetic card, or other similar device, the
hotel shall not assess any charges on the registered guest for use of the
controlled access alcohol and beverage cabinet in that guest room.



(R.C. § 4301.21)



   (B)   Whoever violates division (A)(4) of this section is guilty of
a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 4301.99(C))  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.04  RESTRICTIONS ON SALE OF BEER AND LIQUOR.



   (A)   Restrictions on sales.  Sales of beer and intoxicating liquor
under all classes of permits and from liquor stores are subject to the
following restrictions, in addition to those imposed by the rules or orders
of the state Division of Liquor Control.



      (1)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or
in R.C. Chapter 4301, no beer or intoxicating liquor shall be sold to any
person under 21 years of age.



         (b)   No low-alcohol beverage shall be sold to any
person under 18 years of age.  No permit issued by the Division shall be
suspended, revoked, or cancelled because of a violation of this division
(A)(1)(b).



         (c)   No intoxicating liquor shall be handled by any
person under 21 years of age, except that a person 18 years of age or older
employed by a permit holder may handle or sell beer or intoxicating liquor in
sealed containers in connection with wholesale or retail sales, and any
person 19 years of age or older employed by a permit holder may handle
intoxicating liquor in open containers when acting in the capacity of a
server in a hotel, restaurant, club, or night club, as defined in § 91.01,
or in the premises of a D-7 permit holder.  This section does not authorize
persons under 21 years of age to sell intoxicating liquor across a bar.  Any
person employed by a permit holder may handle beer or intoxicating liquor in
sealed containers in connection with manufacturing, storage, warehousing,
placement, stocking, bagging, loading, or unloading, and may handle beer or
intoxicating liquor in open containers in connection with cleaning tables or
handling empty bottles or glasses.



      (2)   No permit holder and no agent or employee of a permit
holder shall sell or furnish beer or intoxicating liquor to an intoxicated
person.



      (3)   (a)   No sales of intoxicating liquor shall be made
after 2:30 a.m. on Sunday, except under either of the following circumstances:



            1.   Intoxicating liquor may be sold on Sunday
under authority of a permit that authorizes Sunday sale.



            2.   Spiritous liquor may be sold on Sunday by any
person awarded an agency contract under R.C. § 4301.17 if the sale of
spiritous liquor is authorized in the applicable precinct as the result of an
election on question (B)(1) or (B)(2) of R.C. § 4301.351 and if the agency
contract authorizes the sale of spiritous liquor on Sunday.



         (b)   This section does not prevent the municipality
from adopting a closing hour for the sale of intoxicating liquor earlier than
2:30 a.m. on Sunday or to provide that no intoxicating liquor may be sold
prior to that hour on Sunday.



      (4)   No holder of a permit shall give away any beer or
intoxicating liquor of any kind at any time in connection with the permit
holder's business.



      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, no retail
permit holder shall display or permit the display on the outside of any
licensed retail premises, on any lot of ground on which the licensed premises
are situated, or on the exterior of any building of which the licensed
premises are a part, any sign, illustration, or advertisement bearing the
name, brand name, trade name, trademark, designation, or other emblem of, or
indicating the manufacturer, producer, distributor, place of manufacture,
production, or distribution of, any beer or intoxicating liquor.  Signs,
illustrations, or advertisements bearing the name, brand name, trade name,
trademark, designation, or other emblem of or indicating the manufacturer,
producer, distributor, place of manufacture, production, or distribution of
beer or intoxicating liquor may be displayed and permitted to be displayed on
the interior or in the show windows of any licensed premises, if the
particular brand or type of product so advertised is actually available for
sale on the premises at the time of that display.  The Liquor Control
Commission shall determine by rule the size and character of those signs,
illustrations, or advertisements.



      (6)   No retail permit holder shall possess on the licensed
premises any barrel or other container from which beer is drawn, unless there
is attached to the spigot or other dispensing apparatus the name of the
manufacturer of the product contained in the barrel or other container,
provided that, if the beer is served at a bar, the manufacturer's name or
brand shall appear in full view of the purchaser.  The Commission shall
regulate the size and character of the devices provided for in this section.



      (7)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, no sale
of any gift certificate shall be permitted whereby beer or intoxicating
liquor of any kind is to be exchanged for the certificate, unless the gift
certificate can be exchanged only for food, and beer or intoxicating liquor,
for on-premises consumption and the value of the beer or intoxicating liquor
does not exceed more than 30% of the total value of the gift certificate. 
The sale of gift certificates for the purchase of beer, wine, or mixed
beverages shall be permitted for the purchase of beer, wine, or mixed
beverages for off-premises consumption.  Limitations on the use of a gift
certificate for the purchase of beer, wine, or mixed beverages for
off-premises consumption may be expressed by clearly stamping or typing on
the face of the certificate that the certificate may not be used for the
purchase of beer, wine, or mixed beverages for on-premises consumption.



(R.C. § 4301.22)



   (B)   Division (A)(1) not modified or affected.  Sections 91.10
through 91.14, and R.C. §§ 4301.633 through 4301.637 shall not be deemed to
modify or affect division (A)(1) of this section or R.C. § 4301.22(A).



(R.C. § 4301.638)



   (C)   Penalties.



      (1)   Whoever violates divisions (A)(1)(b) or (A)(3) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 4301.99(B))



      (2)   Whoever violates divisions (A)(1)(a), (A)(1)(c) or
(A)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4301.99(D), (H))  Penalty, see § 91.99



Statutory reference:



   Suspension of beer and liquor sales during emergency, see R.C. §
4301.251



§ 91.05  PERMIT REQUIRED; ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED WITHOUT PERMIT.



   (A)   Permit required.



      (1)   No person personally or by the person's clerk, agent, or
employee, shall manufacture, manufacture for sale, offer, keep, or possess
for sale, furnish or sell, or solicit the purchase or sale of any beer or
intoxicating liquor in this state, or transport, import, or cause to be
transported or imported any beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol in or into
this municipality for delivery, use or sale, unless the person has fully
complied with R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303 or is the holder of a permit issued
by the Division of Liquor Control and in force at the time.



      (2)   No manufacturer, supplier, wholesale distributor,
broker, or retailer of beer or intoxicating liquor, or other person shall
employ, retain, or otherwise utilize any person in this state to act as an
employee, agent, solicitor, or salesperson, or act in any other
representative capacity to sell, solicit, take orders, or receive offers to
purchase or expressions of interest to purchase beer or intoxicating liquor
from any person, at any location other than a liquor permit premises, except
as specifically authorized by R.C. Chapter 4301 or R.C. Chapter 4303 or rules
adopted thereunder. No function, event, or party shall take place at any
location other than a liquor permit premises where any person acts in any
manner to sell, solicit, take orders, or receive offers to purchase or
expressions of intent to purchase beer or intoxicating liquor to or from any
person, except as specifically authorized by R.C. Chapter 4301 or R.C.
Chapter 4303 or rules adopted thereunder.



(R.C. § 4303.25)



   (B)   Activities prohibited without permit.



      (1)   No person, personally  or by the person's clerk, agent,
or employee, who is not the holder of an A permit issued by the Division of
Liquor Control, in force at the time, and authorizing the manufacture of beer
or intoxicating liquor, or who is not an agent or employee of the Department
authorized to manufacture beer or intoxicating liquor, shall manufacture any
beer or intoxicating liquor for sale, or shall manufacture spirituous liquor.



      (2)   No person, personally  or by the person's clerk, agent,
or employee, who is not the holder of an A, B, C, D, E, F, G, I, or S permit
issued by the Department, in force at the time, and authorizing the sale of
beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol, or who is not an agent or employee of
the Department or the Tax Commissioner authorized to sell beer, intoxicating
liquor, or alcohol, shall sell, keep, or possess beer, intoxicating liquor,
or alcohol for sale to any persons other than those authorized by this
chapter and R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303 to purchase any beer or intoxicating
liquor, or sell any alcohol at retail. This division does not apply to or
affect the sale or possession for sale of any low-alcohol beverage.



      (3)   No person, personally  or by the person's clerk, agent,
or employee, who is the holder of a permit issued by the Department, shall
sell, keep, or possess for sale any intoxicating liquor not purchased from
the Department or from the holder of a permit issued by the Department
authorizing the sale of intoxicating liquor, unless the same has been
purchased with the special consent of the Department. The Department shall
revoke the permit of any person convicted of a violation of this division.



(R.C. § 4301.58)



   (C)   Penalty. Whoever violates division (B) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 4301.99(C))



§ 91.06  ILLEGAL TRANSPORTATION PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person, who is not the holder of an H permit shall
transport beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol in this municipality.  This
section does not apply to the transportation and delivery of beer, alcohol,
or intoxicating liquor purchased or to be purchased from the holder of a
permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control, in force at the time, and
authorizing the sale and delivery of the beer, alcohol, or intoxicating
liquor so transported, or to the transportation and delivery of beer,
intoxicating liquor, or alcohol purchased from the Department or the Tax
Commissioner, or purchased by the holder of an A or B permit outside this
state, and transported within this municipality by them in their own trucks
for the purpose of sale under their permits.



(R.C. § 4301.60)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.



(R.C. § 4301.99(C))



§ 91.07  OPEN CONTAINER PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.



   (A)   As used in this section:



      CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINE. Means a vehicle registered under R.C. §
4503.24.



      HIGHWAY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.



      MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.



      STREET. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.



   (B)   No person shall have in the person’s possession an opened
container of beer or intoxicating liquor in any of the following
circumstances:



      (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(1)(e) of this
section, in a state liquor store;



      (2)   Except as provided in division (C) of this section, on
the premises of the holder of any permit issued by the Division of Liquor
Control;



      (3)   In any other public place;



      (4)   Except as provided in division (D) or (E) of this
section, while operating or being a passenger in or on a motor vehicle on any
street, highway, or other public or private property open to the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking;



      (5)   Except as provided in division (D) or (E) of this
section, while being in or on a stationary motor vehicle on any street,
highway, or other public or private property open to the public for purposes
of vehicular travel or parking.



   (C)   (1)   A person may have in the person’s possession an
opened container of any of the following:



         (a)   Beer or intoxicating liquor that has been lawfully
purchased for consumption on the premises where bought from the holder of an
A-1-A, A-2, A-3a, D-1, D-2, D-3, D-3a, D-4, D-4a, D-5, D-5a, D-5b, D-5c,
D-5d, D-5e, D-5f, D-5g, D-5h, D-5i, D-5j, D-5k, D-5l, D-5m, D-5n, D-5o, D-7,
D-8, E, F, F-2, F-5, F-7, or F-8 permit;



         (b)   Beer, wine, or mixed beverages served for
consumption on the premises by the holder of an F-3 permit or wine served for
consumption on the premises by the holder of an F-4 or F-6 permit;



         (c)   Beer or intoxicating liquor consumed on the
premises of a convention facility as provided in R.C. § 4303.201;



         (d)   Beer or intoxicating liquor to be consumed during
tastings and samplings approved by rule of the Liquor Control Commission;



         (e)   Spiritous liquor to be consumed for purposes of a
tasting sample, as defined in R.C. § 4301.171.



      (2)   A person may have in the person’s possession on an F
liquor permit premises an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor
that was not purchased from the holder of the F permit if the premises for
which the F permit is issued is a music festival and the holder of the F
permit grants permission for that possession on the premises during the
period for which the F permit is issued. As used in this division (C)(2),
MUSIC FESTIVAL means a series of outdoor live musical performances extending
for a period of at least three consecutive days and located on an area of
land of at least 40 acres.



      (3)   (a)   A person may have in the person’s possession
on a D-2 liquor permit premises an opened or unopened container of wine that
was not purchased from the holder of the D-2 permit if the premises for which
the D-2 permit is issued is an outdoor performing arts center, the person is
attending an orchestral performance, and the holder of the D-2 permit grants
permission for the possession and consumption of wine in certain
predesignated areas of the premises during the period for which the D-2
permit is issued.



         (b)   As used in division (C)(3)(a) of this section:



            ORCHESTRAL PERFORM-ANCE. Means a concert comprised of
a group of not fewer than 40 musicians playing various musical instruments.



            OUTDOOR PERFORMING ARTS CENTER. Means an outdoor
performing arts center that is located on not less than 150 acres of land and
that is open for performances from the first day of April to the last day of
October of each year.



      (4)   A person may have in the person’s possession an opened
or unopened container of beer or intoxicating liquor at an outdoor location
at which the person is attending an orchestral performance as defined in
division (C)(3)(b) of this section if the person with supervision and control
over the performance grants permission for the possession and consumption of
beer or intoxicating liquor in certain predesignated areas of that outdoor
location.



      (5)   (a)   A person may have in the person’s possession
on an F-9 liquor permit premises an opened or unopened container of beer or
intoxicating liquor that was not purchased from the holder of the F-9 permit
if the person is attending an orchestral performance and the holder of the
F-9 permit grants permission for the possession and consumption of beer or
intoxicating liquor in certain predesignated areas of the premises during the
period for which the F-9 permit is issued.



         (b)   As used in division (C)(5) of this section,
ORCHESTRAL PERFORMANCE has the same meaning as in division (C)(3)(b) of this
section.



      (6)   (a)   A person may have in the person’s possession
on the property of an outdoor motorsports facility an opened or unopened
container of beer or intoxicating liquor that was not purchased from the
owner of the facility if both of the following apply:



            1.   The person is attending a racing event at the
facility; and



            2.   The owner of the facility grants permission
for the possession and consumption of beer or intoxicating liquor on the
property of the facility.



         (b)   As used in division (C)(6)(a) of this section:



            OUTDOOR MOTORSPORTS FACILITY. An outdoor racetrack to
which all of the following apply:



               a.   It is 2.4 miles or more in length.



               b.   It is located on 200 acres or more of
land.



               c.   The primary business of the owner of
the facility is the hosting and promoting of racing events.



               d.   The holder of a D-1, D-2, or D-3 permit
is located on the property of the facility.



            RACING EVENT. A motor vehicle racing event sanctioned
by one or more motor racing sanctioning organizations.



      (7)   (a)   A person may have in the person’s possession
an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor at an outdoor location
within an outdoor refreshment area created under R.C. § 4301.82 if the
opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor was purchased from a
qualified permit holder to which both of the following apply:



            1.   The permit holder’s premises is located
within the outdoor refreshment area.



            2.   The permit held by the permit holder has an
outdoor refreshment area designation.



         (b)   Division (C)(7) of this section does not authorize
a person to do either of the following:



            1.   Enter the premises of an establishment within
an outdoor refreshment area while possessing an opened container of beer or
intoxicating liquor acquired elsewhere;



            2.   Possess an opened container of beer or
intoxicating liquor while being in or on a motor vehicle within an outdoor
refreshment area, unless the motor vehicle is stationary and is not being
operated in a lane of vehicular travel or unless the possession is otherwise
authorized under division (D) or (E) of this section.



      (8)   (a)   A person may have in the person’s possession
on the property of a market, within a



defined F-8 permit premises, an opened container of beer or intoxicating
liquor that was purchased from a D permit premises that is located
immediately adjacent to the market if both of the following apply:



            1.   The market grants permission for the
possession and consumption of beer and intoxicating liquor within the defined
F-8 permit premises;



            2.   The market is hosting an event pursuant to an
F-8 permit and the market has notified the division of liquor control about
the event in accordance with R.C. § 4303.208(A)(3).



         (b)   As used in division (c)(8) of this section,
“market” means a market, for which an F-8 permit is held, that has been
in operation since 1860.



   (D)   This section does not apply to a person who pays all or a
portion of the fee imposed for use of a chauffeured limousine pursuant to a
prearranged contract or the guest of the person, when all of the following
apply:



      (1)   The person or guest is a passenger in the limousine.



      (2)   The person or guest is located in the limousine, but is
not occupying a seat in the front compartment of the limousine where the
operator of the limousine is located.



      (3)   The limousine is located on any street, highway, or
other public or private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking.



   (E)   An opened bottle of wine that was purchased from the holder of
a permit that authorizes the sale of wine for consumption on the premises
where sold is not an opened container for the purposes of this section if
both of the following apply:



      (1)   The opened bottle of wine is securely resealed by the
permit holder or an employee of the permit holder before the bottle is
removed from the premises. The bottle shall be secured in such a manner that
it is visibly apparent if the bottle has been subsequently opened or tampered
with.



      (2)   The opened bottle of wine that is resealed in accordance
with division (E)(1) of this section is stored in the trunk of a motor
vehicle or, if the motor vehicle does not have a trunk, behind the last
upright seat or in an area not normally occupied by the driver or passengers
and not easily accessible by the driver.(R.C. § 4301.62)



   (F)   (1)   Except if an ordinance or resolution is enacted or
adopted under division (F)(2) of this section, this section does not apply to
a person who, pursuant to a prearranged contract, is a passenger riding on a
commercial quadricycle when all of the following apply:



         (a)   The person is not occupying a seat in the front of
the commercial quadricycle where the operator is steering or braking.



         (b)   The commercial quadricycle is being operated on a
street, highway, or other public or private property open to the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking.



         (c)   The person has in their possession on the
commercial quadricycle an opened container of beer or wine.



         (d)   The person has in their possession on the
commercial quadricycle not more than either 36 ounces of beer or 18 ounces of
wine.



      (2)   The Legislative Authority may enact an ordinance or
adopt a resolution, as applicable, that prohibits a passenger riding on a
commercial quadricycle from possessing an opened container of beer or wine.



      (3)   As used in this section, COMMERCIAL QUADRICYCLE means a
vehicle that has fully- operative pedals for propulsion entirely by human
power and that meets all of the following requirements:



         (a)   It has four wheels and is operated in a manner
similar to a bicycle.



         (b)   It has at least five seats for passengers.



         (c)   It is designed to be powered by the pedaling of
the operator and the passengers.



         (d)   It is used for commercial purposes.



         (e)   It is operated by the vehicle owner or an employee
of the owner.



   (G)   (1)   This section does not apply to a person that has in
the person’s possession an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor
on the premises of a market if the beer or intoxicating liquor has been
purchased from a D liquor permit holder that is located in the market.



      (2)   As used in division (G) of this section, “market”
means an establishment that:



         (a)   Leases space in the market to individual vendors,
not less than 50% of which are retail food establishments or food service
operations licensed under R.C. Chapter 3717;



         (b)   Has an indoor sales floor area of not less than
22,000 square feet;



         (c)   Hosts a farmer’s market on each Saturday from
April through December.



(R.C. § 4301.62)



   (H)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4301.99(A))



§ 91.08  UNDERAGE PERSON SHALL NOT PURCHASE INTOXICATING LIQUOR OR BEER.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C.
Chapter 4301, no person under the age of 21 years shall purchase beer or
intoxicating liquor.



(R.C. § 4301.63)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $25
nor more than $100.  The court imposing a fine for a violation of this
section may order that the fine be paid by the performance of public work at
a reasonable hourly rate established by the court.  The court shall
designate the time within which the public work shall be completed.



(R.C. § 4301.99(E))



§ 91.09  PROHIBITIONS; MINORS UNDER 18 YEARS; LOW-ALCOHOL BEVERAGES.



   (A)   As used in this section, UNDERAGE PERSON means a person under
18 years of age.



   (B)   No underage person shall purchase any low-alcohol beverage.



   (C)   No underage person shall order, pay for, share the cost of, or
attempt to purchase any low-alcohol beverage.



   (D)   No person shall knowingly furnish any false information as to
the name, age, or other identification of any underage person for the purpose
of obtaining or with the intent to obtain any low-alcohol beverage for an
underage person, by purchase or as a gift.



   (E)   No underage person shall knowingly show or give false
information concerning his or her name, age, or other identification for the
purpose of purchasing or otherwise obtaining any low-alcohol beverage in any
place in this municipality.



   (F)   No person shall sell or furnish any low-alcohol beverage to,
or buy any low-alcohol beverage for, an underage person, unless given by a
physician in the regular line of his or her practice or given for established
religious purposes, or unless the underage person is accompanied by a parent,
spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian.



   (G)   (1)   No person who is the owner or occupant of any public
or private place shall knowingly allow any underage person to remain in or on
the place while possessing or consuming any low-alcohol beverage, unless the
low-alcohol beverage is given to the person possessing or consuming it by
that person's parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal
guardian, and the parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal
guardian is present when the person possesses or consumes the low-alcohol
beverage.



      (2)   An owner of a public or private place is not liable for
acts or omissions in violation of division (G)(1) that are committed by a
lessee of that place, unless the owner authorizes or acquiesces in the
lessee's acts or omissions.



   (H)   No permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control shall be
suspended, revoked, or cancelled because of a violation of either division
(F) or (G).



   (I)   No underage person shall knowingly possess or consume any
low-alcohol beverage in any public or private place, unless he or she is
accompanied by a parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal
guardian, or unless the low-alcohol beverage is given by a physician in the
regular line of his or her practice or given for established religious
purposes.



   (J)   No parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal
guardian of an underage person shall knowingly permit the underage person to
violate this section.



(R.C. § 4301.631)



   (K)   (1)   Whoever violates any provision of this section for
which no other penalty is provided is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.



(R.C. § 4301.99(B))



      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section shall be
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  The court imposing a fine for a violation of
division (B) of this section may order that the fine be paid by the
performance of public work at a reasonable hourly rate established by the
court.  The court shall designate the time within which the public work
shall be completed.



(R.C. § 4301.99(E))  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.10  ALCOHOL VAPORIZING DEVICES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   As used in this section, ALCOHOL VAPORIZING DEVICE means a
machine or other device that mixes beer or intoxicating liquor with pure
oxygen or any other gas to produce a vaporized product for the purpose of
consumption by inhalation.



   (B)   No person shall sell or offer for sale an alcohol vaporizing
device.



   (C)   No person shall purchase or use an alcohol vaporizing device.



(R.C. § 4301.65)



   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is
guilty of misdemeanor of the third degree. For a second or subsequent
violation occurring within a period of five consecutive years after the first
violation, a person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 4301.99(J))



      (2)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty
of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4301.99(A))



§ 91.11  MISREPRESENTATION TO OBTAIN ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE FOR A MINOR
PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C.
Chapter 4301, no person shall knowingly furnish any false information as to
the name, age, or other identification of any person under 21 years of age,
for the purpose of obtaining, or with the intent to obtain, beer or
intoxicating liquor for a person under 21 years of age, by purchase, or as a
gift.



(R.C. § 4301.633)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.



(R.C. § 4301.99(C))



§ 91.12  MISREPRESENTATION BY A MINOR UNDER 21 YEARS.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C.
Chapter 4301, no person under the age of 21 years shall knowingly show or
give false information concerning his or her name, age, or other
identification for the purpose of purchasing or otherwise obtaining beer or
intoxicating liquor in any place in this municipality where beer or
intoxicating liquor is sold under a permit issued by the Division of Liquor
Control, or sold by the Division of Liquor Control.



(R.C. § 4301.634)



   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates § 91.12 is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the first degree.  If, in committing a first violation of § 91.12, the
offender presented to the permit holder or his or her employee or agent a
false, fictitious, or altered identification card, a false or fictitious
driver's license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver's license
issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than $250 and not
more than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more
than six months.



      (2)   On a second violation in which, for the second time, the
offender presented to the permit holder or his or her employee or agent a
false, fictitious, or altered identification card, a false or fictitious
driver's license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver's license
issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than $500 nor
more than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more
than six months.  The court also may suspend the offender's driver's or
commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operation privilege or
deny the offender the opportunity to be issued a driver's or commercial
driver's license for a period not exceeding 60 days.



      (3)   On a third or subsequent violation in which, for the
third or subsequent time, the offender presented to the permit holder or his
or her employee or agent a false, fictitious, or altered identification card,
a false or fictitious driver’s license purportedly issued by any state, or
a driver’s license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less
than $500 nor more than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of
imprisonment of not more than six months.  Except as provided in this
division, the court also may impose a class six suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or
nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. §
4510.02(A)(6), and the court may order that the suspension or denial remain
in effect until the offender attains the age of 21 years. The court, in lieu
of suspending the offender’s temporary instruction permit, probationary
driver’s license, or driver’s license, instead may order the offender to
perform a determinate number of hours of community service, with the court
determining the actual number of hours and the nature of the community
service the offender shall perform.



(R.C. § 4301.99(F))



§ 91.13  [RESERVED]



Editor's note:



   This section, formerly based on R.C. § 4301.211 (Prohibitions on Price
Advertising), was repealed because underlying state law was repealed.



§ 91.14  POSTING OF CARD.



   (A)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 4301.691,
every place in this municipality where beer, intoxicating liquor, or any
low-alcohol beverage is sold for beverage purposes shall display at all
times, in a prominent place on the premises thereof, a printed card, which
shall be furnished by the Division of Liquor Control and which shall read
substantially as follows:



   WARNING TO PERSONS UNDER AGE



   If you are under the age of 21



Under the statutes of the state of Ohio, if you order, pay for, share the
cost of, or attempt to purchase, or possess or consume beer or intoxicating
liquor in any public place, or furnish false information as to name, age, or
other identification, you are subject to a fine of up to $1,000, or
imprisonment up to 6 months, or both.



   If you are under the age of 18



Under the statutes of the state of Ohio, if you order, pay for, share the
cost of, or attempt to purchase, or posses or consume, any type of beer or
wine that contains either no alcohol or less than one-half of one per cent of
alcohol by volume in any public place, or furnish false information as to the
name, age, or other identification, you are subject to a fine of up to $250
or to imprisonment up to 30 days, or both.



      (2)   No person shall be subject to any criminal prosecution
or any proceedings before the Department or the Liquor Control Commission for
failing to display this card.  No permit issued by the Department shall be
suspended, revoked, or canceled because of the failure of the permit holder
to display this card.



   (B)   (1)   Every place in this municipality for which a D permit
has been issued under R.C. Chapter 4303 shall be issued a printed card by the
Division of Liquor Control that shall read substantially as follows:



   WARNING



   If you are carrying a firearm



Under the statutes of Ohio, if you possess a firearm in any room in which
liquor is being dispensed in premises for which a D permit has been issued
under Chapter 4303 of the Revised Code, you may be guilty of a felony and may
be subjected to a prison term of up to one year.



      (2)   No person shall be subject to any criminal prosecution
or any proceedings before the Division of Liquor Control or the Liquor
Control Commission for failing to display this card. No permit issued by the
Department shall be suspended, revoked, or canceled because of the failure of
the permit holder to display this card.



(R.C. § 4301.637)  Penalty, see § 91.99



Statutory reference:



   Carrying concealed weapon, felony, see R.C. § 2923.12



   Possessing firearm in liquor permit premises, exceptions, defenses, see
R.C. § 2923.121



§ 91.15  GOOD FAITH ACCEPTANCES OF SPURIOUS IDENTIFICATION.



   (A)   No permit holder, agent or employee of a permit holder, or any
other person may be found guilty of a violation of any section of this
chapter in which age is any element of the offense, if any court of record
finds all of the following:



      (1)   That the person buying, at the time of so doing,
exhibited to the permit holder, the agent or employee of the permit holder,
or the other person a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an
identification card as defined in R.C. § 4301.61, a military identification
card issued by the United States Department of Defense, or a United States or
foreign passport, that displays a picture of the individual for whom the
license, card, or passport was issued and shows that the person buying was
then at least 21 years of age if the person was buying beer as defined in
R.C. § 4301.01 or intoxicating liquor, or that the person was then at least
18 years of age if the person was buying any low- alcohol beverage;



      (2)   That the permit holder, the agent or employee of the
permit holder, or the other person made a bona fide effort to ascertain the
true age of the person buying by checking the identification presented at the
time of the purchase to ascertain that the description on the identification
compared with the appearance of the buyer and that the identification
presented had not been altered in any way.



      (3)   That the permit holder, the agent or employee of the
permit holder, or the other person had reason to believe that the person
buying was of legal age.



   (B)   The defense provided by division (A) of this section is in
addition to the affirmative defense provided by § 91.31.



(R.C. § 4301.639(A), (C))



§ 91.16  CONSUMPTION IN MOTOR VEHICLE PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall consume any beer or intoxicating liquor in a
motor vehicle. This section does not apply to persons described in R.C. §
4301.62(D) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



(R.C. § 4301.64)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree. If an offender who violates this section was under the age
of 18 years at the time of the offense, the court, in addition to any other
penalties it imposes upon the offender, may suspend the offender’s
temporary instruction permit, probationary driver’s license or driver’s
license for a period of not less than six months and not more than one
year.  In lieu of suspending the offender’s temporary instruction permit,
probationary driver’s license, or driver’s license, the court instead may
require the offender to perform community service for a number of hours
determined by the court. If the offender is 15 years and six months of age or
older and has not been issued a temporary instruction permit or probationary
driver’s license, the offender shall not be eligible to be issued such a
license or permit for a period of six months. If the offender has not
attained the age of 15 years and six months, the offender shall not be
eligible to be issued a temporary instruction permit until the offender
attains the age of 16 years.



(R.C. § 4301.99(B))



§ 91.17  HOURS OF SALE OR CONSUMPTION.



   (A)   This section shall apply to the retail sale of beer, wine,
mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor.



   (B)   (1)   No beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor
shall be sold or delivered by an A-1, A-2, B-1, B-2, B-4, B-5, C-1, C-2,
C-2X, D-1, D-2, D-2X, D-3 when issued without a D-3A, D-3X, D-4, D-5G, D-5H,
D-5K, D-8, F, F-1, F-2, F-3, F-4, F-5, F-6, G, or I permit holder from Monday
to Saturday between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:30 a.m. and on Sunday
between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and Sunday midnight, unless statutorily
authorized otherwise.



      (2)   Consumption of beer, wine, mixed beverages, or
spirituous liquor is also prohibited during the above hours upon the premises
of the above permit holders who are authorized by their permit to sell beer,
wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor for on-premises consumption.



   (C)   (1)   No beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor
shall be sold or delivered by an A-1A, D-3 when issued with a D-3A, D-4A,
D-5, D-5A, D-5B, D-5C, D-5D, D-5E, D-5F, D-5I, D-5J, or D-7 permit holder
from Monday to Saturday between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 5:30 a.m. and on
Sunday between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and Sunday midnight, unless statutorily
authorized otherwise.



      (2)   Consumption of beer, wine, mixed beverages, or
spirituous liquor is also prohibited during the above hours upon the premises
of the above permit holders who are authorized by their permit to sell beer,
wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor for on-premises consumption.



   (D)   Permit holders authorized to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages,
or spirituous liquor at retail who are not specifically identified in
divisions (B) or (C) above shall be subject to the provisions of division
(B), unless statutorily authorized otherwise.



   (E)   The hours on Sunday during which sales, delivery, or
consumption of alcoholic beverages may take place are established by statute,
but in no event shall they begin prior to 5:30 a.m.



(O.A.C. § 4301:1-1-49)



   (F)   No association, corporation, local unit of an association or
corporation, or D permit holder who holds an F-2 permit shall sell beer or
intoxicating liquor beyond the hours of sale allowed by the permit. This
division imposes strict liability on the holder of such permit and on any
officer, agent or employee of such permit holder.



(R.C. § 4303.202(D)(2))



   (G)   No F-8 permit holder shall sell beer or intoxicating liquor
beyond the hours of sale allowed by the permit.  This division imposes
strict liability on the holder of an F-8 permit and on any officer, agent or
employee of that permit holder.



(R.C. § 4303.208(C))



   (H)   Whoever violates divisions (F) or (G) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 4303.99(D))  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.18  OBSTRUCTING SEARCH OF PREMISES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall hinder or obstruct any agent or employee of
the Division of Liquor Control, any enforcement agent of the Department of
Public Safety or any officer of the law from making an inspection or search
of any place, other than a bona fide private residence, where beer or
intoxicating liquor is possessed, kept, sold, or given away.



(R.C. § 4301.66)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.



(R.C. § 4301.99(C))



   (C)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the
hindrance, obstruction, resistance, or interference alleged consisted of
constitutionally protected speech only.



§ 91.19  ILLEGAL POSSESSION OF INTOXICATING LIQUOR PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall have possession of any spirituous liquor, in
excess of one liter, in one or more containers, which was not purchased at
wholesale or retail from the Division of Liquor Control or otherwise lawfully
acquired pursuant to this chapter, R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303, or any other
intoxicating liquor or beer, in one or more containers, which was not
lawfully acquired pursuant to those chapters.



(R.C. § 4301.67)  Penalty, see § 91.99



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 4301.99(B))



§ 91.20  PROHIBITION AGAINST SALE OR POSSESSION OF DILUTED LIQUOR AND
REFILLED CONTAINERS.



   (A)   No person shall sell, offer for sale, or possess with the
intent to sell intoxicating liquor in any original container which has been
diluted, refilled, or partly refilled.



(R.C. § 4301.68)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.



(R.C. § 4301.99(C))



§ 91.21 OFFENSES INVOLVING UNDERAGE PERSONS.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C.
Chapter 4301, no person shall sell beer or intoxicating liquor to an underage
person, shall buy beer or intoxicating liquor for an underage person, or
shall furnish it to an underage person unless given by a physician in the
regular line of the physician's practice or given for established religious
purposes or unless the underage person is supervised by a parent, spouse who
is not an underage person, or legal guardian. In proceedings before the
Liquor Control Commission, no permit holder, or no employee or agent of a
permit holder, charged with a violation of this division shall be charged,
for the same offense, with a violation of R.C. § 4301.22(A)(1) or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



   (B)   No person who is the owner or occupant of any public or
private place shall knowingly allow any underage person to remain in or on
the place while possessing or consuming beer or intoxicating liquor, unless
the intoxicating liquor or beer is given to the person possessing or
consuming it by that person's parent, spouse who is not an underage person,
or legal guardian and the parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or
legal guardian is present at the time of the person's possession or
consumption of the beer or intoxicating liquor. An owner of a public or
private place is not liable for acts or omissions in violation of this
division that are committed by a lessee of that place, unless the owner
authorizes or acquiesces in the lessee's acts or omissions.



   (C)   No person shall engage or use accommodations at a hotel, inn,
cabin, campground, or restaurant when the person knows or has reason to know
either of the following:



      (1)   That beer or intoxicating liquor will be consumed by an
underage person on the premises of the accommodations that the person engages
or uses, unless the person engaging or using the accommodations is the spouse
of the underage person and who is not an underage person, or is the parent or
legal guardian of all of the underage persons, who consume beer or
intoxicating liquor on the premises and that person is on the premises at all
times when beer or intoxicating liquor is being consumed by an underage
person.



      (2)   That a drug of abuse will be consumed on the premises of
the accommodations by any person, except a person who obtained the drug of
abuse pursuant to a prescription issued by a licensed health professionals
authorized to prescribe drugs and has the drug of abuse in the original
container in which it was dispensed to the person.



   (D)   (1)   No person is required to permit the engagement of
accommodations at any hotel, inn, cabin, or campground by an underage person
or for an underage person, if the person engaging the accommodations knows or
has reason to know that the underage person is intoxicated, or that the
underage person possesses any beer or intoxicating liquor and is not
supervised by a parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal
guardian who is or will be present at all times when the beer or intoxicating
liquor is being consumed by the underage person.



      (2)   No underage person shall knowingly engage or attempt to
engage accommodations at any hotel, inn, cabin, or campground by presenting
identification that falsely indicates that the underage person is 21 years of
age or older for the purpose of violating this section.



   (E)   (1)   No underage person shall knowingly order, pay for,
share the cost of, attempt to purchase, possess, or consume any beer or
intoxicating liquor in any public or private place. No underage person shall
knowingly be under the influence of any beer or intoxicating liquor in any
public place. The prohibitions set forth in this division against an underage
person knowingly possessing, consuming, or being under the influence of any
beer or intoxicating liquor shall not apply if the underage person is
supervised by a parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal
guardian, or the beer or intoxicating liquor is given by a physician in the
regular line of the physician's practice or given for established religious
purposes.



      (2)   If a person is charged in a criminal complaint with
violating division (E)(1) of this section, R.C. § 2935.36 shall apply to the
offense, except that a person is ineligible for diversion under that section
if the person previously has been diverted pursuant to this division (E)(2).
If the person completes the diversion program to the satisfaction of the
court, the court shall dismiss the complaint and order the record in the case
sealed under R.C. § 2953.52. If the person fails to satisfactorily complete
the diversion program, the court shall proceed with the complaint.



   (F)   No parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal
guardian of a minor shall knowingly permit the minor to violate this section
or R.C. § 4301.63, 4301.633, or 4301.634, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.



   (G)   The operator of any hotel, inn, cabin, or campground shall
make the provisions of this section available in writing to any person
engaging or using accommodations at the hotel, inn, cabin, or campground.



   (H)   As used in this section:



      DRUG OF ABUSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.011.



      HOTEL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3731.01.



      LICENSED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL AUTHORIZED TO PRESCRIBE DRUGS. Has
the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.



      MINOR. Means a person under the age of 18 years.



      PRESCRIPTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.



      UNDERAGE PERSON. Means a person under the age of 21 years.



(R.C. § 4301.69)



   (I)   The provisions of R.C. §§ 4301.633 through 4301.637, or
substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, shall not be deemed to modify
or affect divisions (A) through (H) of this section or R.C. § 4301.69.



(R.C. § 4301.638)



   (J)   (1)   Except as provided in division (J)(2) of this
section, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If an offender who violates division (E)(1) of this section was
under the age of 18 years at the time of the offense and the offense occurred
while the offender was the operator of or a passenger in a motor vehicle, the
court, in addition to any other penalties it imposes upon the offender, shall
suspend the offender's temporary instruction permit or probationary driver's
license for a period of six months. If the offender is 15 years and six
months of age or older and has not been issued a temporary instruction permit
or probationary driver's license, the offender shall not be eligible to be
issued such a license or permit for a period of six months. If the offender
has not attained the age of 15 years and six months, the offender shall not
be eligible to be issued a temporary instruction permit until the offender
attains the age of 16 years.



(R.C. § 4301.99(C))



      (2)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor, shall be fined not less than $500 nor more than $1,000, and
in addition to the fine, may be imprisoned for a definite term of not more
than six months.



(R.C. § 4301.99(I))



Statutory reference:



   Changes to law if federal uniform drinking age repealed or declared
unconstitutional, see R.C. § 4301.691



§ 91.22  KEEPING PLACE WHERE BEER OR INTOXICATING LIQUORS ARE SOLD IN
VIOLATION OF LAW.



   (A)   No person shall keep a place where beer or intoxicating
liquors are sold, furnished, or given away in violation of law. The court, on
conviction for a subsequent violation of this section, shall order the place
where the beer or intoxicating liquor is sold, furnished, or given away to be
abated as a nuisance or shall order the person so convicted to give bond
payable to the state in the sum of $1,000, with sureties to the acceptance of
the court, that the person will not sell, furnish, or give away beer or
intoxicating liquor in violation of law and will pay all fines, costs, and
damages assessed against the person for that subsequent violation of this
section. The giving away of beer or intoxicating liquors, or any other device
to evade this section, constitutes unlawful selling.



   (B)   As used in this section, BEER has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 4301.01.



   (C)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any premises
for which a permit has been issued under R.C. Chapter 4303 while that permit
is in effect.



(R.C. § 4399.09)



   (D)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than
$100 nor more than $500 on a first offense and shall be fined not less than
$200 nor more than $500 on each subsequent offense.



(R.C. § 4399.99(B))



§ 91.23  INTOXICATING LIQUORS SHALL NOT BE SOLD IN BROTHELS.



   (A)   No person shall sell, exchange, or give away intoxicating
liquor in a brothel.



(R.C. § 4399.10)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than
$100 nor more than $500 and imprisoned not less than one nor more than six
months.



(R.C. § 4399.99(C))



§ 91.24  USE OF INTOXICATING LIQUOR IN A PUBLIC DANCE HALL PROHIBITED;
EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (A)(2) of
this section, no person who is the proprietor of, or who conducts, manages,
or is in charge of any public dance hall shall allow the use of any
intoxicating liquor or the presence of intoxicated persons in the public
dance hall or on the premises on which it is located.



      (2)   The prohibition against the use of any intoxicating
liquor contained in division (A)(1) of this section does not apply to
establishments that are holders of a D-1, D-2, D-3, D-4, or D-5 permit whose
principal business consists of conducting a hotel, a restaurant, a club, or a
nightclub, all as defined in R.C. § 4301.01.



(R.C. § 4399.14)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $25
nor more than $500, imprisoned not more than six months, or both.



(R.C. § 4399.99(D))



§ 91.25  POISONOUSLY ADULTERATED LIQUORS.



   (A)   No person, for the purpose of sale, shall adulterate
spirituous liquor, alcoholic liquor, or beer used or intended for drink or
medicinal or mechanical purposes, with cocculus indicus, vitriol, grains of
paradise, opium, alum, capsicum, copperas, laurel water, logwood, brazilwood,
cochineal, sugar of lead, aloes, glucose, tannic acid, or any other substance
that is poisonous or injurious to health, or with a substance not a necessary
ingredient in the manufacture of the spiritous liquor, alcoholic liquor, or
beer, or sell, offer, or keep for sale spiritous liquor, alcoholic liquor, or
beer that is so adulterated.



   (B)   In addition to the penalties provided in division (C) of this
section, a person convicted of violating this section shall pay all necessary
costs and expenses incurred in inspecting and analyzing spiritous liquor,
alcoholic liquor, or beer that is so adulterated, sold, kept, or offered for
sale.



(R.C. § 4399.15)



   (C)   Whoever violates this section shall be guilty of a third
degree misdemeanor.



§ 91.26  TAVERN KEEPER PERMITTING RIOTING OR DRUNKENNESS.



   (A)   No tavern keeper shall permit rioting, intoxication, or
drunkenness in or on his or her premises.



(R.C. § 4399.16)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor
and shall be fined not more than $150.



§ 91.27  NOTICE OF ACTION TO PROHIBIT LIQUOR BUSINESS.



   Any party bringing an action to prohibit the operation of a business
under a liquor permit issued pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4303 shall, upon filing
the complaint in the action, notify the Division of Liquor Control of the
filing of the complaint.



(R.C. § 4303.40)



§ 91.28  [RESERVED]



Editor's note:



   This section, formerly based on R.C. § 4301.73 (Place Where Beer or
Intoxicating Liquor is Sold Declared a Nuisance), was repealed because
underlying state law was repealed.



§ 91.29  PROCEDURE WHEN INJUNCTION VIOLATED.



   (A)   Any person subject to an injunction, temporary or permanent,
granted pursuant to § 91.28, shall obey the injunction.  If the person
violates the injunction, the court, or in vacation a judge thereof, may
summarily try and punish the violator.  The proceedings for punishment for
contempt shall be commenced by filing with the Clerk of the Court from which
the injunction issued, information under oath setting out the alleged facts
constituting the violation, whereupon the court shall cause a warrant to
issue under which the defendant shall be arrested.  The trial may be had
upon affidavits, or either party may demand the production and oral
examination of the witnesses.



(R.C. § 4301.74)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.



(R.C. § 4301.99(C))



§ 91.30  LIQUOR TRANSACTION SCANS.



   (A)   As used in this section and § 91.31:



      CARD HOLDER. Means any person who presents a driver's or
commercial driver's license or an identification card to a permit holder, or
an agent or employee of a permit holder, for either of the purposes listed in
under divisions (a) or (b) of the definition for "transaction scan" in this
section.



      IDENTIFICATION CARD. Means an identification card issued under
R.C. §§ 4507.50 through 4507.52 or an equivalent identification card issued
by another state.



      PERMIT HOLDER. Means the holder of a permit issued under R.C.
Chapter 4303.



      TRANSACTION SCAN. Means the process by which a permit holder or
an agent or employee of a permit holder checks, by means of a transaction
scan device, the validity of a driver's or commercial driver's license or an
identification card that is presented as a condition for doing either of the
following:



         (a)   Purchasing any beer, intoxicating liquor, or
low-alcohol beverage;



         (b)   Gaining admission to a premises that has been
issued a liquor permit authorizing the sale of beer or intoxicating liquor
for consumption on the premises where sold, and where admission is restricted
to persons 21 years of age or older.



      TRANSACTION SCAN DEVICE. Means any commercial device or
combination of devices used at a point of sale that is capable of deciphering
in an electronically readable format the information encoded on the magnetic
strip or bar code of a driver's or commercial driver's license or an
identification card.



   (B)   (1)   A permit holder or an agent or employee of a permit
holder may perform a transaction scan by means of a transaction scan device
to check the validity of a driver's or commercial driver's license or
identification card presented by a card holder for either of the purposes
listed in divisions (a) or (b) of the definition for "transaction scan" in
this section.



      (2)   If the information deciphered by the transaction scan
performed under division (B)(1) of this section fails to match the
information printed on the driver's or commercial driver's license or
identification card presented by the card holder, or if the transaction scan
indicates that the information so printed is false or fraudulent, neither the
permit holder nor any agent or employee of the permit holder shall sell any
beer, intoxicating liquor, or low-alcohol beverage to the card holder.



      (3)   Division (B)(1) of this section does not preclude a
permit holder or an agent or employee of a permit holder from using a
transaction scan device to check the validity of a document other than a
driver's or commercial driver's license or identification card, if the
document includes a bar code or magnetic strip that may be scanned by the
device, as a condition of a sale beer, intoxicating liquor, or a low-alcohol
beverage or of granting admission to a premises described in the definition
for "transaction scan" in this section.



   (C)   The Registrar of Motor Vehicles, with the approval of the
Liquor Control Commission, shall adopt, and may amend or rescind, rules in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 119 that do both of the following:



      (1)   Govern the recording and maintenance of information
described in R.C. § 4301.61(D)(1)(a) and (D)(1)(b), R.C. § 2925.57(D)(1)(a)
and (D)(1)(b), and R.C. § 2927.021(D)(1)(a) and (D)(1)(b);



      (2)   Ensure quality control in the use of transaction scan
devices under R.C. §§ 2925.57, 2925.58, 2927.021, 2927.022, 4301.61, and
4301.611.



   (D)   (1)   No permit holder or agent or employee of a permit
holder shall electronically or mechanically record or maintain any
information derived from a transaction scan, except for the following:



         (a)   The name and date of birth of the person listed on
the driver's or commercial driver's license or identification card presented
by the card holder;



         (b)   The expiration date and identification number of
the driver's or commercial driver's license or identification card presented
by the card holder.



      (2)   No permit holder or agent or employee of a permit holder
shall use the information that is derived from a transaction scan or that is
permitted to be recorded and maintained under division (D)(1) of this
section, except for purposes of R.C. § 4301.611, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.



      (3)   No permit holder or agent or employee of a permit holder
shall use a transaction scan device for a purpose other than a purpose listed
in divisions (a) or (b) of the definition for "transaction scan" in this
section.



      (4)   No permit holder or agent or employee of a permit holder
shall sell or otherwise disseminate the information derived from a
transaction scan to any third party, including but not limited to selling or
otherwise disseminating that information for any marketing, advertising, or
promotional activities, but a seller or agent or employee of a seller may
release that information pursuant to a court order or as specifically
authorized by R.C. § 4301.611, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, or another section of this code or the Ohio Revised Code.



   (E)   Nothing in this section or R.C. § 4301.611, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, relieves a permit holder or an
agent or employee of a permit holder of any responsibility to comply with any
other applicable local, state or federal laws or rules governing the sale of
beer, intoxicating liquor, or low-alcohol beverages.



   (F)   Whoever violates division (B)(2) or (D) of this section is
guilty of an illegal liquor transaction scan, and the court may impose upon
the offender a civil penalty of up to $1,000 for each violation. The Clerk of
the Court shall pay each collected civil penalty to the County Treasurer for
deposit into the County Treasury.



(R.C. § 4301.61)



§ 91.31  AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES.



   (A)   A permit holder or an agent or employee of a permit holder may
not be found guilty of a charge of a violation of this chapter or any rule of
the Liquor Control Commission in which the age of the purchaser of any beer,
intoxicating liquor, or low-alcohol beverage is an element of the alleged
violation, if the permit holder, agent, or employee raises and proves as an
affirmative defense that all of the following occurred:



      (1)   A card holder attempting to purchase any beer,
intoxicating liquor, or low-alcohol beverage presented a driver's or
commercial driver's license or an identification card.



      (2)   A transaction scan of the driver's or commercial
driver's license or identification card that the card holder presented
indicated that the license or card was valid.



      (3)   The beer, intoxicating liquor, or low-alcohol beverage
was sold to the card holder in reasonable reliance upon the identification
presented and the completed transaction scan.



   (B)   In determining whether a permit holder or an agent or employee
of a permit holder has proven the affirmative defense provided by division
(A) of this section, the Liquor Control Commission or the trier of fact in a
court of record shall consider any written policy that the permit holder has
adopted and implemented and that is intended to prevent violations of R.C.
§§ 4301.22(A)(1) or (A)(2), 4301.63 through 4301.636, 4301.69, and
4301.691, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances. For purposes
of division (A)(3) of this section, the Commission or trier of fact shall
consider that reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and the
completed transaction scan may require a permit holder or an agent or
employee of a permit holder to exercise reasonable diligence to determine,
and that the use of a transaction scan device does not excuse a permit holder
or an agent or employee of a permit holder from exercising reasonable
diligence to determine, the following:



      (1)   Whether a person to whom the permit holder or agent or
employee of a permit holder sells any beer or intoxicating liquor is 21 years
of age or older or sells low-alcohol beverage is 18 years of age or older;



      (2)   Whether the description and picture appearing on the
driver's or commercial driver's license or identification card presented by a
card holder is that of the card holder.



   (C)   The affirmative defense provided by division (A) of this
section is in addition to the defense provided by R.C. § 4301.639, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



   (D)   In any hearing before the Liquor Control Commission and in any
criminal action in which the affirmative defense provided by division (A) of
this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a deputy registrar
who issued an identification card under R.C. §§ 4507.50 through 4507.52
shall be permitted to submit certified copies of the records of that issuance
in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of or contractors with the Bureau
of Motor Vehicles in the hearing or action.



(R.C. § 4301.611)



§ 91.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no other
penalty has been provided is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. §§ 4301.70, 4301.99(A))



Statutory reference:



   Liquor Director to be notified of court decision regarding permit
holder, employee or agent, see R.C. § 4301.991



CHAPTER 92:  GARBAGE DISPOSAL



Section



   92.01   Definitions



   92.02   Construction of waste containers



   92.03   Garbage to be removed within reasonable time



   92.04   Depositing waste on public or private property; order to
remove



 



   92.99   Penalty



§ 92.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall
have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.



   COMBUSTIBLE WASTE.  All waste substances capable of incineration or
burning, including garbage, paper, rags, excelsior, wood, grass, leaves and
the like.



   COMMERCIAL WASTE.  All waste, combustible and non-combustible, arising
out of the operations of businesses and industry and all other wastes not
resulting from the ordinary operations of private residences or households. 



(‘67 Code, § 92.01)



§ 92.02  CONSTRUCTION OF WASTE CONTAINERS.



   Containers for combustible and for non-combustible waste shall be of
galvanized iron, plastic or other non-rusting material, of substantial
construction, with tight fitting lids, watertight, of such size to be easily
handled by one man, and not in any case to have a capacity in excess of 30
gallons and not to exceed 75 pounds in weight. 



(‘67 Code, § 92.02)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.03  GARBAGE TO BE REMOVED WITHIN REASONABLE TIME.



   No garbage shall be allowed to remain exposed in any building or on any
premises a longer time than shall be reasonably necessary to remove and
deposit the same in proper waste containers. 



(‘67 Code, § 92.03)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.04  DEPOSITING WASTE ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY; ORDER TO REMOVE.



   (A)   Refuse and litter must be placed in covered, watertight waste
containers at all times. For the purpose of this section, LITTER and REFUSE
shall include garbage, waste, peelings of vegetables or fruits, rubbish,
ashes, cans, bottles, wire, paper, cartons, boxes, or other materials of an
unsightly or unsanitary nature. Any appropriately maintained composting
system not exceeding two cubic yards shall be exempt from the restrictions
listed in this section.  Recyclable materials which are accepted for
recycling by the city's recycling contractor, and which are placed in an
approved recycling bin or other container provided by the city or its
contractor, are exempt.  Provided, however, that the recyclable materials
placed in such containers must be appropriately placed so as not to cause
litter or refuse by overflowing or being blown about from such container.



   (B)   Any containers, including recycling containers, or other
refuse or litter placed at the curb for pickup by any solid waste contractor
shall not be placed at the curb earlier than 5:00 p.m. the day before such
pickup is scheduled, and any containers must be removed from the curb by 9:00
p.m. the day of pickup.



   (C)   Penalty.  Any violation of the provisions of this section
shall be punishable as a minor misdemeanor. Each day a violation occurs shall
constitute a separate criminal offense.



§ 92.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject
to the penalty provided in § 10.99.



CHAPTER 93:  NUISANCES; ABATEMENTS



Section



Nuisances



   93.01   Regulating the burning of fires



   93.02   Storing of refuse; inoperative motor vehicles, etc.



   93.03   Maintaining certain nuisances



   93.04   [Reserved]



Property Maintenance Code



   93.10   General administration



   93.11   Applicability



   93.12   Property maintenance inspection



   93.13   Duties and powers of the Community Development Director



   93.14   Violations



   93.15   Notice of violation



   93.16   Minor nuisances



   93.17   Unsafe structures



   93.18   Emergency measures



   93.19   Demolition



   93.20   Means of appeal



   93.21   Definitions



   93.22   General requirements



   93.23   Exterior open areas



   93.24   Exterior structure



Weeds and Litter on Property



   93.40   Keeping down weeds



   93.41   Notice to owner to cut noxious weeds, remove litter; service



   93.42   Fees for service and return



   93.43   Procedure when owner fails to comply with notice



   93.44   Written return to County Auditor; amount as a lien upon
property



 



   93.99   Penalty



NUISANCES



§ 93.01  REGULATING THE BURNING OF FIRES.



   (A)   Prohibited and exempt fires.  No person without a permit
shall kindle, ignite, set, start, or maintain fires of any matter on pavement
of any public road or street in the municipality, within any house or other
structures within the municipality, or in or upon any other matter within the
municipality except fires in a contained fireplace for outdoor cooking or for
the burning of paper or wood in containers constructed to prevent the spread
of such fires.  All fires shall be attended until extinguished or safely
covered.



   (B)   Fire permit.  Any person desiring to kindle, ignite, set,
start, or maintain fires shall apply to the Fire Chief of the municipality
for a written permit to do so.  The Fire Chief may grant such permit under
such proper safeguards as he/she may stipulate.  In determining whether to
issue any permit and the conditions governing the use of any permit, the Fire
Chief shall consider the proposed location of the fire and its proximity to
other combustible or inflammable material, the possibility of danger to
buildings and structures, the degree and type of supervision to be provided,
the quantity of the material to be burned and of smoke to be generated,
weather conditions, the season of the year, wind direction and velocity,
dryness of the ground and vegetation, the tools or apparatus to be employed
for fire control, the extent to which debris from combustion may present a
fallout problem in adjacent areas, and the nature and extent of air pollution
that may be caused.



(Ord. 15-2008, passed 10-1-08) Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.02  STORING OF REFUSE; INOPERATIVE MOTOR VEHICLES, ETC.



   (A)   For the purposes of this section the term INOPERATIVE MOTOR
VEHICLES shall be deemed to mean motor-driven vehicles that cannot, both
physically and lawfully, under their own power, and without repair or
replacement of parts, be operated on the public highways of this municipality
and have remained in such inoperative condition for 30 or more consecutive
days, or a motor driven vehicle which has no attached vehicle registration or
to which the attached vehicle registration is expired or which vehicle
registration attached is registered to another motor vehicle.



   (B)   No person or corporation shall store or place any used
building materials, inoperative motor vehicles, motor vehicle parts, scrap
metal, refuse, or rubbish on any property, or allow any such materials,
vehicles, parts, or substances to remain on any property, except to the
extent that materials, vehicles, parts, or substances so stored, placed, or
allowed are not visible from any point on any other property (including any
point on any structure on any such other property), public or private.



   (C)   It shall not be unlawful, however, for any person or
corporation to store or place used building materials on any property when
such materials are to be used by the owner of such property in construction
on such property or on any other property owned by him, provided that such
materials shall not be allowed to remain unused on such property for more
than 30 days prior to commencement of construction of the building in the
construction of which they are to be used or for more than six months in any
event.



(‘67 Code, § 93.09)  Penalty, see § 93.99(D)



Statutory reference:



   Abandoned vehicles, see R.C. §§ 4513.60 through 4513.65



§ 93.03  MAINTAINING CERTAIN NUISANCES.



   (A)   No person shall erect, continue to use, or maintain a
building, structure, or place for the exercise of a trade, employment, or
business or for keeping or feeding an animal which, by occasioning noxious
exhalations or noisome or offensive smells, becomes injurious to the health,
comfort, or property of individuals or of the public.



   (B)   No person shall cause or allow offal, filth, or noisome
substances to be collected or remain in any place to the damage or prejudice
of others or of the public.



   (C)   No person shall unlawfully obstruct or impede the passage of a
navigable river, harbor, or collection of water, or corrupt or render
unwholesome or impure a watercourse, stream of water, or unlawfully divert
such watercourse from its natural course or state to the injury or prejudice
of others.



   (D)   Persons who are engaged in agriculture-related activities, as
AGRICULTURE is defined in R.C. § 519.01, and who are conducting those
activities outside the municipality, in accordance with generally accepted
agricultural practices, and in such a manner so as not to have a substantial,
adverse effect on the public health, safety, or welfare, are exempt from
divisions (A) and (B) above and from any ordinances, resolutions, rules, or
other enactments of the municipality that prohibit excessive noise.



(R.C. § 3767.13)



   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the third degree.



(R.C. § 3767.99(C))  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 93.04  [RESERVED]



Editor's note:



   This section, formerly pertaining to property maintenance standards,
was repealed by the enactment of the city's Property Maintenance Code,
Ordinance15-2008, passed October 1, 2008. The Property Maintenance Code will
be included in this Code in a future update; until such time, copies of the
Property Maintenance Code are available for public inspection at the city's
administrative office.



PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE



§ 93.10  GENERAL ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   Title.  These regulations shall be known as the City of
Montgomery Property Maintenance Code hereinafter referred to as "this code"
or "Property Maintenance Code".



   (B)   Scope.  The provisions of this code shall apply to all
existing residential and non-residential structures and premises within the
City of Montgomery ("the city") and shall constitute minimum requirements and
standards for premises, structures, equipment, and facilities for safe and
sanitary maintenance for protection from the elements, life safety, and
safety from fire and other hazards.  This code is intended to define the
responsibility of owners, operators and occupants; the occupancy of existing
structures and premises; and for administration, enforcement and penalties.



   (C)   Intent.  This code shall be construed to secure its expressed
intent, which is to ensure public health, safety and welfare insofar as they
are affected by the continued occupancy and lack of maintenance of structures
and premises.  Existing structures and premises that do not comply with
these provisions shall be altered or repaired to provide a minimum level of
health and safety as required herein.



   (D)   Severability.  If a section, subsection, sentence, clause or
phrase of this code is, for any reason, held to be unauthorized or
unconstitutional, such section shall be stricken or modified by the court,
and such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of
this code.



(Ord. 15-2008, passed 10-1-08)



§ 93.11  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   General.  The provisions of this code shall apply to all
matters affecting or relating to structures and premises, as set forth in §
93.10.  Where, in a specific case, different sections of this code or the
Code of Ordinances of the City of Montgomery specify different requirements,
the most restrictive requirements shall govern.



   (B)   Maintenance.  Equipment, systems, devices and safeguards
required by this code or a previous regulation or code under which the
structure or premises was constructed, altered or repaired shall be
maintained in good working order.  Except as otherwise specified herein, the
owner, owner's designated agent or occupant shall be responsible for the
maintenance of buildings, structures and premises.



   (C)   Application of other codes.  Repairs, additions or
alterations of a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in
accordance with the procedures and provisions of all applicable codes and
standards.  Nothing in this code shall be construed to cancel, modify or set
aside any provision of the City of Montgomery Code of Ordinances or any other
applicable codes and standards.



   (D)   Existing remedies.  The provisions in this code shall not be
construed to abolish or impair existing remedies of the city or its officers
or agencies relating to the removal or demolition of any structure which is
dangerous, unsafe and unsanitary.



   (E)   Workmanship.  Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or
installations which are caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of
this code shall be executed and installed in a workmanlike manner and
installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions.



   (F)   Historic buildings.  The provisions of this code shall not be
mandatory for existing buildings or structures designated by the state or
city as historic or landmark buildings when such buildings or structures are
judged by the Community Development Director to be safe and consistent with
the public interest of health, safety and welfare.



(Ord. 15-2008, passed 10-1-08)



§ 93.12  PROPERTY MAINTENANCE INSPECTION.



   (A)   General.  The Department of Community Development is charged
with the administration and enforcement of this Property Maintenance Code and
the executive official in charge thereof shall be known as the Community
Development Director.



   (B)   Officers.  The Community Development Director may designate
any qualified city employee or qualified agent of the city providing code
enforcement services to the city under an authorized contract, to administer
the duties that are assigned to the Community Development Director by this
code.  Such qualified city employee or qualified agent hereinafter shall be
referred to as "designated agent".



(Ord. 15-2008, passed 10-1-08)



§ 93.13  DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR.



   (A)   General.  The Community Development Director or designated
agent shall enforce the provisions of this code.  Unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise, hereinafter any duty, responsibility or authority
delegated to the Community Development Director shall include the Community
Development Director and/or designated agent or employee of the Community
Development Director.



   (B)   Interpretation authority.  The Community Development Director
shall have the authority to interpret and implement the provisions of this
code; to secure the intent thereof; and to designate requirements applicable
because of local climatic or other conditions.



   (C)   Inspections.  The Community Development Director shall make
all of the required inspections. All reports of such inspections shall be in
writing from a responsible officer of such agency or by the responsible
individual. The Community Development Director is authorized to engage such
experts as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that may
arise in the administration or enforcement of this code.



   (D)   Right of entry.  The Community Development Director is
authorized to enter any structure or premises within the city at reasonable
times to inspect subject to constitutional restrictions on unreasonable
searches and seizures. If entry is refused or not obtained, the Community
Development Director is authorized to pursue access to the premises allowed
by law.



   (E)   Identification.  The Community Development Director shall
carry proper identification when inspecting structures or premises in the
performance of duties under this code.



   (F)   Notices and orders.  The Community Development Director shall
issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this code.



(Ord. 15-2008, passed 10-1-08)



§ 93.14  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Unlawful acts.  It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or
corporation to be in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions
of this code.



   (B)   Notice of violation.  The Community Development Director
shall serve notice of violation in accordance with § 93.15.



   (C)   Prosecution of violation.  If a person, firm, or corporation
to whom a notice of violation has been served does not bring the property at
issue into compliance with the provisions of this code by the deadline
established in the notice of violation or by the granted deadline extension,
if any, such person shall be guilty of violation of this code and subject to
the penalties set forth in division (D) of this section.  If the notice of
violation is not complied with, the Community Development Director may
institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity (including action
for injunctive relief) to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to
require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy or use of the
premises or structure in violation of the provisions of this code or of the
order or direction made pursuant thereto. 



   (D)   Violation penalties.  Failure to correct the conditions set
forth in the notice of violation within the time allowed in such notice or
any extension to such notice shall constitute a criminal misdemeanor
offense.  Upon conviction of such violation, the responsible person or party
shall be fined not more than $1,000 or imprisoned for not more than 180 days,
or both.  Each day such violation continues shall be deemed a separate
offense.  Any other person who commits, participates in or assists in the
continuation of such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense
and suffer the penalties provided herein.



   (E)   General penalty.  The imposition of the penalties herein
prescribed shall not preclude the Community Development Director from
instituting appropriate action to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or
to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises, or to stop
an illegal act, conduct, business or utilization of the building, structure
or premises.



(Ord. 15-2008, passed 10-1-08)



§ 93.15  NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   (A)   Notice of violation.  The Community Development Director
shall serve notice of violation (hereinafter referred to as "notice" or
"notice of violation") on all persons, firms, or corporations, or the agent
or property manager of a person, firm or corporation identified as the owner
or occupant of such property found to be in conflict with or in violation of
any of the provisions of this code. 



   (B)   Form of notice of violation.  Whenever the Community
Development Director determines that there has been a violation of this code
or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, notice shall be
given in accordance with the following:



      (1)   The notice shall be in writing;



      (2)   The notice shall be sent to the person, firm, or
corporation listed by the Hamilton County Auditor's Office as owner of the
property or the person, firm or corporation identified as the occupant of
such property.  Such notice may also be sent to the agent or property
manager of a person, firm or corporation identified as the owner or occupant
of such property;



      (3)   The notice shall include a description of the property
that is sufficient for identification purposes;



      (4)   The notice shall include a statement of the violation(s)
determined to exist on the property with specific references to the section
or sections of this code alleged to have been violated;



      (5)   The notice shall include a description of the corrective
action which must be taken to bring the property into compliance with the
provisions of this code;



      (6)   The notice shall include a deadline by which time the
person receiving the notice shall be required to take the necessary
corrective action required to bring the property into compliance with the
provisions of this code; and



      (7)   The notice shall inform the person or entity to whom
addressed of the right to appeal such notice of violation.



   (C)   Method of service.  The notice of violation shall be deemed
to be properly served if a copy thereof is:



      (1)   Delivered personally;



      (2)   Sent by certified or first class mail addressed to the
occupant of such property or to the owner of the property at the address
listed as the owner's tax mailing address by the Hamilton County Auditor. 
If the address for the owner appearing on the tax list of the auditor's
office is that of a lending institution or other person or entity clearly
recognizable as not being the owner of such property, then written notice
shall be mailed to such institution, person or entity at the listed address
and to the named owner(s) at the street address of the property;



      (3)   Sent by certified or first class mail addressed to the
owner's last known address; or



      (4)   Posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure
affected by such notice.



   (D)   Extension of compliance deadline.  The Community Development
Director may, at his/her sole discretion, extend the deadline previously
stated in the notice of violation for corrective action to bring a property
into compliance in cases where good cause is demonstrated.  In the event
such an extension is granted, the Community Development Director shall notify
the property owner, occupant or agent of the extension in the same form and
pursuant to the same method of service required in division (C) of this
section.  Any such notice of extension shall specifically state the revised
deadline by which time the person or entity receiving the extension shall be
required to take the necessary corrective action to bring the property into
compliance with the provisions of this code.



(Ord. 15-2008, passed 10-1-08)



§ 93.16  MINOR NUISANCES.



   (A)   General.  A minor nuisance exists when a property is in
violation of any of the regulations in §§ 93.01, 93.22, 93.23 and 93.24 of
this code, unless the condition of the property has deteriorated to such a
condition that enforcement under §§ 93.17, 93.18 or 93.19 are determined to
be more appropriate.



   (B)   Notice.  Whenever the Community Development Director has
determined a violation of the property maintenance standards set forth in
§§ 93.01, 93.22, 93.23 and 93.24 of this code exists, and such conditions,
as they exist endanger public health, welfare, or safety, or materially
interfere with the peaceful enjoyment of the occupants of such property or
the owners or occupants of adjacent property, the Community Development
Director shall post a "Notice of Abatement" in a conspicuous place in or
about the structure affected by such notice.  The notice shall be in the
form prescribed in § 93.15(B).



   (C)   Abatement.  Upon failure of the owner to correct the minor
nuisance within the time specified in the order, the Community Development
Director or designated agent shall cause the minor nuisance to be abated
through any available public agency or by contract or arrangement by private
persons and the cost thereof shall be charged against the real estate upon
which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate and
may be collected by any other legal resource.



   (D)   Cost of abatement.  Costs incurred in the performance of
minor nuisance abatement shall be paid by the city.  The Director of Law of
the city shall take action to put a lien on the property consistent with Ohio
law where the unsafe structure is or was located for the recovery of such
costs.  The costs may include all labor, equipment or other materials to
correct or remove such nuisance, the fees of the officer serving the notices,
the cost of public notice of any appeal hearings, and an administrative fee
equal to 3% of the cost to remove and abate such nuisance, but such
administrative fee shall not exceed $100 nor be less than $25.



   (E)   Appeal.  Any person ordered who receives a "Notice of
Abatement" may appeal to the City Manager within three days from the date of
notice from the Community Development Director.  The City Manager may modify
or reverse the decision of the Community Development Director or may refer
the appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals for a hearing.  Upon referral of
an appeal from the City Manager, the person ordered to take emergency
measures shall be afforded an appeal hearing by the Board of Zoning Appeals,
as described in § 93.20.



(Ord. 15-2008, passed 10-1-08)



§ 93.17  UNSAFE STRUCTURES.



   (A)   General.  When a structure is found by the Community
Development Director to be unsafe, or when a structure is found unfit for
human occupancy, or is found unlawful, such structure shall be condemned
pursuant to the provisions of this code.



      (1)   Unsafe structures.  An unsafe structure is one that is
found to be so out of repair and dilapidated that, in the condition it is
permitted to be and remain, it shall or will if such condition is suffered to
continue, present an imminent danger of failure or collapse which may
endanger the life, limb or property of persons occupying or using such
structure, endanger the life, limb or property of persons using or being upon
the streets or public ways of the municipality adjoining such lot of land, by
reason of the collapse of such building, house, or structure, or by the
falling of parts thereof or of objects therefrom; or has become so out of
repair and dilapidated that it constitutes a fire hazard liable to catch on
fire or communicate fire because of its condition and lack of repair.



      (2)   Structure unfit for human occupancy.  A structure unfit
for human occupancy is one that is found to have become so out of repair and
dilapidated that, due to lack of adequate maintenance or neglect, it
endangers the public health, welfare, or safety, or materially interferes
with the peaceful enjoyment of owners, or occupants of adjacent property or
persons occupying or using such structure.



      (3)   Unlawful structure.  An unlawful structure is found in
whole or in part to be occupied by more persons than permitted under the Ohio
Building Code, or was erected, altered or occupied contrary to law.



   (B)   Closing of vacant structures.  If a structure is vacant and
unfit for human occupancy, and is not in danger of structural collapse, the
Community Development Director is authorized to post a placard of
condemnation on the premises and order the structure closed up so as not to
be a nuisance.  Upon failure of the owner to close up the premises within
the time specified in the order, the Community Development Director shall
cause the premises to be closed and secured through any available public
agency or by contract or arrangement by private persons and the cost thereof
shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located
and shall be a lien upon such real estate and may be collected by any other
legal resource.



   (C)   Notice.  Whenever the Community Development Director has
condemned a structure under the provisions of this section, notice shall be
posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such
notice.  The notice shall be in the form prescribed in § 93.15(B).



   (D)   Placarding.  Upon the failure of the owner or person
responsible to comply with the notice provision within the time given, the
Community Development Director shall post on the premises a placard bearing
the word "Condemned" and a statement of the penalties provided in for
occupying the premises or removing the placard.



      (1)   Placard removal.  The Community Development Director
shall remove the condemnation placard whenever the defect(s) upon which the
condemnation and placarding action were based have been eliminated.  Any
person who defaces or removes a condemnation placard without the approval of
the Community Development Director shall be in violation of this code and
subject to the penalties set forth in § 93.14(D).



   (E)   Prohibited occupancy.  Any person who shall occupy a
placarded premises which has been condemned, and any owner or any person
responsible for the premises who shall let anyone occupy a placarded premises
which has been condemned shall be in violation of this code and subject to
the penalties set forth in § 93.14(D).



   (F)   Cost of closing vacant structures.  Costs incurred in the
performance of closing vacant structures shall be paid by the city.  The
Director of Law of the city shall take action to put a lien on the property
consistent with Ohio law where the unsafe structure is or was located for the
recovery of such costs.  The costs may include all labor, equipment or other
materials to close the vacant structure, the fees of the officer serving the
notices, the cost of public notice of any appeal hearings, and an
administrative fee equal to 3% of the cost to make the emergency repairs, but
such administrative fee shall not exceed $100 nor be less than $25.



   (G)   Appeal.  Any person ordered to close a vacant structure shall
comply with such order within the time allowed by the Community Development
Director, unless appealed to the City Manager within three days from the date
of notice from the Community Development Director.  The City Manager may
modify or reverse the decision of the Community Development Director or may
refer the appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals for a hearing.  Upon
referral of an appeal from the City Manager, the person ordered to take
emergency measures shall be afforded an appeal hearing by the Board of Zoning
Appeals, as described in § 93.20.



(Ord. 15-2008, passed 10-1-08)



§ 93.18  EMERGENCY MEASURES.



   (A)   Imminent danger.  When, in the opinion of the Community
Development Director, there is imminent danger of failure or collapse of a
building or structure which endangers life, or when any structure or part of
a structure has fallen and life is endangered by the occupation of the
structure, or when there is actual or potential danger to the building
occupants or those in the proximity of any structure because of explosives,
explosive fumes or vapors or the presence of toxic fumes, gases or materials,
the Community Development Director is hereby authorized and empowered to
order and require the occupants to vacate the premises immediately.  The
Community Development Director or designated agent shall cause to be posted
at each entrance to such structure a notice reading as follows:  "This
Structure is Unsafe and Its Occupancy Has Been Prohibited by the Community
Development Director."  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such
structure except for the purpose of securing the structure, making the
required repairs, removing the hazardous condition or of demolishing the same.



   (B)   Temporary safeguards.  Notwithstanding other provisions of
this code, whenever, in the opinion of the Community Development Director,
there is imminent danger due to an unsafe condition, the Community
Development Director shall order the necessary work to be done, including the
boarding up of openings, to render such structure temporarily safe whether or
not the legal procedure herein described has been instituted; and shall cause
such other action to be taken as the Community Development Director deems
necessary to meet such emergency.



   (C)   Closing streets.  When necessary for public safety, the
Community Development Director may temporarily close structures and close, or
issue an order to the authority having jurisdiction to close, sidewalks,
streets, public ways and places adjacent to unsafe structures if there is an
imminent danger of injury from such unsafe structure to persons or property
within such areas to be closed, and prohibit the same from being utilized.



   (D)   Emergency repairs.  For the purposes of this section, the
Community Development Director shall employ the necessary labor and materials
to perform required work as expeditiously as possible. 



   (E)   Cost of emergency repairs.  Costs incurred in the performance
of emergency work shall be paid by the city.  The Director of Law of the
city shall take action to put a lien on the property consistent with Ohio law
where the unsafe structure is or was located for the recovery of such
costs.  The costs may include all labor, equipment or other materials to
make the emergency repairs, the fees of the officer serving the notices, the
cost of public notice of any appeal hearings, and an administrative fee equal
to 3% of the cost to make the emergency repairs, but such administrative fee
shall not exceed $100 nor be less than $25.



   (F)   Appeal.  Any person ordered to take emergency measures shall
comply with such order within the time allowed by the Community Development
Director, unless appealed to the City Manager within three days from the date
of notice from the Community Development Director.  The City Manager may
modify or reverse the decision of the Community Development Director or may
refer the appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals for a hearing.  Upon
referral of an appeal from the City Manager, the person ordered to take
emergency measures shall be afforded an appeal hearing by the Board of Zoning
Appeals, as described in § 93.20.



(Ord. 15-2008, passed 10-1-08)



§ 93.19  DEMOLITION.



   (A)   General.  The Community Development Director shall order the
owner of any premises upon which is located any structure, which in the
judgment of the Community Development Director is so dilapidated or has
become so out of repair to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise
unfit for human habitation or occupancy, and such that it is unreasonable to
repair the structure, to demolish and remove such structure; or if the
structure is capable of being made safe by repairs, to repair and make safe
and sanitary or to demolish and remove at owner's option; or where there has
been a cessation of normal construction of any unfinished structure for a
period of more than two years, to demolish and remove such structure.



   (B)   Notices and orders.  All notices and orders shall comply with
§ 93.15(B).



   (C)   Failure to comply.  If the owner of a premises fails to
comply with a demolition order within the time prescribed, the Community
Development Director shall cause the structure to be demolished and removed,
either through an available public agency or by contract or arrangement with
private persons, and the cost of such demolition and removal shall be charged
against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a
lien upon such real estate.



   (D)   Salvage materials.  When any structure has been ordered
demolished and removed, the city shall have the right to sell the salvage and
valuable materials as surplus at the highest price obtainable.  The net
proceeds of such sale, after deducting the expenses of such demolition and
removal, shall be promptly remitted with a report of such sale or
transaction, including items of expense and amounts deducted, to the owner of
such property.  If such a surplus does not remain to be paid over, the
report shall so state.



(Ord. 15-2008, passed 10-1-08)



§ 93.20  MEANS OF APPEAL.



   (A)   Application for appeal.  Unless another timeline or process
is set forth herein, any person directly affected by a decision of the
Community Development Director or a notice or order issued under this code
shall have the right to appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals, provided that
a written application for appeal is filed within 20 days of the date of the
decision of the Community Development Director, or date the notice or order
was served.



   (B)   Standard for review.  An application for appeal shall be
based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally
adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this
code do not fully apply, the requirements of this code are adequately
satisfied by other means, or the strict application of any requirement of
this code would cause undue hardship.



   (C)   Administrative procedures for appeals.  The procedure for
such appeal shall be consistent with Chapter 150.20 of the Montgomery Code of
Ordinances.



(Ord. 15-2008, passed 10-1-08)



§ 93.21  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   General.



      (1)   Scope.  Unless otherwise expressly stated, the
following terms shall, for the purposes of this code, have the meanings shown
in this chapter.



      (2)   Interchangeability.  Words stated in the present tense
include the future; words stated in the masculine gender include the feminine
and neuter; the singular number includes the plural and the plural, the
singular.



      (3)   Terms defined in other codes.  Where terms are not
defined in this code, but are defined in the Ohio Building Code for
commercial structures, including multi-family residential structures, the
State of Ohio Building Code for one, two and three family residential
structures, the Ohio Fire Code, or the City of Montgomery Zoning Code, such
terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as in those codes.



      (4)   Terms not defined.  Where terms are not defined through
the methods authorized by this sectin such terms shall have ordinarily
accepted meanings such as the context implies.



      (5)   Parts.  Whenever the words DWELLING UNIT , DWELLING ,
PREMISES , STRUCTURE , BUILDING , ROOMING HOUSE , ROOMING UNIT or STORY are
stated in this code, they shall be construed as though they were followed by
the words "or any part thereof."



   (B)   General definitions.



      APPROVED.   Approved by the Community Development Director or a
duly authorized representative.



      BUILDING MATERIALS.   Items used in construction of structures
or in landscaping, including, but not limited to lumber, plywood, concrete,
rebar, roofing, siding, doors, windows, flashing, piping, fencing or other
materials commonly used for building or construction, being either new or
used.



      COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR.   The official who is charged
with the administration and enforcement of this code, or any duly authorized
representative.



      COMPOST BIN.   A closed container used to house a heap of
decomposing organic material. 



      COMPOST HEAP.   A pile of organic materials kept under
controlled conditions so that the original raw materials are transformed by
decay and degradation into humus. 



      CONDEMN.   To adjudge unfit for occupancy.



      DISCARDED MATERIALS.   The accumulation of wood, appliances,
furniture, mattresses, motor vehicle parts or tires, building materials,
toys, recreational or sporting equipment, carpeting or any other material or
equipment whereby its placement upon real property is not consistent with its
intended normal use or due to its condition and/or state of disrepair is not
usable for its normal intended use.



      DWELLING UNIT.   A group of rooms comprising living, dining,
sleeping room or rooms, storage closets, as well as space and equipment for
cooking, bathing and toilet facilities, all used by only one family.



      ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION AREA.   A tract of land that has been
awarded protected status in order to ensure that natural features or biota
are safeguarded.



      EXTERIOR PROPERTY.   The open space on the premises and on an
adjoining property under the control of owners or operators of such premises.



      GARBAGE.   The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the
hauling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.  Vegetable waste as
part of a managed compost heap shall not be considered garbage.



      GUARD.   A building component or a system of building components
located at or near the open sides of elevated walking surfaces that minimizes
the possibility of a fall from the walking surface to a lower level.



      IMMINENT DANGER.   A condition which would cause serious or
life-threatening injury or death at any time.  Imminent meaning ready to
take place especially hanging threateningly over one's head.



      INOPERABLE VEHICLE.   Motor-driven vehicles that cannot,
physically or lawfully, under their own power, and without repair or
replacement of parts, be operated on the public highways of the city and have
remained in such inoperable condition for ten or more consecutive days, or a
motor driven vehicle which has no attached vehicle registration or to which
the attached vehicle registration is expired or which vehicle registration
attached is registered to another vehicle.



      LANDSCAPE AREA.   A portion of property where the surface of the
ground has been purposely planted, cultivated and maintained to create an
aesthetic effect, which includes, but is not limited to lawn grass,
ornamental grass, bushes, trees, flowers or other vegetation and surface
covering, such as gravel, rocks, shale, bark mulch, soils and paving stones,
but does not include weeds or noxious weeds.



      OCCUPANCY.   The purpose for which a building or portion thereof
is utilized or occupied.



      OCCUPANT.   Any individual living or sleeping or operating a
business within a building, or having possession of a space within a building.



      OPERATOR/MANAGER.   Any person who has charge, care or control
of a structure or premises which is let or offered for occupancy.



      OWNER.   Any person, agent, operator, manager, firm or
corporation having legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded
in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title
to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the
trustee of a trust holding such property of any such person, and the executor
or administrator of the estate of such person if granted authority to take
possession or control of real property by a court.



      PERSON.   An individual, corporation, partnership or any other
group acting as a unit.



      PREMISES.   A lot, plot or parcel of land including any
structure thereon.



      PUBLIC WAY.   Any street, alley or similar parcel of land, which
is deeded, dedicated or otherwise permanently available to the public for
public use.



      RAIN BARREL.   A container used as a cistern to collect and
store rainwater runoff. 



      RAIN GARDEN.   A planted depression that is designed to absorb
rainwater runoff from impervious areas, such as roofs, driveways, walkways,
and compacted lawn areas.



      RIPARIAN ZONE.   The part of the watershed immediately adjacent
to the stream channel located in the 500 year flood plain or 50 feet from the
centerline of the stream or creek, whichever is greater.



      RUBBISH.   Combustible and noncombustible waste materials,
except garbage; the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood,
coal, coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes,
wood, packaging materials, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings,
tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, paper waste, crockery and dust. 
Tree branches and yard trimmings which are part of a managed compost heap
shall not be considered rubbish.



      SAFE.   Free from risk or harm.



      SANITARY.   Characterized by or readily kept in cleanliness.



      SWALE.   A low-lying stretch of land which gathers and carries
surface run-off.



      TENANT.   A person, corporation, partnership or group, whether
or not the legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as
a unit.



      WOODED AREA.   An un-landscaped tract of land consisting of a
dense growth of trees, plants and underbrush.



      WORKMANLIKE.   Executed in a skilled manner; e.g., generally
plumb, level, square, in line, undamaged and without marring adjacent work.



(Ord. 15-2008, passed 10-1-08)



§ 93.22  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Scope.  The provisions of this chapter shall govern the
minimum conditions and responsibilities of persons for maintenance of the
exterior of all premises, both residential and commercial, the grounds of
such property and the condition of all buildings and structures thereon so
that the appearance thereof shall reflect a level of maintenance in keeping
with the standards of the city so as to avoid blighting effects and hazards
to health, safety and welfare.



   (B)   Responsibility.  The owner of the premises shall maintain the
structures and exterior property in compliance with these requirements,
except as otherwise provided for in this code. A person shall not occupy as
owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy premises which are not in a
sanitary and safe condition and which do not comply with the requirements of
this chapter. Occupants of a dwelling unit are also responsible for keeping
it in a clean, sanitary and safe condition that part of the dwelling unit or
premises which they occupy and control.



   (C)   Vacant structures and land.  All vacant structures and
premises thereof or vacant land shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure
and sanitary condition as provided herein so as not to cause a blighting
problem or adversely affect the public health or safety.  All vacant
structures shall be secured so as to prevent the entry of rodents and other
pests.



(Ord. 15-2008, passed 10-1-08)



§ 93.23  EXTERIOR OPEN AREAS.



   (A)   Sanitation.



      (1)   All exterior property and premises shall be maintained
in a clean, safe and sanitary condition free from any accumulation of rubbish
or garbage.  No person shall erect, continue to use, or maintain a building,
structure, or place for the exercise of a trade, employment, or business or
for keeping or feeding an animal which, by occasioning noxious exhalations or
noisome or offensive smells, becomes injurious to the health, comfort, or
property of individuals or of the public.  No person shall cause or allow
offal, filth, or noisome substances to be collected or remain in any place to
the damage or prejudice of others or of the public.  No person shall allow
the accumulation on any lot or in any such building, house, or structure,
rubbish or other materials which shall or will, if such condition is suffered
to continue, attract and propagate vermin or insects.



      (2)   Regulations for the disposal of garbage and rubbish are
detailed in Chapter 92 of the Montgomery Code of Ordinances.



   (B)   Discarded materials.  All exterior property and premises
shall be maintained free of discarded materials.



   (C)   Compost heap.  A compost heap shall not be placed in any
front yard as defined by the City Zoning Ordinance and shall be set back a
minimum of two feet from any side and rear yard lot line and a minimum of 20
feet from adjacent residential dwelling unit.  In no event shall a compost
heap be located in any riparian zone, drainage or utility easement.  A
compost heap shall be no more than five feet in height, and shall not exceed
a maximum ground or base area of 100 square feet.  The depositing of pet
waste, meat scraps, or other materials that may attract animals or vermin to
the compost heap or which may provide an obnoxious odor is prohibited.  If
the compost heap is located in a landscape area, it shall be enclosed in a
compost bin.



   (D)   Building materials.  Owners shall not permit the accumulation
of building materials upon property and shall remove said materials from the
exterior of the property, except when said building materials are permitted
upon property where the owner is in possession of a valid and existing
building permit issued by the city or if the owner is otherwise in the
process of construction or improvements upon said property.



   (E)   Grading and drainage.  All premises shall be properly graded
and maintained to provide for the immediate diversion of water away from
buildings and to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or
within any structure located thereon with the exception of approved retention
areas, reservoirs, and rain gardens.  Any alteration of the existing grading
and drainage shall comply with the regulations set forth in Chapter 154 of
the Montgomery Code of Ordinances.



   (F)   Water.



      (1)   Pollution.  It shall be unlawful for any person to cast
rubbish or garbage into any reservoir, pond, or watercourse, or to in any
manner corrupt or render unwholesome or impure water thereof.



      (2)   Rivers and streams.  It shall be unlawful for any
person to place or cause to be placed in the channel or bed of any river or
stream in the city any fence, building or other structure, or any rock,
gravel, concrete or other matter which may encroach upon or reclaim lands
from the beds of such rivers or streams or which may impede, retard or divert
the flow of water in said rivers or streams; provided, however, that nothing
contained herein shall deny to the city, any government agency or municipal
corporation to power to go upon such rivers or streams, modify the river
channel and erect such structures, which may be deemed necessary or desirable
for flood protection, transportation, riparian zone improvement or public
recreation. 



   (G)   Soil erosion.  The exterior open space around each structure
shall be maintained or so improved as to provide for grass plantings or other
suitable ground cover to prevent soil erosion, which is or may become
detrimental to the structures, lot use or adjacent lots and structures.



   (H)   Drainage swales.  Swales are to be maintained by the owners
of the parcels upon which they are located and at no time shall anyone plant
shrubs and/or trees on, or discharge, empty, or place any material, fill or
waste into, any swale so as to divert or impede drainage flow.  Rain gardens
may be permitted in drainage swales as approved by the City Engineer.  Small
swales can be mowed as a part of the yard.  Larger drainage swales in meadow
situations should be mowed less frequently in order to allow grasses to grow
taller to retard runoff and prevent erosion.  Swales in woodland areas
should be left in their natural condition leaving the understory to retard
runoff and prevent erosion.



   (I)   Private sewers.  Private sanitary or storm sewers are to be
maintained by the owners of the parcels upon which they are located. Any such
sewer which may become exposed due to soil erosion or any pipes within such
sewer, which are broken or deteriorated, shall be repaired and maintained by
the owner of the parcel upon which such sewer is located. Additionally, the
owner of the parcel upon which such sewer is located shall maintain the sewer
system free and open so as not to impede the free flow of materials through
such sewer system.



   (J)   Vegetation.



      (1)   Safe flow of traffic.  All hedges, bushes, trees and
other vegetation, both within or without of the right-of-way, shall be kept
trimmed and from becoming overgrown such that such growth interferes with the
safe flow of traffic or is an obstruction to traffic sight lines or otherwise
blocks, impedes or interferes with appropriate traffic safety signs.



      (2)   Maintenance.  All plant materials, especially trees and
shrubs, which are dead, afflicted with decay, disease or insect infestation,
or otherwise considered dangerous to other plant material; or are in such a
condition that it shall or will, if such condition is suffered to continue,
endanger the life, limb, or property or cause hurt, damage, or injury to
persons or property or cause hurt, damage, or injury to persons or property
upon the public streets, or public ways adjacent thereto, by the falling
thereof or of parts thereof, shall be removed or appropriately treated.



   Exception:  Any portion of property which is within a riparian zone of
any creek or waterway or is an environmental conservation area, or wooded
area shall be exempt from the provisions of this section.



   (K)   Weeds and plant growth.  All premises and exterior property
shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth, including cultivated
lawns, in excess of six inches.  Weeds shall be defined as annual plants and
vegetation, other than trees or shrubs provided; however this term shall not
include cultivated flowers and gardens.  All weeds and plant growth in
excess of six inches shall be cut and destroyed within five days after
service of a notice of violation.  If the owner fails to comply with the
notice within the time allotted, the city may begin minor nuisance abatement,
as outlined in § 93.16.  The following noxious weeds as identified by the
Ohio State University document Identifying Noxious Weeds of Ohio (Bulletin
866-98) or as amended in the future shall be prohibited:



 



Wild Mustard
 
Brassica kaber var. pinnatifida


Musk Thistle (Nodding Thistle)
 
Carduus nutans


Oxeye Daisy
 
Leucanthemum vulgare


Canada Thistle
 
Cirsium arvense


Poison Hemlock
 
Conium maculatum


Wild Carrot (Queen Annes Lace)
 
Daucus carota


Purple Loosestrife
 
Lythrum salicaria


Wild Parsnip
 
Pastinaca sativa


Mile-a-Minute Weed
 
Polygonum perfoliatum


Russian Thistle
 
Salsola iberica


Cressleaf Groundsel
 
Senecio glabellus


Shattercane
 
Sorghum bicolor


Johnsongrass
 
Sorghum halepense


Grapevines (abandoned)
 
Vitis spp.




 



   (L)   Sidewalks, parking areas and driveways.  All sidewalks,
walkways, stairs, driveways, parking areas and similar areas shall be kept in
a proper state of repair, and maintained free from hazardous conditions, such
as holes, grade shifts and trip hazards.



   (M)   Defacement of property.  No person shall willfully or
wantonly damage, mutilate or deface any exterior surface or any structure or
building on any private or public property by placing thereon any marking,
carving or graffiti.  It shall be the responsibility of the owner to restore
said surface to an approved state of maintenance and repair.



   (N)   Accessory buildings and structures.  All accessory buildings
and structures, including, but not limited to detached garages, storage
sheds, decks, gazebos, bridges, patios, pergolas, fences and walls,
doghouses, chicken coops, rabbit hutches, beehives and other animal shelters
shall be maintained structurally sound and in good repair.



   (O)   Swimming pools and other water features.  Swimming pools,
spas, jacuzzis, and other water features shall be maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition, in good repair and free of stagnant water.  Swimming
pools, spas and jacuzzis that are properly closed shall be exempt from this
regulation.  Rain barrels and rain gardens shall be exempt from this
regulation; however, all rain barrels shall be completely enclosed or covered
with a mesh screen to keep mosquitoes and other insects out of the standing
water. 



   (P)   Motor vehicles.



      (1)   Storage of inoperable vehicles.  Except as provided in
division (P)(2) of this section, no inoperable motor vehicle shall be parked,
kept or stored on any lot.  This section shall not be construed to permit
the parking or placing of inoperable vehicles on any public right-of-way.



      (2)   Parking.  No motor vehicle shall be parked on any lot
unless parked on a hard surface including asphalt, concrete, pervious
pavement, pavers, or an approved gravel driveway.



      (3)   Major repair.  No motor vehicle shall at any time be in
a state of major disassembly, disrepair, or in the process of being stripped
or dismantled.  Painting of motor vehicles is prohibited unless conducted
inside an approved spray booth.



   Exception: A motor vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major
overhaul, including body work, provided that such work is performed inside a
structure or similarly enclosed area designed and approved for such purposes.



      (4)   Minor repair.  Minor repair, including changing a flat
tire, window repair, oil changes, changing the air filter, tune ups, changing
wiper blades, changing lights, and other similar work of the personal
vehicle(s) registered to the owner/occupant of such property is allowed on
any property.  This section shall not otherwise authorize the operation of
any motor vehicle repair facility in a zoning district where such use is
either not accepted as a permitted use or is conditionally permitted within
such district.



   (Q)   It shall be prohibited, in any zoning district within the
city, for any person to slaughter or field dress any animal.  This
restriction shall not apply to any property area within the city where
hunting is permitted.  Additionally, any animal carcass must be properly
stored before disposal so as not to cause noisome or offensive odors, attract
animals or pests, and such animal carcass must be disposed of in a safe and
sanitary manner.



(Ord. 15-2008, passed 10-1-08; Am. Ord. 13-2009, passed 12-2-09)



§ 93.24  EXTERIOR STRUCTURE.



   (A)   General.  The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in
good repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as to be preserved safely,
fire hazards eliminated, and adjoining properties in the neighborhood
protected from blighting influences.



   (B)   Protective treatment.  All exterior surfaces, including but
not limited to, doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, trim,
balconies, decks and fences shall be maintained in good condition.  Exterior
wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the
elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. 
Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces
repainted.  All siding and masonry joints as well as those between the
building envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors, and skylights shall be
maintained weather resistant and water tight.  All metal surfaces subject to
rust or corrosion shall be coated to inhibit such rust and corrosion and all
surfaces with rust or corrosion shall be stabilized and coated to inhibit
future rust and corrosion.  Oxidation stains shall be removed from exterior
surfaces.  Surfaces designed for stabilization by oxidation are exempt from
this requirement.  Those surface materials whose appearance and maintenance
would be enhanced by a natural weathering effect or other natural effects may
remain untreated. 



   (C)   Premises identification.  Buildings shall have approved
address numbers placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from
the street or road fronting the property.  The numbers shall contrast with
their background.  Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet
letters.  Numbers shall be a minimum of four inches in height with a minimum
stroke width of 0.5 inch.  Numbers shall not exceed a maximum of 24 inches
in height.  Address signage shall be no larger than necessary for adequate
identification by safety service personnel.



   (D)   Structural members.  All structural members shall be
maintained free from deterioration, and shall be capable of safely supporting
the imposed dead and live loads.



   (E)   Foundation walls.  All foundation walls shall be maintained
plumb and free from open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such
condition so as to prevent entry of rodents and other pests.



   (F)   Exterior walls.  All exterior walls shall be free from holes,
breaks, and loose or rotting materials; and maintained weatherproofed and
properly surface coated where required to prevent deterioration.



   (G)   Roofs and drainage.  The roof and flashing shall be sound,
tight and not have defects that admit rain or melting snow or ice. Roof
drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls
or interior portion of the structure. Roof drains, gutters and downspouts
shall be maintained in good repair and free from obstructions.



   (H)   Decorative features.  All cornices, belt courses, corbels,
terra cotta trim, wall facings and similar decorative features shall be
maintained in good repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition.



   (I)   Overhang extensions.  All overhang extensions including, but
not limited to canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, fire escapes,
standpipes, and exhaust ducts shall be maintained in good repair and be
properly anchored so as to be kept in a sound condition. When required, all
exposed surfaces or metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and
against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials,
such as paint or similar surface treatment.



   (J)   Stairways, decks, porches and balconies.  Every exterior
stairway, deck, porch and balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto,
shall be maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage
and capable of supporting the imposed loads. Said areas shall be kept clear
of hazards and debris and shall not be used as storage areas.



   (K)   Chimneys, towers and satellite dishes.  All chimneys, cooling
towers, smoke stacks, antennas, satellite dishes and similar appurtenances
shall be maintained structurally safe and sound, and in good repair. All
exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and
against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials,
such as paint or similar surface treatment.



   (L)   Handrails and guards.  Every handrail and guard shall be
firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be
maintained in good condition.



   (M)   Window, skylight and door frames.  Every window, skylight,
door and frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair and weather
tight.  All glazing materials shall be maintained free from cracks and holes.



   (N)   Doors.  All exterior doors, door assemblies and hardware
shall be maintained in good condition.



   (O)   Basement hatchways.  Every basement hatchway shall be
maintained to prevent the entrance of rodents, rain and surface drainage
water.



   (P)   Guards for basement windows.  Every basement window that is
openable shall be supplied with rodent shields, storm windows or other
approved protection against the entry of rodents.



(Ord. 15-2008, passed 10-1-08)



WEEDS AND LITTER ON PROPERTY



§ 93.40  KEEPING DOWN WEEDS.



   (A)   Any person owning or having charge of land within the
municipality shall keep such property free and clear from all noxious weeds
and rank vegetation and shall be required to cut all such weeds and
vegetation on the lots owned or controlled by him or her at least twice in
every year, once between June 1 and July 1 and once between August 1 and
September 1.



   (B)   Noxious weeds and rank vegetation shall include but not be
limited to:



      (1)   Any weeds such as the following:



   Noxious Weeds



   Buckthorn



   Canada Thistle



   Columbus Grass



   Corncockle



   Cressleaf Groundsel



   Curly Dock



   Dodder



   Field Bindweed



   French Weed



   Hairy Whitetop (Ballcress)



   Hedge Bindweed



   Heart-podded Hoary Cress



   Horsenettle



   Japanese Knotweed



   Johnsongrass



   Kochia



   Kudzu



   Leafy Spurge



   Mile-A-Minute Weed



   Musk Thistle



   Oxeye Daisy



   Perennial Sowthistle



   Poison Hemlock



   Purple Loosestrife



   Quackgrass



   Russian Knapweed



   Russian Thistle



   Serrated Tussock



   Shatter Cane



   Wild Carrot



   Wild Garlic



   Wild Mustard



   Wild Onion



   Wild Parsnip



      (2)   Grapevines when growing in groups of 100 or more and not
pruned, sprayed, cultivated, or otherwise maintained for two consecutive
years;



(O.A.C. §§ 901:5-31-01 and 901:5-37-01)



      (3)   Bushes of the species of tall, common, or European
barberry, further known as berberis vulgaris or its horticultural varieties;



      (4)   Any weeds, grass, or plants, other than trees, bushes,
flowers, or other ornamental plants, growing to a height exceeding 6 inches.



Statutory reference:



   List of prohibited and secondary noxious weeds, see O.A.C. §§
901:5-31-01 and 901:5-37-01



§ 93.41  NOTICE TO OWNER TO CUT NOXIOUS WEEDS, REMOVE LITTER; SERVICE.



   (A)   Upon written information that noxious weeds are growing on
lands in the municipality and are about to spread or mature seeds, the City
Manager shall cause a written notice to be served personally or by certified
mail upon the owner, lessee, agent, or tenant having charge of such land,
notifying him or her that noxious weeds are growing on such lands and that
they must be cut and destroyed within five (5) days after service of such
notice. If the owner, lessee, agent or tenant cannot be reasonably located,
then it is sufficient service to post a copy of this notice in a conspicuous
place in or about the structure, building, premises or property affected by
such notice.



   (B)   Upon a finding by the City Manager that litter has been placed
on lands in the municipality, has not been removed, and constitutes a
detriment to public health, the City Manager shall cause a written notice to
be served either personally or by certified mail upon the owner, lessee,
agent, or tenant having charge of such land, notifying him or her that litter
is on the land, and that it must be collected and removed within 15 days
after the service of the notice. If the owner, lessee, agent or tenant cannot
be reasonably located, then it is sufficient service to post a copy of this
notice in a conspicuous place in or about the structure, building, premises
or property affected by such notice.



   (C)   As used in this section and § 93.43, LITTER includes any
garbage, waste, peelings of vegetables or fruits, rubbish, ashes, cans,
bottles, wire, paper, cartons, boxes, parts of automobiles, wagons,
furniture, glass, oil of an unsightly or unsanitary nature, or anything else
of an unsightly or unsanitary nature.



   (D)   This section does not apply to land being used under a
municipal building or construction permit or license, a municipal permit or
license, or a conditional zoning permit or variance to operate a junkyard,
scrap metal processing facility, or similar business, or a permit or license
issued pursuant to R.C. Chapter 3734, §§ 4737.05 to 4737.12, or R.C.
Chapter 6111.



(R.C. § 731.51)



§ 93.42  FEES FOR SERVICE AND RETURN.



   The Building Department, its designee, or Clerk of the City Manager may
make service and return of the notice provided for in § 93.41 and shall be
allowed the same fees as that provided for service and return of summons in
civil cases before a magistrate.



(R.C. § 731.52)



§ 93.43  PROCEDURE WHEN OWNER FAILS TO COMPLY WITH NOTICE.



   If the owner, lessee, agent, or tenant having charge of the lands
mentioned in § 93.41 fails to comply with the notice required by such
section, the City Manager or his designated agents shall be entitled to enter
upon such property and shall cause such noxious weeds to be cut and destroyed
or such litter removed and may employ the necessary labor to perform the
task.  All expenses incurred shall, when approved by the City Manager, be
paid out of the money in the treasury of the municipality not otherwise
appropriated.



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see R.C. § 731.53



§ 93.44  WRITTEN RETURN TO COUNTY AUDITOR; AMOUNT AS A LIEN UPON PROPERTY.



   The City Manager shall make a written return to the County Auditor of
their action under §§ 93.41, 93.42, and 93.43, with a statement of the
charges for their services, the amount paid for labor, equipment or materials
to correct and remove such violation, the fees of the officers serving the
notices, an administrative fee equal to 3% of the amount assessed, but such
administrative fee shall not exceed $100 nor be less than $25, and a proper
description of the premises.  These amounts, when allowed, shall be entered
upon the tax duplicate and be a lien upon such lands from and after the date
of entry and be collected as other taxes with 10% per annum added upon the
unpaid balance collectible over a period not to exceed five year.  If the
amount assessed is less than $1,000 total, it shall be payable in full within
the following tax year.



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see R.C. § 731.54



§ 93.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter for which no
other penalty has been provided shall be subject to the penalty provided in
§ 10.99.



CHAPTER 94:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section



   94.01   Permit required to open sidewalk



   94.02   Application and fee



   94.03   Permit issued, when



   94.04   Restoration of pavement



   94.05   Barriers around excavation



   94.06   Warning lights



   94.07   Construction of primary streets



   94.08   Construction of secondary streets



   94.09   Permit required for construction of streets; deposit and
payment for inspection services



   94.10   Street inspectors; appointment, duties, and compensation



   94.11   Permit required for construction of driveways; construction
standards; drainage method to be approved



   94.12   Limiting width of sidewalk area for driveway; driveways at
property line.



   94.13   Trees overhanging streets and sidewalks



   94.14   Sidewalk construction specifications; condemnation



   94.15   Public sidewalk maintenance



   94.16   Sidewalk maintenance responsibilities



   94.17   Temporary sidewalk



   94.18   Access regulations



   94.19   Tracking mud, rocks or other debris onto streets and
sidewalks



   94.20   Creation and appropriation of monies for motor vehicle tax



   94.21   Montgomery Road Corridor design standard



 



   94.99   Penalty



   Appendix A:   Access regulations



§ 94.01  PERMIT REQUIRED TO OPEN SIDEWALK.



   No person, firm, or corporation other than the Director of Service,
Municipal Engineer, or the authorized employees or agents of either, may make
any opening in any street, alley, sidewalk, or public way of the
municipality, unless a permit to make such opening shall have been obtained
prior to commencement of the work, as herein provided. 



(‘67 Code, § 94.01)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.02  APPLICATION AND FEE.



   Each permit for making such opening shall be confined to a single
project and shall be issued by the Director of Service.  Application shall
be made on a form prescribed by the Director of Service, giving the purpose
of the proposed opening, the exact location of the proposed opening, the kind
of paving, the area and depth to be excavated and such other facts as may be
provided for.  A fee as adopted by the City Manager shall be collected by
the Director of Service before issuing such permit, which sum shall be paid
into the general fund of the municipality. 



(‘67 Code, § 94.02)



§ 94.03  PERMIT ISSUED, WHEN.



   The permit shall be issued only after a bond sufficient to cover the
cost of restoration has been posted with the Director of Service, conditioned
upon prompt and satisfactory refilling of excavations and restoration of all
surfaces disturbed. 



(‘67 Code, § 94.03)



§ 94.04  RESTORATION OF PAVEMENT.



   (A)   The opening and restoration of a pavement, or other surface,
shall be performed under the direction and to the satisfaction of the
Director of Service, and in accordance with rules, regulations, and
specifications heretofore or hereafter established by the Council.



   (B)   Upon failure or refusal of the permittee satisfactorily to
fill the excavation, restore the surface, and remove all excess materials
within the time specified in the permit or where not specified therein,
within a reasonable time after commencement of the work, the municipality may
proceed, without notice, to make such fill and restoration and the deposit
referred to in the preceding section shall be deemed forfeited.  Thereupon,
such deposit shall be paid into the street repair fund of the municipality,
except such part demanded and paid to the permittee as the difference between
the deposit and the charges of the municipality for restoration services
performed by it.  If the amount of such services performed by the
municipality should exceed the amount of such deposit, the Director of
Finance shall proceed to collect the remainder due from such permittee.



   (C)   The restoration of any opening made in a street right-of-way
pursuant to this section shall be made by backfilling the opening with
compacted granular backfill or controlled density backfill to a distance of
four feet from improved portion of street, or to the satisfaction of the
Director of Service.  The top filling of the backfill shall be of soil.



   (D)   That portion of any opening that is in the improved portion of
a street shall be restored by filling said opening with compacted granular
backfill or controlled density backfill properly compacted, but the improved
portion shall be rebuilt to the street specifications of the type of street
that has been opened.



   (E)   Whenever any tunneling, boring or drilling under a street
right-of-way with an opening in excess of six inches is made, the opening
shall be refilled by blowing or compacting either compacted granular backfill
or controlled density backfill around any pipe or conduit inserted in such
opening.



(‘67 Code, § 94.04)



§ 94.05  BARRIERS AROUND EXCAVATIONS.



   Any person engaged in or employing others in excavating, or opening any
street, sidewalk, alley, or other public way, shall have such excavation or
opening fully barricaded at all times to prevent injury to persons or
animals. 



(‘67 Code, § 94.05)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.06  WARNING LIGHTS.



   Any person engaged in or employing others in excavating or otherwise in
any manner obstructing a portion or all of any street, sidewalk, alley, or
other public way, at all times during the night season shall cause the area
to be secured consistent with the requirement of the Ohio Manual of Uniform
Traffic Control Devices.



(‘67 Code, § 94.06)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.07  CONSTRUCTION OF PRIMARY STREETS.



   (A)   For the construction of a primary street the right-or-way
shall be not less than 60 feet in width and the road surface of the street
shall be not less than 24 feet in width.



   (B)   The "Ohio Department of Transportation Construction and
Material Specifications" are hereby adopted for use and application in the
city unless otherwise provided in this chapter.  All primary streets shall
meet the "Ohio Department of Transportation Construction and Material
Specifications" for full-depth asphalt concrete with the following
deviation:  under 404.02 Composition, aggregate shall be 100% crushed
aggregate.



   (C)   Primary streets shall have curbs which shall meet ODOT
standards.



   (D)   Storm sewer conduit shall meet ODOT standards.



   (E)   Wherever plastic conduit is permitted storm water conduit
shall meet ODOT specifications and shall be a certified "ring-tite" plastic
pipe.



   (F)   Storm water discharge or intake facilities shall have an
approved, reinforced concrete headwall and shall meet ODOT standards. Any
deviation from this requirement shall be approved by the City Engineer.



   (G)   Storm water discharge by downspouts, sump pumps, or other
device onto public streets and sidewalks is prohibited. Provision shall be
made to connect all storm water discharge to the nearest drainage swale or
storm sewer system.



   (H)   Manholes and catchbasin inlets shall be reinforced concrete,
precast or poured in place concrete structures and shall meet ODOT standards.



(‘67 Code, § 94.07)  (Am. Ord. 19-1984, passed 8-1-84)



§ 94.08  CONSTRUCTION OF SECONDARY STREETS.



   (A)   For the construction of secondary streets the right-of-way
shall be not less than 50 feet in width and the road surface shall not be
less than 24 feet in width.



   (B)   Secondary streets shall be constructed with the same
construction specifications as primary streets as set forth in § 94.07 of
this chapter. 



(‘67 Code, § 94.08)  (Am. Ord. 19-1984, passed 8-1-84)



§ 94.09  PERMIT REQUIRED FOR CONSTRUCTION OF STREETS; DEPOSIT AND PAYMENT
FOR INSPECTION SERVICES.



   (A)   Before proceeding with the construction of a street intended
for dedication to public use, the owner of the land or his agent shall obtain
a permit for the construction from the Director of Service for which a fee as
adopted by the City Manager shall be paid.



   (B)   A permit for street construction shall not be issued until the
owner or his agent has agreed, in terms satisfactory to the Director of
Service, to compensate the municipality for its expense incurred in employing
a street inspector to supervise the construction and has deposited 25% of the
Director's estimate of such cost with the municipality. 



(‘67 Code, § 94.09)  (Am. Ord. 22-1980, passed 10-1-80)



§ 94.10  STREET INSPECTORS; APPOINTMENT, DUTIES, AND COMPENSATION.



   (A)   The Director of Service shall name a sufficient number of
persons who are, in the Director's judgment, qualified to supervise the
construction of streets in the municipality.



   (B)   Whenever any person, firm, or corporation has obtained a
permit for street construction or for the opening of a street, alley,
sidewalk, or public way, the Director of Service shall appoint a street
inspector from his list of qualified persons to inspect the installation
during the course of construction for compliance with applicable building
laws and construction norms.  The inspector shall report to the Director of
Service; he shall be compensated by the municipality at the rate established
for such service by the city council. 



(‘67 Code, § 94.10)  (Am. Ord. 22-1980, passed 10-1-80)



§ 94.11 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR CONSTRUCTION OF DRIVEWAYS; CONSTRUCTION
STANDARDS; DRAINAGE METHOD TO BE APPROVED.



   (A)   No person shall construct or commence the construction of a
driveway within the street right-of-way lines of any street in the
municipality until a permit therefor has been obtained from the Director of
Service.



   (B)   The Director of Service shall not issue a permit for the
construction of a driveway within the confines of a street right-of-way until
he has approved the method of disposing of surface drainage along the street
right-of-way by means of an approved conduit, or other suitable means of
drainage under the proposed driveway.



   (C)   The Director of Service shall not issue a permit for the
construction of a driveway which intersects with a street right-of-way until
the Director of Public Safety has approved of the location of the
intersection.  The Director shall consider the effect of the driveway
location as the same affects the safety of motorists and pedestrians and
shall withhold approval when he deems that an alternate intersection of the
street and driveway would protect persons or property and that such alternate
intersection is reasonably available to the applicant. 



(‘67 Code, § 94.11)  (Am. Ord. 25-1973, passed 10-3-73; Am. Ord. 19-1984,
passed 8-1-84)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.12 LIMITING WIDTH OF SIDEWALK AREA FOR DRIVEWAY; DRIVEWAYS AT PROPERTY
LINE.



   For the purpose of this section PROPERTY LINE is defined as the line of
demarcation where the right-of-way of a street abuts the property owner’s
property line:



   (A)   In "E" retail district the maximum width of a driveway at the
property line shall be 20 feet;



   (B)   In any residence zone the maximum width of a driveway at the
property line shall be 20 feet;



   (C)   The maximum width of a driveway in an "E" retail district
where said driveway joins the surface highway shall be 35 feet;



   (D)   The maximum width of any residence zone shall be 20 feet at
the surface street line;



   (E)   No two driveways shall be constructed on the same parcel of
real estate within 15 feet of each other.



(Ord. 381, passed 1955)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.13  TREES OVERHANGING STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.



   Owners of trees or bushes, any part of which overhang or extend over
any part of a public sidewalk or public street in the municipality shall so
trim said trees or bushes. 



(‘67 Code, § 94.13)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.14  SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS: CONDEMNATION.



   (A)   All sidewalks constructed or reconstructed in the municipality
in any public right-of-way shall be installed in conformity with the latest
edition of the Ohio Department of Transportation Construction and Material
Specifications, as amended, all state and federal regulations governing
handicap design, accessibility and use, and with the supplemental City of
Montgomery construction standards hereinafter set forth.



   (B)   As employed herein SIDEWALKS shall include:  concrete walks
and bikeways, handicapped ramps, bituminous walks and bike-ways, entrance
pavements, driveway entrances, concrete and bituminous surfaces, commercial
and residential applications, and areas where paving brick is used or
prescribed.



   (C)   The supplemental City of Montgomery Construction standards are
as follows:



      (1)   Concrete sidewalks installed pursuant to this section
shall be a minimum five feet wide, five inches thick, Class C concrete.  The
sidewalk thickness at a residential driveway entrance shall be seven inches,
and at commercial entrances the concrete shall be reinforced with steel as
directed by the city.



      (2)   The thickness of handicapped ramps adjoining street
curbs, shall be 12 inches, and the minimum width parallel to the curb shall
be 12 inches.



      (3)   Bituminous sidewalk (when permitted) shall conform to
all applicable paving standards, with a compacted thickness of five inches of
asphalt and a minimum of eight inches when sidewalks are an integral part of
the street or highway.



      (4)   The subgrade to any type of sidewalk shall conform to
the requirements provided for streets and highways. The use of fill and
embankment shall meet ODOT standards.



      (5)   Paving brick, block and tile-type sidewalks (when
permitted) shall conform to Ohio and Montgomery standards and to the
manufacturer's specifications.



      (6) All sidewalks shall conform to the stormwater control
requirements imposed by the city.



      (7)   Sidewalk construction in the Heritage Overlay District
must conform to the Streetscape Master Plan.  See § 151.1405.



   (D)   Condemnation.  The following sidewalks, or parts of
sidewalks, now or hereafter existing shall be condemned:



      (1)   Any block, stone, brick, or segment thereof having a
crack in it more than 5/8 of an inch wide at the surface.



      (2)   Adjoining blocks, stones, bricks, or portions thereof
whose adjacent edges differ in vertical elevation by more than 5/8 of an inch.



      (3)   Blocks, stones, or bricks that have holes in them 5/8 of
an inch or more in diameter or that are broken so that substantial fragments
are missing or loose.



      (4)   Blocks, stones, or bricks having depressions such as to
impound mud or water.



      (5)   Blocks, stones, or bricks having a cross slope away from
the street in excess of 3/4 of an inch vertical per one foot horizontal.



      (6)   Blocks, stones, or bricks that are very rough, with the
course aggregate protruding, by reason of ravelling or spalling. 



(‘67 Code, § 94.14)  (Ord. 5-1972, passed 4-5-72; Am. Ord. 25-1980,
passed 12-3-80; Am. Ord. 8-1986, passed 7-2-86)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.15  PUBLIC SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   No person shall obstruct any public sidewalk by erecting or
placing thereon any fence, structure, sign, or other obstruction, nor permit
the same to remain thereon.



   (B)   No person shall encumber any street or public sidewalk space
with goods, wares, merchandise, or other materials.  This section shall not
apply to the continued use of existing market stands on the effective date of
this section, or to the temporary use of streets and public sidewalks for
lawful construction projects, or to the use of sidewalks for shows or fairs
authorized by the Directors of Safety and Service, or to the use of public
sidewalks for the placement of waste collection containers on the evening
prior to or on the day of waste collection.



   (C)   The owner of property immediately adjacent to a public
sidewalk shall remove all debris, garbage, refuse, and obstructions therefrom
within a reasonable period of time after written notification to such effect
has been made by the Director of Service.  The notice required hereunder
shall be deemed complete upon delivery:



      (1)   To the owner personally.



      (2)   To the owner by mail addressed to him at his last known
address.



      (3)   To any tenant, when the address of the owner is unknown.



      (4)   Upon the posting of notice upon any vacant premises when
the address of the owner is unknown. 



(Ord. 15-1974, passed 9-4-74)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.16  SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITIES.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply:



   MAJOR MAINTENANCE.  Major maintenance includes, without limitation,
repairing or replacing deteriorated sidewalks, structural repairs to
sidewalks, and the repair of cracks or material separations which present a
danger of injury to persons or property traveling upon such sidewalk.



   PRIVATE SIDEWALKS.  Private sidewalks are located solely within and
upon private property designed to circulate pedestrian traffic safely within
the private development or to connect the private development to the public
sidewalk.



   PUBLIC SIDEWALKS.  Public sidewalks are those paved walkways on both
public or private property, located within or near the public right-of-way,
constructed to provide for the circulation of pedestrian traffic along the
streets and highways within the community.  The sidewalks more often than
not traverse more than one property and are typically inter-connected
throughout the community.



   ROUTINE MAINTENANCE.  Routine maintenance includes, without
limitation, clearing debris, dust, dirt, grass clippings and weeds, and snow
and ice removal.



   (B)   (1)   The city shall assume the responsibility for major
maintenance of all public sidewalks within the city, and commencing with the
passage of this section the city shall no longer assume the responsibility
for routine maintenance of public sidewalks.  The owner of the property upon
which is constructed a private sidewalk shall be responsible for major and
routine maintenance of such private sidewalk.



      (2)   This section is not intended to abrogate any statutory
or common law immunity available to the city regarding the construction,
repair or maintenance of public grounds or sidewalks, nor is this section
intended to establish a statutory standard of care, nor modify any common law
standard of care, for private property owners in a civil proceeding arising
from injuries to persons or property occurring on such public sidewalks.



      (3)   There shall be no criminal penalty for a violation of
this section.  It is the city's intent by this section to delineate the
responsibility for sidewalk maintenance and repair.  This shall affect no
other Code section or criminal liability outlined in this Code regarding the
obstruction of, or debris upon, sidewalks or public ways.



(Ord. 10-2000, passed 10-4-00)



§ 94.17  TEMPORARY SIDEWALKS.



   Whenever normal pedestrian traffic past a construction site is
disrupted, a temporary sidewalk or walkway shall be constructed of asphalt
(or an approved equal) at least 42 inches in width and at such an elevation
so as to join the existing walkways at each end. Approval of material,
location, elevation, and safety features shall be obtained from the Director
of Service.  The permanent sidewalk shall be completed at the earliest
possible time.  When a sidewalk is to be constructed, an occupancy permit
for the habitation or operation of the development, or portions thereof,
shall not be issued until the permanent sidewalk has been constructed and
approved. 



(Ord. 9-1984, passed 4-4-84)



§ 94.18  ACCESS REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Access classification of roadways.  Each roadway, or portion
thereof, under the jurisdiction of the city shall be assigned an access
classification based on a consideration of existing and projected traffic
volumes, adopted local transportation plans and needs, the existing and/or
projected character of lands adjoining the roadway, adopted local land use
plans and zoning, and the availability of reasonable access to those lands. 
The access classifications are defined as follows:



      (1)   Access Class 1.  Roadways capable of providing medium
to high speeds and traffic volumes over medium to long distances.  Direct
access to abutting land is subordinate to providing service to through
traffic.



         (a)   Private direct access to a Class 1 roadway shall
be permitted only when the property in question has no other reasonable
access to the public road network.



         (b)   The design and location of allowable private
access points shall comply with all applicable sections of this regulation.



         (c)   All private direct access points to Class 1
roadways shall be designated as "Temporary" and all requirements of division
(J) of this section shall apply.



      (2)   Access Class II.  Roads capable of providing moderate
travel speeds and traffic volumes and generally provide the linkage between
Access Class I and Access Class III roadways.  There is a reasonable balance
between access and mobility needs within this classification.



         (a)   Generally, only one private access point shall be
provided to an individual parcel unless it can be shown that additional
access points would not be detrimental to the safety and operation of the
roadway and are necessary for the approved use of the property.



         (b)   The design and location of allowable access points
must comply with all applicable sections of this regulation.



         (c)   The following roadways are hereby designated as
Access Class II roadways:



   Table 1




Road Name   From   To





Montgomery Rd. (SR 22)   Corporation Line   Corporation Line





Cooper Rd. (SR 126)   W. Corporation Line   E. Corporation Line





Remington Rd (SR 126)   Montgomery Road   E. Corporation Line





Main Street   Montgomery Road   Montgomery Rd.





Pfeiffer Road   W. Corporation Line   Montgomery Rd.





Hopewell Road   E. Corporation Line   Montgomery Rd.





Kemper Road   Corporation Line   Corporation Line





Cornell Road   Corporation Line   Corporation Line




      (3)   Access Class III.  Roadways and streets which allow for
low to medium travel speeds and traffic volumes and are linked to the roadway
network through intersections with Access Class II roadways and other Access
Class III roadways. Access needs take priority over through traffic movement
without compromising the public health, welfare, and safety.



         (a)   The number of access points to a parcel is limited
only to the requirements of divisions (C) and (D) of this section.



         (b)   All public dedicated streets or portions thereof
within the jurisdiction of the city not previously designated as Access Class
I or Access Class II roadways are hereby designated as Access Class III
roadways.



   (B)   Minimum spacing of driveways.  In order to minimize the
potential for accidents and delay to through vehicles, all adjacent driveways
onto Class I and Class II public roadways shall be separated by a minimum
distance measured from centerline to centerline as shown in Table 2 according
to the posted speed limit on the roadway.




Table 2
Minimum Spacing of Adjacent Driveways





Posted Speed Limit (mph)   Minimum Spacing (feet)





   20   85





   25   105





   30   125





   35   150





   40   185





   45   230





   50   275




   Additionally, the spacing of adjacent driveways should be as uniform as
possible between major intersections.



   (C)   Minimum corner clearance of driveways from intersecting
streets.  The location of driveways adjacent to intersecting streets shall
conform to the minimum corner clearances provided in § 1 of Appendix A.



   (D)   Minimum sight distances.  All driveways and intersecting
roadways shall be designed and located so that the minimum distances as shown
in § 2 of Appendix A, are provided.



   (E)   Provisions for maintaining the capacity of the roadway.  All
new development shall be designed so that all traffic requiring access to and
from the development shall operate in such a manner that it will not
adversely affect the capacity of the roadway. Provisions for the present or
future construction of a frontage road, restriction or channelization of
turning movements, or other improvements may be required, as a condition of
approval, in order to maintain the capacity of any adjacent roadway.



   (F)   Number of access points.  Each existing tract of land is
entitled to one direct or indirect access point to the public roadway network
provided that its location and design fulfill, as a minimum, the requirements
of division (C) and division (D) of this section.  Where the roadway
frontage of a tract of land is greater than 500 feet, an additional access
point may be allowed if determined by the city that the access point will not
adversely affect the capacity of the roadway.  Said additional access point
shall be in compliance with all applicable provisions of this section.



   (G)   Coordination of access points.  Major access points on
opposite sides of the Class I and II roadways shall when possible be located
opposite each other.  If not so located, turning movement restrictions may
be imposed.  In addition, in order to maximize the efficient utilization of
access points, access drives shall be designed, located, and constructed in a
manner to provide and make possible the coordination of access with and
between adjacent properties developed (present and future) for similar or
compatible uses.  As a condition of approval for construction, use, or reuse
of any access point, unobstructed and unencumbered access, in accordance with
the provisions of this section, may be required from any such access point to
adjacent properties.



   (H)   Consolidation of existing access points.  Whenever the use of
a parcel of land changes, or two or more parcels of land are assembled under
one purpose, plan, entity, or usage, the existing driveway permits shall
become void and the new permit shall be based upon the owner/developer's
plans to use some existing driveways and close or relocate other driveways. 
Any such new or reauthorized access point shall comply with all applicable
provisions of this section.



   (I)   Design of access points.  The width, angle, grade, curb
radii, and other design aspects of access points shall be in accordance with
§§ 94.11 and 94.12 of this chapter.



   (J)   Temporary access points.  Any access point that does not
comply with one or more sections of this regulation may be designated as
"Temporary".  Any access point so designated may be terminated, reduced,
limited to certain turning movements or caused to be relocated at such time
as the particular use served by an access point changes and/or the property
is otherwise provided an alternate means of access via a frontage road, an
intersecting street or a shared common driveway.  In all cases where said
access points are classified as "temporary," such designation shall be duly
noted on the site plan submitted for approval.



   (K)   Spacing restrictions for signalized access points.  Access
points shall be designed so that those which will warrant signalization shall
be spaced a minimum distance of one quarter mile apart.  The location and
design of proposed signalized access points shall be determined by a traffic
engineering study prepared by the developer and subject to the approval of
the city which shall account for at least the following variables:



      (1)   Traffic signal phasing as determined by analysis of
projected turning movements;



      (2)   Traffic signal cycle length as determined by analysis of
projected traffic volumes;



      (3)   Relationship to adjacent signals (existing or proposed)
for purposes of signal interconnection and coordination;



      (4)   Roadway geometrics and sight distance considerations; and



      (5)   Accident experience.



   If the installation of a traffic signal is approved, the developer may
be required to participate in all or part of the cost of design, purchase,
and installation of the signal equipment.



   (L)   Provision for exclusive turning lanes and
deceleration/acceleration lanes.  At those access points where vehicles
turning to and from the roadway will affect the capacity of the roadway, the
developer shall dedicate sufficient right-of-way and construct turning lanes
or deceleration/acceleration lanes as necessary to maintain the capacity of
the roadway.



   (M)   Provision of frontage roads.  The use of frontage roads to
provide access to property adjacent to access Class I or Class II roadways
may be required.  The landowner/developer may be required to construct the
frontage road to the side and/or rear property lines or reserve sufficient
right-of-way to allow future construction.  As adjacent property develops
landowner/developers shall be required to interconnect the individual
portions of frontage roads as appropriate.  Access to the roadway via an
intersecting street or a common driveway may be required if the use of a
frontage road is not feasible.



   (N)   Waiver of requirements.  The city may, at its discretion,
reasonably waive or modify the requirements of this section, if it is
determined that such action is warranted given the nature of the individual
project.  A decision of the city staff may be appealed to the Planning
Commission by the property owner within 30 days of the date the decision is
made.  In such instances, the decision of the Planning Commission shall be
final.



(Ord. 12-1988, passed 3-2-88)



§ 94.19  TRACKING MUD, ROCKS OR OTHER DEBRIS ONTO STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   No person shall operate on any street, alley or other public
place a vehicle with mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter
on its wheels or other parts if such operation results in the depositing or
tracking of such mud, dirt, substances, litter or foreign matter on any
street, alley or other public place. No person being the owner of real
property or a prime contractor in charge of a construction site shall
maintain such property or construction site so that vehicles upon such
property or construction site pick up mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or
foreign matter on the wheels or other parts and deposit or track such mud,
dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter onto any street, alley or
other public place.



   (B)   Where mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter
has been tracked or deposited on any street, alley or other public place in
violation of this section, the City Manager, or his designee, is authorized
to cause such mud, dirt, substances, litter or foreign matter to be cleaned
from such street and to charge the cost thereof to person or persons
responsible. The cost of cleaning may be collected by civil suit. The term
RESPONSIBLE PERSON as used in this section means the driver of the vehicle
which deposited or tracked the mud, dirt, substances, litter or foreign
matter on the street or his or her employer or the owner of the real property
or prime contractor in charge of a construction site from where the deposited
or tracked mud, dirt, substances, litter or foreign matter on the street,
alley or other public place originated.



(Ord. 10-1991, passed 4-3-91; Am. Ord. 14-1996, passed 11-6-96; Am. Ord.
2-1998, passed 2-4-98)



§ 94.20  CREATION AND APPROPRIATION OF MONIES FOR MOTOR VEHICLE TAX.



   (A)   There is hereby levied an additional $5 license tax under the
provisions of R.C. § 4504.171 to take effect at the earliest time allowed by
state law.  The revenue derived from said tax will be used for the purposes
authorized pursuant to R.C. § 4504.171, including to supplement costs and
expenses associated with the maintenance of public roads within the city.



   (B)   There is hereby created a separate fund to be maintained by
the city known as the Montgomery Street Improvement Fund.  All monies raised
by the imposition of the $5 motor vehicle tax shall be paid into this fund
which shall have as its purpose the expenditure of these monies pursuant to
the provisions of R.C. § 4504.171.



(Ord. 4-1993, passed 1-20-93)



§ 94.21  MONTGOMERY ROAD CORRIDOR DESIGN STANDARD.



   The Montgomery Road Corridor design standard developed by McBride Dale
Clarion with the assistance of the Corridor Advisory Committee and
recommended by the Planning Commission, a copy of which is attached to
Ordinance 2-2006 and incorporated herein by reference, is adopted in its
entirety.



(Ord. 2-2006, passed 2-1-06)



§ 94.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject
to the penalty provided in § 10.99.



APPENDIX A:  ACCESS REGULATIONS



Section



   1.   Minimum corner clearance of driveways from intersecting streets



   2.   Minimum sight distances



§ 1  MINIMUM CORNER CLEARANCE OF DRIVEWAYS FROM INTERSECTING STREETS.



 





 
 
MINIMUM CORNER CLEARANCES (FT)


ITEM
 
ACCESS CLASSIFICATION


CLASS I
 
CLASS II
 
CLASS III


A
 
230
 
175
 
50


B
 
115
 
85
 
50


C
 
230
 
175
 
50


D
 
230
 
175
 
50


E
 
75
 
0
 
0




 



   A. Signalized Intersection Control



 





 
 
MINIMUM CORNER CLEARANCES (FT)


ITEM
 
ACCESS CLASSIFICATION


CLASS I
 
CLASS II
 
CLASS III


F
 
115
 
75
 
50


G
 
115
 
85
 
50


H
 
85
 
85
 
50


J
 
115
 
75
 
50


K
 
75
 
0
 
0




 



   B.  Stop Sign Intersection Control



 

TYPE OF INTERSECTION CONTROL
 
DESCRIPTION OF ITEMS


SIGNALIZED
 
STOP SIGN


A

 

B

 

C

 

D

 

E
 
F

 

G

 

H

 

J

 

K
 
   The minimum distance from an intersection to a driveway on the
departure lanes where no median is present

The minimum distance from an intersection to a driveway on the approach
lanes  where a median is present

The minimum distance from an intersection to a driveway  on the approach
lanes where no median is present

The minimum distance from an intersection to a driveway on the departure
lanes where a median is present

The minimum lateral distance between a driveway and a median opening



 



   c.  Item Descriptions



(Ord. 12-1988, passed 3-2-88)



§ 2.  MINIMUM SIGHT DISTANCES.



 

MINIMUM SIGHT DISTANCE ALONG THROUGH ROAD FROM INTERSECTION OR DRIVEWAY TO
ALLOW VEHICLE TO SAFELY TURN LEFT OR RIGHT ONTO THROUGH ROAD (FEET)


Operating Speed
 
20
 
30
 
40
 
50
 
60


Direction
 
Left   Right
 
Left   Right
 
Left   Right
 
Left   Right
 
Left   Right


Passenger Car

Truck
 
210   170

380   230
 
320   360

520   450
 
540   590

920   920
 
900   970

1510   1530
 
1320   1400

3080   3110



 







 



 

MINIMUM SIGHT DISTANCE ALONG THROUGH ROAD TO ALLOW VEHICLE TO SAFELY TURN
LEFT INTO INTERSECTION OF DRIVEWAY FROM THROUGH ROAD (FEET)


Operating Speed
 
20
 
30
 
40
 
50
 
60


Lanes on Thru Road
 
2   4   5
 
2   4   6
 
2   4   6
 
2   4   6
 
2   4   6


Passenger Car

Truck
 
240   250   280

370   390   410
 
360   390   420

550   580   610
 
470   520   560

470   770   810
 
590   650   700

920   960   1010
 
710   780   840

1100   1150   1210



 







 



(Ord. 12-1988, passed 3-2-88)



CHAPTER 95:  UNCLAIMED AND ABANDONED VEHICLES



Section



   95.01   Impounding motor vehicle on private property; requirements



   95.02   Impounding abandoned motor vehicle on public property;
notice; disposition



   95.03   Disposition of vehicle ordered into storage



   95.04   Disposition of abandoned junk motor vehicles



   95.05   Prohibition against abandonment of junk motor vehicle



   95.06   Junk motor vehicle; order to cover or remove; notice;
exceptions



Cross-reference:



   Nuisances generally, see Chapter 93



§ 95.01  IMPOUNDING MOTOR VEHICLE ON PRIVATE PROPERTY; REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   (1)   The County Sheriff or Chief of Police, within the
Sheriff’s or Chief’s respective territorial jurisdiction, upon complaint
of any person adversely affected, may order into storage any motor vehicle,
other than an abandoned junk motor vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4513.63,
that has been left on private residential or private agricultural property
for at least four hours without the permission of the person having the right
to the possession of the property. The Sheriff or Chief of Police, upon
complaint of the owner of a repair garage or place of storage, may order into
storage any motor vehicle, other than an abandoned junk motor vehicle, that
has been left at the garage or place of storage for a longer period than that
agreed upon. When ordering a motor vehicle into storage pursuant to this
division, a Sheriff or Chief of Police may arrange for the removal of the
motor vehicle by a towing service and shall designate a storage facility.



      (2)   A towing service towing a motor vehicle under division
(A)(1) of this section shall remove the motor vehicle in accordance with that
division. The towing service shall deliver the motor vehicle to the location
designated by the Sheriff or Chief of Police not more than two hours after
the time it is removed from the private property.



      (3)   Subject to division (B) of this section, the owner of a
motor vehicle that has been removed pursuant to this division may recover the
vehicle only in accordance with division (D) of this section.



      (4)   As used in divisions (A) through (G) of this section,
PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY means private property on which is located one
or more structures that are used as a home, residence, or sleeping place by
one or more persons, if no more than three separate households are maintained
in the structure or structures. The phrase does not include any private
property on which is located one or more structures that are used as a home,
residence, or sleeping place by two or more persons, if more than three
separate households are maintained in the structure or structures.



   (B)   If the owner or operator of a motor vehicle that has been
ordered into storage pursuant to division (A)(1) of this section arrives
after the motor vehicle has been prepared for removal, but prior to its
actual removal from the property, the towing service shall give the owner or
operator oral or written notification at the time of such arrival that the
vehicle owner or operator may pay a fee of not more than one-half of the fee
for the removal of the motor vehicle under division (D)(1) of this section,
in order to obtain release of the motor vehicle. Upon payment of that fee,
the towing service shall give the vehicle owner or operator a receipt showing
both the full amount normally assessed and the actual amount received and
shall release the motor vehicle to the owner or operator. Upon its release,
the owner or operator immediately shall move it so that it is not on the
private residential or private agricultural property without the permission
of the person having the right to possession of the property, or is not at
the garage or place of storage without the permission of the owner, whichever
is applicable.



   (C)   (1)   The County Sheriff and Chief of Police shall maintain
a record of motor vehicles that the Sheriff or Chief orders into storage
pursuant to division (A)(1) of this section. The record shall include an
entry for each such motor vehicle that identifies the motor vehicle’s
license number, make, model, and color, the location from which it was
removed, the date and time of its removal, the telephone number of the person
from whom it may be recovered, and the address of the place to which it has
been taken and from which it may be recovered. The Sheriff or Chief of Police
shall provide any information in the record that pertains to a particular
motor vehicle to any person who, either in person or pursuant to a telephone
call, identifies self as the owner or operator of the motor vehicle and
requests information pertaining to its location.



      (2)   Any person who registers a complaint that is the basis
of the Sheriff’s or Police Chief’s order for the removal and storage of a
motor vehicle under division (A)(1) of this section shall provide the
identity of the law enforcement agency with which the complaint was
registered to any person who identifies self as the owner or operator of the
motor vehicle and requests information pertaining to its location.



   (D)   (1)   The owner or lienholder of a motor vehicle that is
ordered into storage pursuant to division (A)(1) of this section may reclaim
it upon both of the following:



         (a)   Payment of the following fees:



            1.   Not more than $90 for the removal of the
motor vehicle. However, if the motor vehicle has a manufacturer’s gross
vehicle weight rating in excess of 10,000 pounds and is a truck, bus, or a
combination of a commercial tractor and trailer or semitrailer, not more than
$150 for the removal.



            2.   Not more than $12 per 24-hour period for the
storage of the motor vehicle. However, if the motor vehicle has a
manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating in excess of 10,000 pounds and
is a truck, bus, or a combination of a commercial tractor and trailer or
semitrailer, not more than $20 per 24-hour period for storage.



         (b)   Presentation of proof of ownership, which may be
evidenced by a certificate of title to the motor vehicle, a certificate of
registration for the motor vehicle, or a lease agreement.



      (2)   Upon presentation of proof of ownership as required
under division (D)(1)(b) of this section, the owner of a motor vehicle that
is ordered into storage under division (A)(1) of this section may retrieve
any personal items from the motor vehicle without retrieving the vehicle and
without paying any fee. However, the owner may not retrieve any personal item
that has been determined by the Sheriff or Chief of Police, as applicable, to
be necessary to a criminal investigation. For purposes of this division
(D)(2), “personal items” do not include any items that are attached to
the motor vehicle.



      (3)   If a motor vehicle that is ordered into storage pursuant
to division (A)(1) of this section remains unclaimed by the owner for 30
days, the procedures established by R.C. §§ 4513.61 and 4513.62, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, apply.



   (E)   (1)   No person shall remove, or cause the removal of, any
motor vehicle from any private residential or private agricultural property
other than in accordance with division (A)(1) of this section or R.C. §§
4513.61 to 4513.65, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



      (2)   No towing service or storage facility shall fail to
comply with the requirements of this section.



   (F)   Divisions (A) through (G) of this section do not apply to any
private residential or private agricultural property that is established as a
private tow-away zone in accordance with division (H) of this section.



   (G)   The owner of any towing service or storage facility that
violates division (E) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.60)



   (H)   Private tow-away zones.



      (1)   The owner of private property may establish a private
tow-away zone, but may do so only if all of the following conditions are
satisfied:



         (a)   The owner posts on the owner’s property a sign,
that is at least 18 inches by 24 inches in size, that is visible from all
entrances to the property, and that includes all of the following information:



            1.   A statement that the property is a tow-away
zone;



            2.   A description of persons authorized to park
on the property. If the property is a residential property, the owner of the
private property may include on the sign a statement that only tenants and
guests may park in the private tow-away zone, subject to the terms of the
property owner. If the property is a commercial property, the owner of the
private property may include on the sign a statement that only customers may
park in the private tow-away zone. In all cases, if it is not apparent which
persons may park in the private tow-away zone, the owner shall include on the
sign the address of the property on which the private tow-away zone is
located or the name of the business that is located on the property
designated as a private tow-away zone.



            3.   If the private tow-away zone is not
enforceable at all times, the times during which the parking restrictions are
enforced;



            4.   The telephone number and the address of the
place from which a towed vehicle may be recovered at any time during the day
or night;



            5.   A statement that the failure to recover a
towed vehicle may result in the loss of title to the vehicle as provided in
R.C. § 4505.101(B).



         (b)   Any owner of property that has been established as
a private tow-away zone under R.C. § 4513.60, as that section existed prior
to March 23, 2015, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, who
does not have a contract with a towing service for the removal of vehicles
from the property may retain existing private tow-away zone signs that comply
with that section for up to six months after March 23, 2015. At any time, in
order to comply with the requirements of division (H)(1)(a) of this section,
such a property owner may modify the existing sign by affixing to the
existing sign stickers or an addendum in lieu of replacing the sign.



         (c)   A towing service ensures that a vehicle towed
under division (H) of this section is taken to a location from which it may
be recovered that complies with all of the following:



            1.   It is located within 20 linear miles of the
location of the private tow- away zone, unless it is not practicable to take
the vehicle to a place of storage within 20 linear miles.



            2.   It is well-lighted.



            3.   It is on or within a reasonable distance of a
regularly scheduled route of one or more modes of public transportation, if
any public transportation is available in the municipality.



      (2)   (a)   If a vehicle is parked on private property that
is established as a private tow-away zone in accordance with division (H)(1)
of this section, without the consent of the owner of the property or in
violation of any posted parking condition or regulation, the owner may cause
the removal of the vehicle by a towing service. The towing service shall
remove the vehicle in accordance with division (H) of this section. The
vehicle owner and the operator of the vehicle are considered to have
consented to the removal and storage of the vehicle, to the payment of the
applicable fees established under division (H)(7) of this section, and to the
right of a towing service to obtain title to the vehicle if it remains
unclaimed as provided in R.C. § 4505.101. The owner or lienholder of a
vehicle that has been removed under division (H) of this section, subject to
division (H)(3) of this section, may recover the vehicle in accordance with
division (H)(7) of this section.



         (b)   If the municipality requires tow trucks and tow
truck operators to be licensed, no owner of private property located within
the municipality shall cause the removal and storage of any vehicle pursuant
to division (H)(2) of this section by an unlicensed tow truck or unlicensed
tow truck operator.



      (3)   If the owner or operator of a vehicle that is being
removed under authority of division (H)(2) of this section arrives after the
vehicle has been prepared for removal, but prior to its actual removal from
the property, the towing service shall give the vehicle owner or operator
oral or written notification at the time of such arrival that the vehicle
owner or operator may pay a fee of not more than one-half of the fee for the
removal of the vehicle established under division (H)(7) of this section in
order to obtain release of the vehicle. Upon payment of that fee, the towing
service shall give the vehicle owner or operator a receipt showing both the
full amount normally assessed and the actual amount received and shall
release the vehicle to the owner or operator. Upon its release, the owner or
operator immediately shall move the vehicle so that the vehicle is not parked
on the private property established as a private tow-away zone without the
consent of the owner or in violation of any posted parking condition or
regulation.



      (4)   (a)   1.   Prior to towing a vehicle under
division (H)(2) of this section, a towing service shall make all reasonable
efforts to take as many photographs as necessary to evidence that the vehicle
is clearly parked on private property in violation of a private tow-away zone
established under division (H)(1) of this section.



            2.   The towing service shall record the time and
date of the photographs taken under division (H) of this section. The towing
service shall retain the photographs and the record of the time and date, in
electronic or printed form, for at least 30 days after the date on which the
vehicle is recovered by the owner or lienholder or at least two years after
the date on which the vehicle was towed, whichever is earlier.



         (b)   A towing service shall deliver a vehicle towed
under division (H)(2) of this section to the location from which it may be
recovered not more than two hours after the time it was removed from the
private tow-away zone.



      (5)   (a)   If an owner of private property that is
established as a private tow-away zone in accordance with division (H)(1) of
this section causes the removal of a vehicle from that property by a towing
service under division (H)(2) of this section, the towing service, within two
hours of removing the vehicle, shall provide notice to the County Sheriff or
the Police Department concerning all of the following:



            1.   The vehicle’s license number, make, model,
and color;



            2.   The location from which the vehicle was
removed;



            3.   The date and time the vehicle was removed;



            4.   The telephone number of the person from whom
the vehicle may be recovered;



            5.   The address of the place from which the
vehicle may be recovered.



         (b)   The County Sheriff and Chief of Police shall
maintain a record of any vehicle removed from private property in the
Sheriff's or Chief's jurisdiction that is established as a private tow-away
zone of which the Sheriff or Chief has received notice under division (H) of
this section. The record shall include all information submitted by the
towing service. The Sheriff or Chief shall provide any information in the
record that pertains to a particular vehicle to a person who, either in
person or pursuant to a telephone call, identifies self as the owner,
operator, or lienholder of the vehicle and requests information pertaining to
the vehicle.



      (6)   (a)   When a vehicle is removed from private property
in accordance with division (H) of this section, the owner of the towing
service or storage facility from which the vehicle may be recovered shall
immediately cause a search to be made of the records of the Bureau of Motor
Vehicles to ascertain the identity of the owner and any lienholder of the
motor vehicle. Subject to division (H)(6)(d) of this section, the owner of
the towing service or storage facility shall send notice to the vehicle owner
and any known lienholder as follows:



            1.   Within five business days of removal of the
vehicle from the private tow- away zone, if the vehicle has not yet been
recovered, to the owner’s and lienholder’s last known address by
certified or express mail with return receipt requested or by a commercial
carrier service utilizing any form of delivery requiring a signed receipt;



            2.   If the vehicle remains unclaimed 30 days
after the first notice is sent, in the manner authorized in division
(H)(6)(a)1. of this section;



            3.   If the vehicle remains unclaimed 45 days
after the first notice is sent, in the manner authorized in division
(H)(6)(a)1. of this section.



         (b)   Sixty days after any notice sent pursuant to
division (h)(6)(a) of this section is received, as evidenced by a receipt
signed by any person, or the towing service or storage facility has been
notified that delivery was not possible, the owner of a towing service or
storage facility, if authorized under R.C. § 4505.101(B), may initiate the
process for obtaining a certificate of title to the motor vehicle as provided
in that section.



         (c)   A towing service or storage facility that does not
receive a signed receipt of notice, or a notification that delivery was not
possible, shall not obtain, and shall not attempt to obtain, a certificate of
title to the motor vehicle under R.C. § 4505.101(B).



         (d)   With respect to a vehicle concerning which a
towing service or storage facility is not eligible to obtain title under R.C.
§ 4505.101, the towing service or storage facility need only comply with the
initial notice required under division (H)(6)(a)1. of this section.



      (7)   (a)   The owner or lienholder of a vehicle that is
removed under division (H)(2) of this section may reclaim it upon all of the
following:



            1.    Presentation of proof of ownership, which
may be evidenced by a certificate of title to the vehicle, a certificate of
registration for the motor vehicle, or a lease agreement;



            2.   Payment of the following fees:



               a.   Not more than $90 for the removal of
the vehicle. However, if the vehicle has a manufacturer’s gross vehicle
weight rating in excess of 10,000 pounds and is a truck, bus, or a
combination of a commercial tractor and trailer or semitrailer, not more than
$150 for the removal.



               b.   Not more than $12 per 24-hour period
for the storage of the vehicle. However, if the vehicle has a
manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating in excess of 10,000 and is a
truck, bus, or a combination of a commercial tractor and trailer or
semitrailer, not more than $20 per 24-hour period for storage.



               c.   If notice has been sent to the owner
and lienholder as described in division (H)(6) of this section, a processing
fee of $25.



         (b)   A towing service or storage facility in possession
of a vehicle that is removed under authority of division (H)(2) of this
section shall show the vehicle owner, operator, or lienholder who contests
the removal of the vehicle all photographs taken under division (H)(4) of
this section. Upon request, the towing service or storage facility shall
provide copies of all photographs in the medium in which the photographs are
stored, whether paper, electronic, or otherwise.



         (c)   Upon presentation of proof of ownership, which may
be evidenced by a certificate of title to the vehicle, a certificate of
registration for the motor vehicle, or a lease agreement, the owner of a
vehicle that is removed under authority of division (H)(2) of this section
may retrieve any personal items from the vehicle without retrieving the
vehicle and without paying any fee. For purposes of this division (H)(7)(c),
“personal items” do not include any items that are attached to the
vehicle.



      (8)   No towing service or storage facility shall remove, or
cause the removal of, any vehicle from private property that is established
as a private tow-away zone under division (H) of this section, store such a
vehicle other than in accordance with division (H) of this section, or
otherwise fail to comply with any applicable requirement of division (H) of
this section.



      (9)   Division (H) of this section does not affect or limit
the operation of divisions (A) through (G) of this section, R.C. § 4513.60,
R.C. §§ 4513.61 to 4613.65, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinances, as they relate to property other than private property that is
established as a private tow-away zone under division (H)(1) of this section.



      (10)   The owner of any towing service or storage facility or
property owner that violates division (H)(8) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.601)



§ 95.02  IMPOUNDING ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE ON PUBLIC PROPERTY; NOTICE;
DISPOSITION.



   (A)   The County Sheriff or Chief of Police, within the Sheriff’s
or Chief’s respective territorial jurisdiction, or a state highway patrol
trooper, upon notification to the Sheriff or Chief of Police of such action
and of the location of the place of storage, may order into storage any motor
vehicle, including an abandoned junk motor vehicle as defined in R.C. §
4513.63, that:



      (1)   Has come into the possession of the Sheriff, Chief of
Police, or state highway patrol trooper as a result of the performance of the
Sheriff’s, Chief’s, or trooper’s duties; or



      (2)   Has been left on a public street or other property open
to the public for purposes of vehicular travel, or upon or within the
right-of-way of any road or highway, for 48 hours or longer without
notification to the Sheriff or Chief of Police of the reasons for leaving the
motor vehicle in such place. However, when such a motor vehicle constitutes
an obstruction to traffic it may be ordered into storage immediately unless
either of the following applies:



         (a)   The vehicle was involved in an accident and is
subject to R.C. § 4513.66, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance;



         (b)   The vehicle is a commercial motor vehicle. If the
vehicle is a commercial motor vehicle, the Sheriff, Chief of Police, or state
highway patrol trooper shall allow the owner or operator of the vehicle the
opportunity to arrange for the removal of the motor vehicle within a period
of time specified by the Sheriff, Chief of Police, or state highway patrol
trooper. If the Sheriff, Chief of Police, or state highway patrol trooper
determines that the vehicle cannot be removed within the specified period of
time, the Sheriff, Chief of Police, or state highway patrol trooper shall
order the removal of the vehicle.



      (3)   Subject to division (C) of this section, the Sheriff or
Chief of Police shall designate the place of storage of any motor vehicle so
ordered removed.



   (B)   If the Sheriff, Chief of Police, or a state highway patrol
trooper issues an order under division (A) of this section and arranges for
the removal of a motor vehicle by a towing service, the towing service shall
deliver the motor vehicle to the location designated by the Sheriff or Chief
of Police not more than two hours after the time it is removed.



   (C)   (1)   The Sheriff or Chief of Police immediately shall
cause a search to be made of the records of the Bureau of Motor Vehicles to
ascertain the identity of the owner and any lienholder of a motor vehicle
ordered into storage by the Sheriff or Chief of Police, or by a state highway
patrol trooper. Upon obtaining such identity, the Sheriff or Chief of Police
shall send or cause to be sent to the owner or lienholder at the owner’s or
lienholder’s last known address by certified mail with return receipt
requested, notice that informs the owner or lienholder that the motor vehicle
will be declared a nuisance and disposed of if not claimed within ten days of
the date of mailing of the notice.



      (2)   The owner or lienholder of the motor vehicle may reclaim
the motor vehicle upon payment of any expenses or charges incurred in its
removal and storage, and presentation of proof of ownership, which may be
evidenced by a certificate of title or memorandum certificate of title to the
motor vehicle, a certificate of registration for the motor vehicle, or a
lease agreement. Upon presentation of proof of ownership evidenced as
provided above, the owner of the motor vehicle also may retrieve any personal
items from the vehicle without retrieving the vehicle and without paying any
fee. However, the owner may not retrieve any personal item that has been
determined by the Sheriff, Chief of Police or a state highway patrol trooper,
as applicable, to be necessary to a criminal investigation. For purposes of
this division (C)(2), “personal items” do not include any items that are
attached to the vehicle.



      (3)   If the owner or lienholder of the motor vehicle reclaims
it after a search of the records of the Bureau of Motor Vehicles has been
conducted and after notice has been sent to the owner or lienholder as
described in this section, and the search was conducted by the owner of the
place of storage or the owner’s employee, and the notice was sent to the
motor vehicle owner by the owner of the place of storage or the owner’s
employee, the owner or lienholder shall pay to the place of storage a
processing fee of $25, in addition to any expenses or charges incurred in the
removal and storage of the vehicle.



   (D)   If the owner or lienholder makes no claim to the motor vehicle
within ten days of the date of mailing of the notice, and if the vehicle is
to be disposed of at public auction as provided in R.C. § 4513.62 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the Sheriff or Chief of Police,
without charge to any party, shall file with the Clerk of Courts of the
county in which the place of storage is located an affidavit showing
compliance with the requirements of this section. Upon presentation of the
affidavit, the Clerk, without charge, shall issue a salvage certificate of
title, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances, to the Sheriff or Chief
of Police. If the vehicle is to be disposed of to a motor vehicle salvage
dealer or other facility as provided in R.C. § 4513.62 or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the Sheriff or Chief of Police shall execute
in triplicate an affidavit, as prescribed by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles,
describing the motor vehicle and the manner in which it was disposed of, and
that all requirements of this section have been complied with. The Sheriff or
Chief of Police shall retain the original of the affidavit for the
Sheriff’s or Chief’s records, and shall furnish two copies to the motor
vehicle salvage dealer or other facility. Upon presentation of a copy of the
affidavit by the motor vehicle salvage dealer, the Clerk of Courts, within 30
days of the presentation, shall issue to such owner a salvage certificate of
title, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances.



   (E)   Whenever a motor vehicle salvage dealer or other facility
receives an affidavit for the disposal of a motor vehicle as provided in this
section, the dealer or facility shall not be required to obtain an Ohio
certificate of title to the motor vehicle in the dealer’s or facility’s
own name if the vehicle is dismantled or destroyed and both copies of the
affidavit are delivered to the Clerk of Courts.



   (F)   No towing service or storage facility shall fail to comply
with this section.



(R.C. § 4513.61)



§ 95.03  DISPOSITION OF VEHICLE ORDERED INTO STORAGE.



   Unclaimed motor vehicles ordered into storage pursuant to §
95.01(A)(1) or § 95.02 shall be disposed of at the order of the Police Chief
to a motor vehicle salvage dealer or scrap metal processing facility as
defined in R.C. § 4737.05, or to any other facility owned by or under
contract with the municipality for the disposal of such motor vehicles, or
shall be sold by the Police Chief or licensed auctioneer at public auction
after giving public notice by advertisement, published once a week for two
successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the county or as
provided in R.C. § 7.16.  Any monies accruing from the disposition of an
unclaimed motor vehicle that are in excess of the expenses resulting from the
removal and storage of the vehicle shall be credited to the general fund of
the municipality.



(R.C. § 4513.62)



§ 95.04  DISPOSITION OF ABANDONED JUNK MOTOR VEHICLES.



   (A)   ABANDONED JUNK MOTOR VEHICLE means any motor vehicle meeting
all of the following requirements:



      (1)   The vehicle is left on private property for 48 hours or
longer without the permission of the person having the right to the
possession of the property, on a public street or other property open to the
public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking, or upon or within the
right-of-way of any road or highway for 48 hours or longer;



      (2)   The vehicle is three years old or older;



      (3)   The vehicle is extensively damaged, such damage
including but not limited to any of the following: missing wheels, tires,
motor, or transmission;



      (4)   The vehicle is apparently inoperable; and



      (5)   The vehicle has a fair market value of $1,500 or less.



   (B)   The Police Chief shall order any abandoned junk motor vehicle
to be photographed by a law enforcement officer.  The officer shall record
the make of motor vehicle, the serial number when available, and shall also
detail the damage or missing equipment to substantiate the value of $1,500 or
less.  The Police Chief shall thereupon immediately dispose of the abandoned
junk motor vehicle to a motor vehicle salvage dealer as defined in R.C. §
4738.01 or a scrap metal processing facility as defined in R.C. § 4737.05
which is under contract to the municipality, or to any other facility owned
by or under contract with the municipality for the destruction of such motor
vehicles.  The records and photographs relating to the abandoned junk motor
vehicle shall be retained by the law enforcement agency ordering the
disposition of such vehicle for a period of at least two years.  The law
enforcement agency shall execute in quadruplicate an affidavit, as prescribed
by the registrar of motor vehicles, describing the motor vehicle and the
manner in which it was disposed of, and that all requirements of R.C. §
4513.63 have been complied with, and, within 30 days of disposing of the
vehicle, shall sign and file the affidavit with the Clerk of Courts of the
county in which the motor vehicle was abandoned.  The Clerk of Courts
retains the original of the affidavit for his or her files, furnishes one
copy thereof to the registrar, one copy to the motor vehicle salvage dealer
or other facility handling the disposal of the vehicle, and one copy to the
law enforcement agency ordering the disposal, who shall file such copy with
the records and photograph relating to the disposal.  Any monies arising
from the disposal of an abandoned junk motor vehicle shall be deposited in
the general fund of the municipality.



   (C)   Notwithstanding § 95.02, any motor vehicle meeting the
requirements of division (A)(2), (3) and (5) of this section which has
remained unclaimed by the owner or lienholder for a period of ten days or
longer following notification as provided in § 95.02 may be disposed of as
provided in this section.



(R.C. § 4513.63)



§ 95.05  PROHIBITION AGAINST ABANDONMENT OF JUNK MOTOR VEHICLE.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall willfully leave an abandoned junk
motor vehicle as defined in § 95.04 on private property for more than 72
hours without the permission of the person having the right to the possession
of the property, or on a public street or other property open to the public
for purposes of vehicular travel or parking, or upon or within the
right-of-way of any road or highway for 48 hours or longer without
notification to the Police Chief of the reason for leaving the motor vehicle
in such place.



      (2)   For purposes of this section, the fact that a motor
vehicle has been so left without permission or notification is prima facie
evidence of abandonment.



      (3)   Nothing contained in §§ 95.01, 95.02 and 95.04 and
R.C. §§ 4513.60, 4513.61 and 4513.63 shall invalidate or prevent the
enactment of further provisions of municipal ordinances regulating or
prohibiting the abandonment of motor vehicles on streets, highways, public
property, or private property within the municipality.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor
and shall also be assessed any costs incurred by the municipality in
disposing of the abandoned junk motor vehicle that is the basis of the
violation, less any money accruing to the municipality from the disposal of
the vehicle.



(R.C. § 4513.64)



§ 95.06  JUNK MOTOR VEHICLE; ORDER TO COVER OR REMOVE; NOTICE; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   (1)   As used in this section, JUNK MOTOR VEHICLE means any
motor vehicle meeting the requirements of § 95.04(A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4) and
(A)(5) that is left uncovered in the open on private property for more than
72 hours with the permission of the person having the right to possession of
the property, except if the person is operating a junk yard or scrap metal
processing facility licensed under the authority of R.C. §§ 4737.05 through
4737.12, or otherwise regulated under authority of a political subdivision;
or if the property on which the motor vehicle is left is not subject to
licensure or regulation by any governmental authority, unless the person
having the right to the possession of the property can establish that the
motor vehicle is part of a bona fide commercial operation; or if the motor
vehicle is a collector's vehicle.



      (2)   The municipality shall not prevent a person from storing
or keeping, or restrict him or her in the method of storing or keeping, any
collector's vehicle on private property with the permission of the person
having the right to the possession of the property, except that the
municipality may require a person having such permission to conceal, by means
of buildings, fences, vegetation, terrain, or other suitable obstruction, and
unlicensed collector's vehicle stored in the open.



      (3)   The Police Chief, the Legislative Authority, or the
zoning authority may send notice, by certified mail with return receipt
requested, to the person having the right to the possession of the property
on which a junk motor vehicle is left, that within ten days of receipt of the
notice, the junk motor vehicle either shall be covered by being housed in a
garage or other suitable structure, or shall be removed from the property.



      (4)   No person shall willfully leave a junk motor vehicle
uncovered in the open for more than ten days after receipt of a notice as
provided in this section. The fact that a junk motor vehicle is so left is
prima facie evidence of willful failure to comply with the notice, and each
subsequent period of 30 days that a junk motor vehicle continues to be so
left constitutes a separate offense.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.65)



CHAPTER 96:  FIRE PREVENTION CODE



Section



   96.01   Fire Prevention Code adopted by reference; exceptions thereto



   96.02   Enforcement



   96.03   Violation prohibited



 



   96.99   Penalty



§ 96.01  FIRE PREVENTION CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; EXCEPTIONS THERETO.



   (A)   The Fire Prevention Code, published and known as the Ohio Fire
Code, as the same is constituted on the effective date of this section and
as  the same may be hereafter amended or recodified, is incorporated herein
by reference as if set out at length and verbatim herein, and is, as so
incorporated, hereby adopted and promulgated by reference and established as
the Fire Prevention Code of the municipality, applicable and controlling, in
all its provisions, within the municipality, to the inhabitants of the
municipality, to the property now and hereafter located, and all construction
performed, within the municipality, and to the use of all such property, save
and except such portions of such Code so adopted as are hereinafter modified.



   (B)   A person may use or allow to be used an open flame, burning
candle(s) or other devices in connection with any public or private gathering
for purposes of worship, instruction, education or similar purpose in places
of public assembly or education, such as churches, schools, and lodges, so
long as the following precautions are strictly adhered to:



      (1)   Stationary open flames may not be used in any aisle or
exit, provided that open flames being utilized in a moving procession are not
prohibited. Stationary flames may be affixed to the end of a pew or mounted
at the side of an exit so long as they do not impair or impede ingress and
egress.



      (2)   Open flames may not be used by anyone under the age of
16 without the supervision of an adult.



      (3)   Open flames must be used only in such a manner as to
avoid ignition of combustible materials or injury to occupants.



      (4)   Non-combustible containers for disposal of the open
flame, candle, or other device must be provided.



   (C)   Open flames, burning candle(s), or other device(s) not
specifically permitted in division (B) may be approved by the Code official,
who shall base his determination on the reasonable standards required to
safeguard life and property from the hazards of fire and explosion.



(Ord. 5-1994, passed 3-2-94)



§ 96.02  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The Fire Prevention Code shall be enforced by the Municipal
Fire Department.



   (B)   The Fire Chief shall enforce the provisions of this chapter
and shall report to the City Manager.



(‘67 Code, § 97.02) (Ord. 27, passed 12-5-73)



§ 96.03  VIOLATION PROHIBITED.



   No person shall violate any provision of the Fire Prevention Code, as
adopted and enacted into law by this chapter; nor shall any person fail to
comply therewith; nor shall any person violate or fail to comply with any
order made thereunder; nor shall any person build in violation of, or
noncompliance with, any detailed statement of specifications or plans
submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued
thereunder and from which no appeal has been taken; nor shall any person fail
to comply with any such order, as extended by any such appeal taken within
such time. 



(‘67 Code, § 97.04) (Ord. 27, passed 12-5-73)



§ 96.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject
to the penalty provided in § 10.99.



CHAPTER 97:  PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES



Section



   97.01   Permits required



   97.02   Issuance; application; deposit



   97.03   Rules and regulations to apply



   97.04   Permit to be produced on request



   97.05   Hours of operation



   97.06   Bicycles, mopeds, and motor vehicles prohibited



 



   97.99   Penalty.



Cross-reference:



   Park and Recreation Commission, see § 33.05 and Charter § 6.03



§ 97.01  PERMITS REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person or organization shall reserve or have exclusive
rights to the use of a shelter house, pavilion, playing field, tennis court,
meeting room, or any other park area or recreational facility unless he shall
first obtain a permit therefor. 



   (B)   No person shall consume any intoxicating liquor on or within
any public recreational facilities unless a proper permit has been obtained
from the City Manager.  For the purposes of this section, recreational
facilities shall include city parks, park shelters, and park lodges. The
permit for reserved park shelters shall allow the consumption of beer and
wine only and no other alcoholic beverages shall be permitted. The permit for
reserved park lodges shall allow beer, wine and other alcoholic beverages. 
All permit holders, in addition to complying with this section, must comply
with any and all state statutes regarding the possession and consumption of
alcohol. No alcoholic beverages shall be allowed outside any park shelter or
park lodge unless specifically permitted by the City Manager.



   (C)   Violation of these and/or any state statute governing the
possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages may result in immediate
revocation of this permit.  A copy of regulations for possession and
consumption of alcoholic beverages on city property shall be distributed to
all applicants with the permit form. A copy of said permit and regulations
are attached to Ordinance No. 1-1997, passed January 8, 1997, and
incorporated as if fully rewritten herein.



(Ord. 18-1972, passed 10-4-72; Am. Ord. 29-1981, passed 11-4-81; Am. Ord.
1-1997, passed 1-8-97)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.02  ISSUANCE; APPLICATION; DEPOSIT.



   Permits for exclusive use of a recreational facility may be issued by
the City Manager, or his designee. Applications for reserved use shall be
accompanied by a deposit in an amount as set by the City Manager. Deposits
may be waived and all deposits shall be returned after the reserved period
less such expenses as may be incurred for the repair of damage or the
cleaning of the facility as the result of the use thereof by the permit
holder.



(Ord. 18-1972, passed 10-4-72; Am. Ord. 29-1981, passed 11-4-81)  Penalty,
see § 97.99



§ 97.03  RULES AND REGULATIONS TO APPLY.



   All use of park and recreation facilities shall be subject to
provisions of this chapter and to the rules and regulations of the Park and
Recreation Commission.  The rules and regulations established by the
Commission are adopted by the municipality as the same are constituted on the
effective date of this section and as the same may hereafter be modified or
amended. 



(Ord. 18-1972, passed 10-4-72; Am. Ord. 29-1981, passed 11-4-81)  Penalty,
see § 97.99



§ 97.04  PERMIT TO BE PRODUCED ON REQUEST.



   Every person claiming to have a permit for exclusive use of a
recreational facility shall produce such permit on the request of any
official or employee of the municipality. 



(Ord. 18-1972, passed 10-4-72; Am. Ord. 29-1981, passed 11-4-81)  Penalty,
see § 97.99



§ 97.05  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   Park premises shall close at 10:00 p.m. and no person shall enter or
remain within any park premises or recreational facility after that time, or
enter any park premises or property before sunrise, except with the written
permission of the City Manager.



(Ord. 18-1972, passed 10-4-72; Am. Ord. 29-1981, passed 11-4-81)  Penalty,
see § 97.99



§ 97.06  BICYCLES, MOPEDS, AND MOTOR VEHICLES PROHIBITED.



   No person shall operate a bicycle, moped, or other motor vehicle or
motor assisted vehicle on any park or recreational facility without the
permission of the person having supervision of the facility.



(Ord. 29-1981, passed 11-4-81)  Penalty, see § 97.99



Cross-reference:



   Riding on sidewalks, playgrounds, etc., see § 74.16



§ 97.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject
to the penalty provided in § 10.99.



CHAPTER 98:  CEMETERIES



Section



   98.01   Municipal cemetery regulations



   98.02   Management of Hopewell Cemetery



§ 98.01  MUNICIPAL CEMETERY REGULATIONS.



   No person shall, without written approval of the City Manager, enter
upon the premises of the Hopewell Cemetery between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m.



(Ord. 11-1977, passed 5-4-77)



§ 98.02  MANAGEMENT OF HOPEWELL CEMETERY.



   Consistent with Article IV of the Charter of the City of Montgomery,
which identifies the authority of the City Manager, Council delegates to the
City Manager all rights and responsibilities as delineated in R.C. Chapter
759, as it may now exist or hereafter be amended, concerning the management,
control and regulation of the cemetery.  The City Manager shall have the
same authority and responsibility as is delegated by the Ohio Revised Code to
the Director of Public Service concerning such cemetery operations.  He
shall be responsible to manage, control and regulate the cemetery including
setting rates and fees for the operation of the cemetery.



(Ord. 7-2013, passed 3-6-13)



CHAPTER 99:  BURGLARY AND EMERGENCY ALARM SYSTEMS



Section



   99.01   Registration of alarm systems



   99.02   False alarms



Cross-reference:



   False alarms, see §§ 132.08 and 132.09



§ 99.01  REGISTRATION OF ALARM SYSTEMS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, a BURGLARY OR OTHER EMERGENCY
ALARM SYSTEM shall mean and include any device designed for the detection of
fire or of an unauthorized entry on the premises or for alerting others of
the commission of an unlawful act, or both, and which, when actuated, emits a
sound or transmits a signal or message, except that smoke or gas detectors
which transmit a sound or signal only within the confines of a structure for
the purpose of alerting occupants shall not be deemed an alarm system within
the meaning of this section.



   (B)   No person shall install, operate, or maintain a burglary or
other emergency alarm system in or on any building, place, or premises
without first registering such system in the office of the City Manager, or
his designee, on a form furnished by the City Manager. The City Manager shall
secure the name and address of the applicant, the name and address of the
firm or person installing the device, the location of the device on the
building, place, or premises, the names of persons to be contacted in the
event of an alarm, the type of system, local or monitored, and other
information as the City Manager may determine to be necessary for the
municipal regulation of alarm systems, the appropriate response to alarms and
the safety, security, and peace of all persons.



   (C)   Any person who fails to register an alarm system within 30
days of receipt of notice to such effect from the City Manager shall be
deemed guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 



(Ord. 8-1979, passed 5-2-79; Am. Ord. 10-1981, passed 5-6-81)



§ 99.02  FALSE ALARMS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, FALSE ALARM shall mean an
alarm signal which necessitates a response by the Police or Fire Department
where an emergency situation does not exist.



   (B)   On the occurrence of a false alarm a warning shall be issued
or a fine shall be imposed according to the following criteria:



      (1)   If no false alarm has previously occurred at the
premises, the City Manager shall cause a warning letter to be sent by regular
U.S. mail to the owner of the premises or to the party who has declared
responsibility for the alarm.  The letter shall advise the recipient that
additional false alarms within a one-year period from the date of the
indicated false alarm will result in the imposition of the penalties
hereinafter set forth.



      (2)   If a second false alarm occurs within one year of the
false alarm indicated in the letter, a second letter shall be sent.



      (3)   If a third false alarm occurs within one year of the
first false alarm, the owner of the property shall be fined the sum of $25
for each offense.  If a fourth or subsequent false alarm occurs within said
year and the alarm is a device designed for the detection of an unauthorized
entry, or for alerting others of the commission of an unlawful act, the owner
of the property shall be fined the sum of $25 for each offense.



      (4)   If a fourth false alarm occurs and the alarm is a device
designed for the detection of fire, and if, as the result thereof, fire
personnel respond to the site, the owner of the property shall be fined the
sum of $50.



      (5)   If a fifth and subsequent false alarms occur and the
alarm is a device designed for the detection of fire, and if, as the result
thereof, fire personnel respond to the site, the owner of the property shall
be fined the sum of $100.



      (6)    At the expiration of one year from the date of the
first false alarm the false alarms record for any building or premises shall
be concluded and any subsequent false alarm shall be recorded as a first
false alarm to which the procedures and penalties provided in this section
shall apply.



   (C)   Fines shall not be imposed on the record owner of the property
when a false alarm occurs and any of the following prevail:



      (1)   The alarm is being tested and notice to such effect has
been communicated to the emergency unit which would normally respond to the
alarm.



      (2)   The false alarm occurs during the first 30 days of
operation of an alarm system or during the first 30 days of occupancy of a
premises with a preexisting alarm system.



      (3)   The false alarm occurs as the result of a natural
disaster or act of God.



      (4)   The false alarm occurs as the result of a power outage
or malfunction that results from work undertaken by the electric or telephone
companies or the cable TV franchisee.



      (5)   The registration of the alarm contains a signed
statement that the applicant will be responsible for the alarm system, in
which case the applicant shall be fined in lieu of the registered owner if he
or she can be found in the municipality. 



(Ord. 8-1979, passed 5-2-79; Am. Ord. 10-1981, passed 5-6-81; Am. Ord.
30-1983, passed 11-2-83)



CHAPTER 100: TREE MAINTENANCE



Section



   100.01   Purpose



   100.02   Applicability



   100.03   Definitions



   100.04   Control of trees in the municipality



   100.05   Tree manual of standards and specifications



   100.06   Planting of street or public trees by private property
owners



   100.07   Tree maintenance/removal



   100.08   Utility providers



   100.09   Removal of stumps



   100.10   Tree protection



   100.11   Realty developments and construction



 



   100.99   Penalty



§ 100.01 PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to promote and protect the beauty and
environmental quality of the community and to promote public health and
safety by providing for the regulation of the planting, maintenance,
preservation and removal of trees, within the city.



(Ord. 1-2002, passed 1-2-02)



§ 100.02  APPLICABILITY.



   This chapter provides authority over all trees located on public
property, which includes public rights-of-way, medians, parks, municipal
properties and such other public places, whether developed or undeveloped,
dedicated to the city.



(Ord. 1-2002, passed 1-2-02)



§ 100.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall
have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.



   ARBORIST.  A person with expertise and certification and training in
the care of trees.



   CALIPER.  For the purposes of this chapter, the caliper of a tree
shall be determined at 4½ feet from the ground, commonly known as diameter
at breast height (DBH).



   CITY MANAGER.  The appointed or acting City Manager, or his designee.



   CONTRACTOR. Any person or entity hired by a private citizen, business,
not within the employ of the city, which is hired for the purpose of
providing a specific service.



   MUNICIPALITY. The City of Montgomery.



   PARK.  Public parks having individual names and all undeveloped areas
with trees, plants and/or vegetation owned by the city.



   PLANTS.  Plants other than trees or vegetation.



   PRIVATE PROPERTY.  All real estate within the City of Montgomery
except real estate that is owned, leased, controlled or occupied by the City
of Montgomery.



   PRIVATE TREES.  Trees located on private property.



   PROPERTY OWNER.  Any one or more of the following:



      (1)   The owner or owners in fee simple of a parcel of real
estate, or a life tenant of such realty, if any; or



      (2)   The record owner or owners as reflected by current
records in the Hamilton County Auditor's Office; or



      (3)   The purchaser or purchasers of such real estate under
any contract for the conditional sale thereof.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  A public place shall mean any park, street, median,
developed or undeveloped municipally owned property, or public right-of-way
dedicated to the municipality.



   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.  A public easement that extends from the street
into a portion of the property on either side of that street or roadway.



   PUBLIC TREES.  All trees located within publicly owned parks or on
municipal properties and those trees located within all public right-of-ways
in the city, including street trees.



   PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR. The Director of the City Department of Public
Works, or its successor department.



   STREET.  A public road or public alley located within the city.



   STREET TREES.  Trees that abut a street or public place for which the
planting site and trunk are located within the public right-of-way.



   TREE.  Any self-supporting woody plant usually having one main trunk
which produces a more or less distinct and elevated head with many branches
and a potential caliper or diameter at breast height of two inches or more.



   TREE LAWN.  That portion of the property lying between the edge of the
public right-of-way and the edge of the paved street.



   URBAN FOREST.  All trees, shrubs and vegetation on public property
within the municipality, including the public right-of-way, easements
dedicated to the city, street medians, public parks, landscaped municipal
properties, nature preserves and undeveloped lands owned by the city.



   UTILITY.  Any water, sewer, gas, drainage or culvert pipe, electric
power, telecommunication signal, communication or cable television conduit,
fiber, wire, cable system or operator thereof.



   UTILITY PROVIDER. Any natural or corporate person, business association
or other business entity, including, but not limited to, a partnership, sole
proprietorship, a political subdivision, a public or private agency of any
kind, which owns or operates a system supplying and/or carrying a utility.



   VEGETATION. Shrubs, bushes and other woody plants that usually remain
low and produce shoots or stems from base and are not usually tree-like or
single stemmed.



(Ord. 1-2002, passed 1-2-02)



§ 100.04  CONTROL OF TREES IN THE MUNICIPALITY.



   The City Manager is responsible for enforcing this chapter and the
regulations within the Tree Manual authorized herein. The City Manager is
hereby given jurisdiction, authority, supervision and control over all trees,
plants and vegetation which now or which hereafter may exist in any public
place in the municipality. The City Manager also is given jurisdiction,
authority and control concerning the issuing of permits hereinafter provided
for. In the exercise of any or all of the powers granted herein, the City
Manager shall have the authority to delegate all or such part of his power
and duties with respect to supervision and control of trees, or the issuance
of permits authorized herein, to such subordinates and assistants in the
employ of the municipality as he may deem appropriate from time to time.



(Ord. 1-2002, passed 1-2-02)



§ 100.05  TREE MANUAL OF STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   With the adoption of this chapter, the Beautification and Tree
Commission shall develop a Tree Manual for the city to include specifications
and standards for the care, preservation, planting, spacing and removal of
public trees. The specifications and standards may include, but may not be
not limited to:



      (1)   Guidance on choosing trees, including recommended and
undesirable species of trees for the public right-of-way, parks and/or other
municipal properties. While adherence to the species guidelines is
encouraged, no species will be specifically prohibited in the public
right-of-way, except if its size is inappropriate for the location in
question.



      (2)   A list of the sizes and classes of trees that can be
accommodated in the right-of-way and under overhead utility lines.



      (3)   Specifications for size, spacing, distances and
clearances of trees in the right-of-way.



      (4)   Pruning standards.



   (B)   Guidelines for tree species will be based on variables such as
attractiveness, size, adaptability to local climate and soil type, tolerance
of drought, pests or adverse urban conditions and/or other factors which
affect suitability for the proposed location. The selection of trees for
planting, pruning or removal in city parks will be at the recommendation of
the City Arborist or person with said responsibility as designated by the
Public Works Director.



   (C)   Once developed, the manual shall be filed with the City
Administration. These recommendations shall from time to time be updated to
reflect current best practices and as amended shall be filed with the City
Administration. The City Tree Manual shall constitute the official
comprehensive City Tree Plan for the city. Implementation of the City Tree
Plan shall be the responsibility of the City Manager. Requests by any public
agency, utility provider, developer or private property owner to vary from
the City Tree Plan due to practical difficulty shall be presented to the City
Manager for his review and final approval.



(Ord. 1-2002, passed 1-2-02)



§ 100.06  PLANTING OF STREET OR PUBLIC TREES BY PRIVATE PROPERTY OWNERS.



   (A)   Abutting private property owners may plant trees or shrubs in
the public right-of-way consistent with the Tree Manual. Trees in the
right-of-way shall be maintained and pruned in accordance with the
requirements set forth in the Tree Manual. Property owners who choose to
plant street trees shall obtain a permit from the City Manager or his
designee. This system will assist the city in maintaining the city's tree
inventory and provide an opportunity for the applicant to obtain standards
and specifications for choosing, planting and maintaining street trees. Such
permits shall be issued at no cost to the applicant. The city shall review
permit applications within 15 business days of the postmarked date or record
of receipt, whichever is earlier; if an application is not acted upon within
the specified time, the applicant may deem the permit to have been denied.



   (B)   The City Manager shall have authority to intervene and deny
approval to any person, firm or contractor who proposes to plant any tree or
vegetation in or upon a public place if said tree or vegetation is of a size
determined to be undesirable for the proposed location, or if the location is
deemed unsuitable.



(Ord. 1-2002, passed 1-2-02)  Penalty, see § 100.99



§ 100.07  TREE MAINTENANCE/REMOVAL.



   (A)   Public tree care. The city shall have the right to plant,
prune, treat, maintain or remove trees, plants, vegetation or portions
thereof within the public right-of-way of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes
and in other public places as may be necessary to eliminate or reduce an
unacceptable risk to public safety; preserve or enhance the health of the
trees, plants or vegetation; or to maintain the beauty/environmental quality
of public grounds.



   (B)   Private property tree care. The standards and procedures for
the care, maintenance and removal of trees upon private property are set
forth in Chapter 93 of this Code governing property maintenance.



(Ord. 1-2002, passed 1-2-02)



§ 100.08  UTILITY PROVIDERS.



   Utility providers which desire to prune or clear trees within the
right-of-way or on other public properties shall provide written evidence to
the City Manager of its adherence to established guidelines for line
clearance work recommended by the National Arborists Association. Such
companies shall also notify the City Manager before commencing line clearance
work within the municipality.



(Ord. 1-2002, passed 1-2-02)



§ 100.09  REMOVAL OF STUMPS.



   Any person who removes a public tree or street tree shall remove the
remaining stump below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump
shall be a minimum of six inches below the surface of the ground. The hole
shall be filled in and seeded within 24 hours of removing the stump.



(Ord. 1-2002, passed 1-2-02)  Penalty, see § 100.99



§ 100.10  TREE PROTECTION.



   (A)   Permits for tree removal.



      (1)   With the exception of representatives of the
municipality, any person, business, contractor, utility or property owner
desiring to remove a tree from the tree lawn, parks, street medians or other
public place for the purpose of construction, or for any other purpose, must
first obtain a permit from the municipality, for which no fee shall be
charged.



      (2)   The City Manager has the authority to grant permits for
the removal of trees from public places. Such permits may be denied if the
removal of tree(s) from a public place is not necessary for the protection of
public health and safety; or can be reasonably avoided; or, in the case of
realty development or construction, unless the permit request is accompanied
by a plan to protect public trees in the general vicinity of construction and
add new trees and/or landscaping if part of the tree lawn is to be removed.
The city shall review permit applications within 15 business days of
postmarked date or record of receipt, whichever is earlier; if a permit
application is not acted upon within the specified time, the applicant may
deem the permit to have been denied.



   (B)   Removal of public trees by the city. Whenever it is necessary
for the city to remove a tree or shrub from a tree lawn or other public
place, in connection with the paving of sidewalk, paving or widening of a
street, or for any other reason, the city shall make reasonable endeavors to
remove and replant such trees or replace them. No tree over 12 inches in
caliper or tree which is 30 years of age or older, shall be removed without
prior review by the City Manager. Replacement trees shall meet the standards
of species, size, condition and placement set forth in this chapter and in
the City Tree Manual. Where practicable, any removed tree with a diameter at
breast height (DBH) of four inches or more shall be replaced, preferably with
a tree of comparable caliper and equal or better condition.



   (C)   Removal or defacement of public trees.



      (1)   No person shall damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove
any tree or shrub on public property or in the public right-of-way; attach
any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters, or other contrivance to any tree
or shrub on public property or in the public right-of-way; or set fire or
permit fire to burn in any manner that injures any portion of any tree or
shrub on public property or in the public right-of-way.



      (2)   Any public tree(s) that are damaged, but not badly
enough to justify removal, as determined by the City Manager, shall be
considered to be devalued. The person or entity causing such damage shall
compensate the city for such damage. The monetary amount shall be determined
by the City Manager or his designee, based on the assessment of a licensed
arborist of the monetary investment required to save the tree(s); or, if
there is a likelihood the tree(s) will not survive the damage inflicted, then
the cost of replacement of tree(s) of like species and caliper; or, if a
different species is more suitable based on current best practices, or the
tree(s) is/are too large to be replaced in kind, then the cost of replacement
with tree(s) of minimum caliper 1 –2" of the same species or more suitable
species, as judged by a licensed arborist.



   (D)   Tree topping. Street trees or public trees shall not be topped
except in such circumstances when the trees are severely damaged by storms or
other natural causes, or when such trees are under utility wires or other
obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical. Tree topping
shall be considered as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than
three inches in diameter within the trees' crown to such a degree so as to
remove the normal canopy and/or disfigure the tree. As a matter of policy,
the City Manager should make all utility providers aware of the standards for
tree topping of public and street trees within the city, and take all
reasonable steps to insure that the pruning of public trees by utility
companies is consistent with these standards.



(Ord. 1-2002, passed 1-2-02)  Penalty, see § 100.99



§ 100.11  REALTY DEVELOPMENTS AND CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   No person shall by any type of construction reduce the number
of trees in the tree lawn without first obtaining a permit (for which no fee
shall be charged) from the City Manager or his designee. Efforts should be
made to protect public trees from damage and a plan to install street trees
and/or add landscaping should accompany the permit request.



   (B)   No person in charge of, or responsible for, the erection,
alteration or removal of any building or structure in the municipality shall
permit any tree upon any public place in the vicinity of such operation to
stand without a good and sufficient guard or protection as to prevent injury,
damage, or defacement to such tree arising out of, in connection with, or by
reason of such operation. The sufficiency of such guard or protection shall
be determined by the City Manager at the time of such erection, alteration or
removal.



   (C)   No person shall excavate ditches, tunnels, trenches or install
a driveway or sidewalk within a radius of ten feet of any public tree or
shrub without first obtaining written approval from the City Manager.



   (D)   No person shall place or maintain in the ground in any public
place any stone, concrete, brick, or other impervious material or substance
in such a manner as may obstruct the free access of air and water to the
roots of any tree upon any public place in the municipality without first
obtaining written permission of the City Manager.



   (E)   The city shall review any permit application required under
this section within 15 business days of the postmarked date or record of
receipt, whichever is earlier; if an application is not acted upon within the
specified time, the applicant may deem the permit to have been denied.



(Ord. 1-2002, passed 1-2-02)  Penalty, see § 100.99



§ 100.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any section of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $500 for the first such
offense.  For subsequent offenses within one year after the first offense,
such person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more
than $750. Each day a condition or any action in violation of this chapter is
continued or permitted may be charged as a separate offense. At the time of
sentencing and after sentencing, the Court may permit restitution in lieu of
any or all of the fine imposed.



(Ord. 1-2002, passed 1-2-02)



CHAPTER 101: HUNTING



Section



   101.01   Definitions



   101.02   Hunting and trapping prohibitions



   101.03   Hunting of deer



 



   101.99   Penalty



§ 101.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:



   CEMETERY.  Any single piece or contiguous pieces of real property
owned by the same person or entity, all or part of which real property is
located within the city, used, laid out or set aside for any one or a
combination of the following: a burial ground for earth interments, a
mausoleum for crypt interments, a columbarium for the deposit of cremated
remains, or a scattering ground for the spreading of cremated remains.



   FUR-BEARING ANIMALS.  Minks, weasels, raccoons, skunks, opossums,
muskrats, fox, beavers, badgers, otters, coyotes and bobcats.



   GAME.  Game birds, game quadrupeds, and fur-bearing animals.



   GAME BIRDS.  Pheasants, quail, ruffed grouse, sharp-tailed grouse,
pinnated grouse, wild turkey, Hungarian partridge, Chukar partridge,
woodcocks, black-breasted plover, golden plover, Wilson's snipe or jacksnipe,
greater and lesser yellowlegs, rail, coots, gallinules, duck, geese, brant,
and crows.



   GAME QUADRUPEDS.  Hares or rabbits, gray squirrels, black squirrels,
fox squirrels, red squirrels, groundhogs or woodchucks, deer, wild boar, and
bears.



   HUNTING.  Pursuing, shooting, killing, following after or on the trail
of, lying in wait for, shooting at, or wounding wild birds or wild quadrupeds
while employing any device commonly used to kill or wound wild birds or wild
quadrupeds, including firearms, bows, crossbows, or other projectiles,
whether the acts result in killing or wounding or not. It includes every
attempt to kill or wound and every act of assistance to any other person in
killing or wounding or attempting to kill or wound wild birds or wild
quadrupeds.



   NON-GAME BIRDS.  All other wild birds not included and defined as game
birds.



   PERMIT.  A document from the Police Department granting the holder
permission to hunt deer within the city.  Such a permit shall be
nontransferable, and shall only be issued after the holder has first obtained
the written consent of the owner of the cemetery to hunt deer on its
property, pursuant to § 101.03.  The permit shall be subject to such
conditions as are deemed necessary by the Chief of Police to protect the
health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city.



   TRAPPING.  Securing or attempting to secure possession of a wild bird
or wild quadruped by means of setting, placing, drawing, or using any devices
that are designed to close upon, hold fast, confine, or otherwise capture a
wild bird or wild quadruped whether the means results in capturing it or not.
It includes every act of assistance to any other person in capturing wild
birds or wild quadrupeds by means of the device whether the means results in
capturing or not.



   WILD QUADRUPEDS.  Game quadrupeds and fur-bearing animals.



(Ord. 2-2003, passed 2-5-03; Am. Ord. 17-2003, passed 10-1-03)



§ 101.02  HUNTING AND TRAPPING PROHIBITIONS.



   Hunting is prohibited within the geographic boundaries of the city.
Trapping is permitted within the city so long as the device used is a humane
device intended to capture, but in no way maim or cause injury to the wild
bird or wild quadruped. Anyone trapping within the city shall be responsible
to place the trap in a safe location so as not to cause harm to persons or
property. Although trapping is permitted in the city, the person placing such
trap and those assisting in the placement of such trap are liable for any
damage or injury caused to persons or property by utilizing such trapping
device.



(Ord. 2-2003, passed 2-5-03)  Penalty, see § 101.99



§ 101.03  HUNTING OF DEER.



   Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, hunting (as
defined in § 101.01) of deer (but no other game, as defined in § 101.01) is
permitted within the geographic boundaries of the city, subject to the
following limitations:



   (A)   Hunting of deer is only permitted within a cemetery exceeding
100 acres in size in the aggregate, except that no hunting of deer is
permitted within 100 yards of any real property used or zoned for residential
purposes.



   (B)   No person shall use a firearm or air rifle to hunt deer. No
person shall carry a firearm or air rifle while hunting deer.



   (C)   Hunting of deer shall only be done with bows and crossbows. No
person shall discharge a bow or crossbow toward any building or dwelling in
such a manner that an arrow might strike it.



   (D)   Hunting of deer shall only be done by a person possessing a
permit and any additional permits required under the laws and regulations of
the State of Ohio or the federal government. Any person engaged in deer
hunting must comply with all conditions and restrictions imposed by the Chief
of Police as part of the permit, and must have the permit on his or her
person at all times while engaged in deer hunting.



   (E)   Hunting of deer shall only occur with the prior written
consent of the owner of the cemetery.



   (F)   Hunting of deer shall only occur at such times as the cemetery
is closed to the public.



   (G)   No person shall hunt deer except from an elevated stand at
least ten feet above the ground.



   (H)   Deer shall only be hunted for the purpose of culling their
numbers, and not for recreational purposes.



   (I)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, any person hunting deer shall
be liable for any damage or injury caused to persons or property as a result
of deer hunting.



(Ord. 17-2003, passed 10-1-03)  Penalty, see § 101.99



§ 101.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.



(Ord. 2-2003, passed 2-5-03)



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



      Chapter




         110.   AMUSEMENT DEVICES





         111.   CANVASSING AND DOOR-TO-DOOR SOLICITATIONS





         112.   VIDEO SERVICE AUTHORIZATIONS




CHAPTER 110:  AMUSEMENT DEVICES



Section



   110.01   Pinball machines; license required



   110.02   Definitions



   110.03   License fee



   110.04   Applications; information



   110.05   Tokens or certificates of value prohibited



   110.06   Distance from school grounds



   110.07   Minors prohibited



   110.08   License may be transferred



   110.09   Relocation of machines to be approved



   110.10   Open to inspection



   110.11   Revocation of license



   110.12   Seizure of gambling devices



 



   110.99   Penalty



§ 110.01  PINBALL MACHINES; LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person, firm, or corporation shall engage in the business of
selling, leasing, renting, operating, or exhibiting pinball machines without
first obtaining a license to do so and conforming to the regulations provided
for such business in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 



('67 Code, § 110.01)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall
have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.



   DISTRIBUTOR.  Any person, firm, or corporation which sells, leases,
rents, or otherwise distributes pinball machines within the municipality.



   EXHIBITOR.  A person, firm, or corporation owning or conducting a
place of business in the municipality and operating or exhibiting one or more
pinball machines at such place of business.



   PINBALL MACHINE.  Includes pinball machines, marble machines, and any
similar amusement or entertainment devices operated by the insertion of a
coin, disc, or other insertion piece, and which register or may register a
score after the insertion of such coin, disc, or other insertion piece. It
shall not include coin-operated vending machines, music machines, motion
picture machines, or other machines or devices used bona fide solely for the
vending of service, food, or merchandise. 



('67 Code, § 110.02)



§ 110.03  LICENSE FEE.



   Every distributor shall pay an annual license fee of $100 and every
exhibitor shall pay an annual license fee of $100 plus a fee of $100 for each
pinball machine maintained or exhibited. An exhibitor operating at more than
one location shall pay a license fee for each location. 



('67 Code, § 110.03)



§ 110.04  APPLICATIONS; INFORMATION.



   (A)   Applications for distributor's and exhibitor's licenses or for
pinball machine licenses shall be made to the City Manager on forms provided
by him. Applications for distributor's licenses shall, in particular, set
forth the places of business and residence of the distributor. If the
distributor is a firm, the place of residence of all the partners shall be
furnished. If the distributor is a corporation, the place of residence of the
Chief Business Manager or other controlling executive officer shall be
furnished.



   (B)   Applications for exhibitor's licenses shall, in addition,
state the number of pinball machines for which the licenses are requested and
the location of the premises, and the particular room on the premises, in
which such pinball machines are to be exhibited.  If the City Manager is
satisfied that the applicant has complied with all the provisions of this and
the following sections, and is otherwise eligible to be a licensee, he shall
issue the license on payment of the license fees.  The license stamps for
pinball machines shall specify the locations in which they are to be
exhibited or maintained. If a location consists of more than one room, the
particular room shall be specified. Each license stamp shall be attached to
the machine for which it is issued so as to be in plain view of the persons
playing the same. 



(Ord. 28-1981, passed 10-7-81)



§ 110.05  TOKENS OR CERTIFICATES OF VALUE PROHIBITED.



   No exhibitor or other person shall exhibit, operate, or have in his
possession a pinball machine which is so constructed as to make possible,
either directly, or by the use of an adjustment, the return of cash, tickets,
discs, or other tokens or certificates of any kind to a player operating the
same, whether or not such tokens or certificates have a value of any kind, or
authorizing further playing or other privileges. Only machines operated
exclusively for the amusement provided by the operation thereof shall be
licensed.



('67 Code, § 110.06)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.06  DISTANCE FROM SCHOOL GROUNDS.



   No person, firm, or corporation shall maintain or exhibit a pinball
machine on any premises situated less than 500 feet from the building and
grounds of any elementary school or high school, the 500 feet to be measured
along the line of the nearest curb. 



('67 Code, § 110.07)



§ 110.07  MINORS PROHIBITED.



   No exhibitor of one or more pinball machines shall permit the same to
be played or used by a person under 18 years of age during school hours. 



('67 Code, § 110.08)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.08  LICENSE MAY BE TRANSFERRED.



   When the business of a distributor or exhibitor is sold or otherwise
transferred, the license of such distributor or exhibitor may be transferred
to the transferee with the consent of the City Manager, for the remainder of
the license period if the latter is satisfied that the successor would be
eligible to receive a new license.  The transfer of an exhibitor's license
shall carry with it the transfer of the pinball machine licenses issued to
him, and this shall be noted on the books of the City Manager and upon the
license stamps issued for the pinball machines. 



('67 Code, § 110.99; Am. Ord. 28-1981, passed 10-7-81)



§ 110.09  RELOCATION OF MACHINES TO BE APPROVED.



   No licensed pinball machine shall be removed from one premise to
another or from one room to another room on the same premises, unless the new
location shall be approved by the administrative assistant and duly noted on
the license stamp and on his records.  Nothing herein, however, shall be
understood to prevent the replacement of one machine by another and the
transfer of the license to such substituted machine, if it complies with the
requirements of this chapter. 



('67 Code, § 110.10)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.10  OPEN TO INSPECTION.



   All pinball machines and all premises in which pinball machines are
maintained or exhibited shall be open to inspection by the police at all
times. 



('67 Code, § 110.11)



§ 110.11  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   Should any distributor or exhibitor violate or fail to comply with any
of the provisions of this chapter, it shall be the duty of the City Manager
to revoke his license.  In case of the revocation of any exhibitor's
license, the licenses of all machines operated by him or on his premises,
shall be revoked and such machines removed from the premises within 24 hours
thereafter.  A distributor or exhibitor whose license has been revoked shall
not be eligible to apply for or receive a new license within the period of
one year after the revocation. 



('67 Code, § 110.13; Am. Ord. 28-1981, passed 10-7-81)



§ 110.12  SEIZURE OF GAMBLING DEVICES.



   If any pinball machine is used as a gambling device or is otherwise
operated contrary to the provisions of the laws of the state, or of this
chapter, the machine may, in the discretion of the City Manager, be seized
and destroyed, as in the case of gaming devices. 



('67 Code, § 110.14; Am. Ord. 28-1981, passed 10-7-81)



Cross-reference:



   Gambling, see Chapter 137



§ 110.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject
to the penalty provided in § 10.99.



CHAPTER 111:  CANVASSING AND DOOR-TO-DOOR SOLICITATIONS



Section



   111.01   Definitions



   111.02   General rules



   111.03   Commercial solicitation permit requirements



   111.04   Applications for commercial solicitation permits



   111.05   Investigation



   111.06   Appeal of denial



   111.07   Issuance of commercial solicitation permit



   111.08   Revocation of commercial solicitation permits



   111.09   No solicitation notice



   111.10   Violations



   111.11   Restriction against leaving property or materials unattended



 



   111.99   Penalty



§ 111.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CANVASSERS.  Any person traveling door-to-door within the community,
to canvas or advocate for a cause, organization or person, or any person
conducting a survey, advocating a religious organization or ministry, or
presenting handbills for a person, cause or organization so long as such
canvassing does not involve the solicitation or request for donations.



   COMMERCIAL SOLICITORS.  Any individual, group of individuals, business
entity, organization (both for-profit or not-for-profit) or any agent of such
business entity or organization which travels door-to-door within the
community, which either solicits or offers for sale either for present or
future delivery any goods, merchandise or services, whether monies are
collected at the time of such solicitation or to be paid in the future.



   COMMUNITY.  As referenced herein, the term community shall mean the
City of Montgomery, Ohio.



   DOOR-TO-DOOR.  Travel by foot, motor vehicle or any other type of
conveyance from house-to-house, building-to-building or door-to-door within
the community. Such solicitation does not include telephone, Internet or any
other electronic communication. Door-to-door travel is intended to mean the
personal contact between two or more individuals at a home, office or
building within the community.



   NON-COMMERCIAL SOLICITORS.  Any individual, group of individuals,
business entity, organization (both for-profit or not-for-profit) or any
agent of such business entity or organization which travels door-to-door
within the community, which either solicits or requests donations for any
organization, person or cause, whether monies are collected at the time of
such solicitation or to be paid in the future.



(Ord. 15-2003, passed 8-6-03)



§ 111.02  GENERAL RULES.



   (A)   In addition to the requirements set forth below for permits by
commercial solicitors, all solicitors, commercial or non-commercial, or
canvassers traveling door-to-door within any residential area of the city to
solicit donations, canvas, or offer goods or services for sale, shall carry
appropriate photo identification and shall exhibit the same upon the request
of any resident contacted within the city.



   (B)   In addition to the permit required for commercial solicitors
as set forth below, any solicitor, commercial or non-commercial, or canvasser
under 18 years of age traveling door-to-door within any residential area of
the city to solicit donations, canvas, or offer goods or services for sale,
must be accompanied by a parent, guardian or supervising adult. Such parent,
guardian or supervising adult shall have photo identification for himself or
herself with him or her at all times, and shall exhibit the same upon request
of any resident contacted within the community.



   (C)   No person or organization shall solicit, whether commercial or
noncommercial, or canvass within any residential area of the community
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. daily.



(Ord. 15-2003, passed 8-6-03)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.03  COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   Commercial solicitors intending to sell or offer for sale goods or
services through door-to-door solicitation in any residential area of the
city shall be required to register in advance with the city through the
Police Department. Each organization, business entity, groups of individuals
or individuals will be issued a permit upon appropriate application to the
city so long as such organization, business entity, group of individuals or
individuals meet the requirements of this chapter for appropriate
registration and authorization to conduct the solicitation within the
community.



(Ord. 15-2003, passed 8-6-03)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.04  APPLICATIONS FOR COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION PERMITS.



   Applicants for permits under this chapter shall file with the Chief of
Police or his or her designated clerk, in writing, in duplicate, on an
application containing the following information:



   (A)   Name of applicant and all agents of the applicant who will
offer or sell goods or services within the city.



   (B)   Permanent home address and/or business address of the
applicant who will offer for sale or solicit sales of goods or services
within the city.



   (C)   A brief description of the nature of the business or
organization offering such goods or services to be sold and a brief
description of the goods or services to be sold.



   (D)   The length of time during which the right to do business or
the right to solicit sales within the community is desired; provided,
however, that this right may not exceed a period of six months. This shall
not restrict a commercial solicitor from selling or soliciting for sale for a
period of 12 months throughout the community, but the commercial solicitor
must renew such permit after its six month expiration with such renewal being
similar to the procedure for the issuance of a new permit.



   (E)   Photographic identification of the applicant and photographic
identification of all agents of the applicant who will be selling or
soliciting for sales within the city.



   (F)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant, or any agent
of the applicant who will be selling or soliciting for sales within the city,
has been convicted of any crime or misdemeanor, the nature of the offense and
the punishment or penalty assessed for such violation. The application shall
acknowledge that the Chief of Police shall access and review the applicant's
and any agent of the applicant's criminal record.



(Ord. 15-2003, passed 8-6-03)



§ 111.05  INVESTIGATION.



   (A)   Upon receipt of the completed application for a commercial
solicitation permit by the Chief of Police, the Chief of Police shall cause
an investigation of the applicants or applicant's agents business and moral
character to be made as the Chief may deem necessary for the protection of
the public good. This review shall be completed by the Chief of Police within
three business days. If the investigation is not completed within that period
of time the applicant may deem the application to be denied and the applicant
may appeal the deemed denial similar to an appeal as set forth in § 111.06.



   (B)   If the Chief of Police's review of the application determines
that any applicant or agent of the applicant has been convicted of a crime of
moral turpitude, any crime of violence which may present a danger to the
public, any sex offense crime or drug offense, the application or the right
of any agent of the applicant to solicit in the community may be denied. If
such application is denied the Chief of Police shall endorse such denial upon
the application and state the reasons for the same and then return the
application to the applicant with a copy to the City Manager. The application
shall be returned either in person or by ordinary mail directed to the
applicant's address as listed on the original application.



(Ord. 15-2003, passed 8-6-03)



§ 111.06  APPEAL OF DENIAL.



   (A)   If an application has been denied as stated herein, the
applicant may file such appeal within ten calendar days after written notice
of such denial has been either delivered to the applicant or mailed to the
applicant by ordinary mail to the applicant's last known address. Such appeal
shall be brought to the City Manager by filing a copy with the office of the
City Manager and a copy with the Chief of Police.



   (B)   The City Manager or his designee shall then hold a public
hearing upon such appeal at which the Chief of Police or his or her designee
shall present the appropriate evidence to the City Manager upon which the
application was denied. The applicant may be present at the public hearing
and may present evidence to refute the findings of the Chief of Police. Upon
hearing all evidence the City Manager may either affirm, modify or, for good
cause shown, overrule the decision of the Chief of Police. The decision of
the City Manager shall be rendered within ten days of the conclusion of the
public hearing. Such decision shall be made in writing and presented
personally to the applicant or mailed by ordinary mail to the applicant at
the last known address provided in the application. The decision by the City
Manager may be appealed as an administrative decision according to Ohio law.



(Ord. 15-2003, passed 8-6-03)



§ 111.07  ISSUANCE OF COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION PERMIT.



   (A)   If as a result of the investigation the Chief of Police
approves the permit, the Chief shall endorse such approval upon the
commercial solicitation permit application. Each application shall then be
assigned an appropriate permit number and a copy of the approved application
shall be returned to the applicant. The applicant must at all times carry a
copy of such approved permit and appropriate photo identification upon his or
her person when soliciting for sales within the city. A copy of the approved
application shall be provided to all agents of the applicant who have been
identified to solicit sales within the community, all of whom shall carry a
copy of the permit and appropriate identification upon his or her person when
soliciting sales within the city.



   (B)   In addition to any criminal offense for a violation of this
section, the approved permit granted to such applicant or the applicant's
agent may immediately be suspended for failure to comply with this section.
Any such suspension may be appealed by the permittee under the same procedure
for application appeals as set forth in § 111.06.



(Ord. 15-2003, passed 8-6-03)



§ 111.08  REVOCATION OF COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION PERMITS.



   (A)   Commercial solicitation permits issued under the provisions of
this chapter may be revoked by the Chief of Police after notice and hearing
for any of the following causes:



      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in
the application for a permit;



      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the
course of carrying on the business of the commercial solicitor;



      (3)   Any violation of this chapter;



      (4)   Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving any
crime of violence which may present a danger to the public or any sex offense
crime or drug offense; or



      (5)   Conducting the business of the commercial solicitor in
an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of peace or
a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public.



   (B)   An issued permit will be immediately suspended upon the
issuance of a notice of hearing by the Chief of Police, under this section,
and will remain suspended pending a decision to reinstate the permit by the
City Manager.



   (C)   Notice of the hearing for revocation of permits shall be given
in writing setting forth specifically the grounds for such revocation and the
time and place of the hearing. The notice shall be delivered personally to
the permit holder or mailed to the permittee at his or her last known address
at least five business days prior to the date set for the hearing. Such
hearing shall be held within ten business days of the notice of revocation
unless extended by agreement with the permit holder.



   (D)   Such hearing shall be conducted by the City Manager, or his
designee, as a public hearing. The City Manager, upon reviewing the evidence
presented, may uphold the decision of the Chief of Police to revoke the
commercial solicitation permit, may modify the decision or may overrule the
decision of the Chief of Police. The City Manager's decision shall be
rendered within ten calendar days of the hearing and shall be rendered in
writing with a copy mailed, postage prepaid, to the permittee at his or her
last known address. Pending a review by the City Manager the commercial
solicitation permit shall be temporarily suspended. If the City Manager fails
to render a decision within ten calendar days after the hearing then a
decision of the Chief of Police shall be deemed to be overruled and the
permit reinstated.



(Ord. 15-2003, passed 8-6-03)



§ 111.09  NO SOLICITATION NOTICE.



   Any resident or business within the community may file a notice of no
solicitation with the Police Department and post a no solicitation sign
conspicuously on the property to bar entry to the property from any
commercial or non-commercial solicitors or canvassers. The notice shall be on
a form provided by the Police Department and the sign shall be a weatherproof
sign, a minimum of three inches by four inches in size, stating no solicitors
or words of similar meaning. The maximum size for any such sign shall be one
square foot.  The letters on such sign shall be at least one-third inch in
height. No commercial or non-commercial solicitors or canvassers shall enter
upon such residential or business property where such sign has been posted
and where such notice has been filed with the Police Department.



(Ord. 15-2003, passed 8-6-03)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.10  VIOLATIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, organization or entity regulated
by this chapter to:



   (A)   Enter upon any residential or business property within the
community if such property has been appropriately posted to prohibit on-site
solicitation;



   (B)   To solicit or canvass within any residential area of the
community between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. daily;



   (C)   To solicit sales within the community without appropriately
obtaining a permit in advance;



   (D)   To solicit sales within the community without having a copy of
such permit on such person;



   (E)   To solicit, whether commercial or non-commercial, or canvass
in the community without appropriate photo identification or refuse to
exhibit such photo identification to a resident or business resident when
requested;



   (F)   Solicit, whether commercial or non-commercial, or canvas in
the community without being accompanied by a parent, guardian or supervising
adult if such solicitor or canvasser is under the age of 18 years;



   (G)   Accompany an underage solicitor or canvasser as an
accompanying parent, guardian or supervising adult without appropriate photo
identification;



   (H)   Remain on such residential or business property without
permission of the occupant or homeowner after the commercial or
non-commercial solicitor or canvasser has been requested by the
owner/occupant or person in charge of the premises to leave such private
premises;



   (I)   Make any false statement or misrepresentation in the process
of applying for a commercial solicitation permit; or



   (J)   Violate any other section of this chapter not specified herein.



(Ord. 15-2003, passed 8-6-03)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.11  RESTRICTION AGAINST LEAVING PROPERTY OR MATERIALS UNATTENDED.



   (A)   Any promotional materials, gifts, display objects, or other
written materials distributed door-to-door throughout the community as a part
of any solicitation or canvass must be appropriately delivered and presented
for acceptance to the homeowner, business owner or occupant. If such
materials are left upon the property, the materials must be appropriately
secured or placed so as not to cause waste, debris or other refuse in the
community as a result of exposure to the weather and other elements. Under no
circumstances may any promotional materials, gifts, display objects or other
door-to-door solicitation or marketing materials or canvassing materials to
be left in the right-of-way. It shall be the responsibility of the solicitor
or canvasser to return to the residence or business property and to remove
such materials from the residence or business property if it remains upon the
residential property or business property in excess of 72 hours after being
delivered to the residence property or business property without being
claimed. It shall also be the responsibility of the solicitor or canvasser to
cleanup any debris, refuse or other waste caused throughout the community by
leaving such property or promotional materials unattended at a residential or
business property.



   (B)   Exceptions.  This section does not apply to any goods or
services preordered by a resident/occupant or business, which goods or
services are being delivered with the permission of the owner/occupant or
person in charge of the premises at an agreed upon time or in an agreed upon
manner.



(Ord. 3-2004, passed 4-7-04)



§ 111.99  PENALTY.



   Any violation of any provisions of this chapter may be subject to a
fine not to exceed $150 for any first offense in a calendar year, not to
exceed $250 for any second offense within a calendar year, and not to exceed
$500 for any third offense within a calendar year. Each day a person,
organization or entity is in violation of this chapter may be charged as a
separate criminal offense.



(Ord. 15-2003, passed 8-6-03; Am. Ord. 2-2004, passed 4-7-04)



CHAPTER 112:  VIDEO SERVICE AUTHORIZATIONS



Section



   112.01   Title



   112.02   Definitions



   112.03   VSP fee



   112.04   VSP fee notice provisions



   112.05   VSP access provisions



   112.06   Access programming requirement



   112.07   Fee payment requirements



   112.08   PEG origination points



   112.09   Notice requirement



   112.10   Application to incumbent cable providers



 



   112.99   Penalty



§ 112.01  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Video Service
Authorizations Chapter".



(Ord. 4-2008, passed 5-7-08)



§ 112.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   INCUMBENT CABLE PROVIDER.  Any person who on the effective date of
this chapter either is the holder of a cable franchise agreement with the
city as granted pursuant to requirements of 47 U.S.C. § 541 or provides
cable service in the city under an expired franchise.



   PEG.  Activities or actions performed for the benefit of public,
educational and government video programming by the city or its appointees.



   VIDEO SERVICE.  The service defined in R.C. § 1332.21(J).



   VIDEO SERVICE AUTHORIZATION or VSA.  The authorization granted to a
video service provider in accordance with the requirements of R.C. §§
1332.21 et seq.



   VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER or VSP.  A person, firm, or corporation granted
a video service authorization under R.C. §§ 1332.21 et seq.



   VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE or VSP FEE.  The fee paid by a VSP in
accordance with the requirements of R.C. § 1332.32.



(Ord. 4-2008, passed 5-7-08)



§ 112.03  VSP FEE.



   In accordance with the requirements of R.C. § 1332.32, all VSPs
providing video service in the city pursuant to a VSA obtained from the
Director of the Ohio Department of Commerce shall pay a VSP fee in the amount
of 5% of gross revenues received from providing video service in the city,
which gross revenue base shall include advertising revenues.  The VSP fee
shall be paid quarterly, not later than 60 days after the end of each
calendar quarter.



(Ord. 4-2008, passed 5-7-08)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.04  VSP FEE NOTICE PROVISIONS.



   Upon receipt of notice from a VSP that it will begin providing video
service in the city pursuant to a state-issued video service authorization,
the City Manager or his or her designee is authorized and directed to provide
such VSP with notice of the VSP fee as determined by this Council in §
112.03, which notice shall be delivered in a manner that provides for proof
of timely delivery.



(Ord. 4-2008, passed 5-7-08)



§ 112.05  VSP ACCESS PROVISIONS.



   Upon receipt of notice from a VSP that it will begin providing video
service in the city pursuant to a VSA, the City Manager or his or her
designee is authorized and directed to provide such VSP with notice that the
VSP shall be required to provide the same number of PEG channels in the city
under the same service tier conditions and subject to the same channel
reclamation conditions as may be proscribed by R.C. § 1332.30(A)(1)(a) -
(A)(1)(b) for the incumbent cable provider with the most recent obligation in
the city, which notice shall be delivered in a manner that provides for proof
of timely delivery and shall state the appropriate number of PEG channels and
service tiers required to be provided by the VSP within the city within 120
days after delivery of such notice. Additionally, should no PEG channels
currently be provided by an incumbent cable provider with such an obligation
in the city, the City Manager may provide written notice to a VSP of its
obligation to provide PEG channels in accordance with R.C. § 1332.30(B)(1).



(Ord. 4-2008, passed 5-7-08)



§ 112.06  ACCESS PROGRAMMING REQUIREMENT.



   In accordance with the requirements of R.C. § 1332.30(A)(1)(a) or R.C.
§ 1332.30(B)(1), when PEG channels are provided to the city by an incumbent
cable provider or VSP, such PEG channels are required to be programmed by the
city with at least 40 hours of non-character generated content per week with
at least 60% of the programming being non-repeat and locally produced.  For
the purposes of this section, NON-REPEAT AND LOCALLY PRODUCED shall mean the
first three playbacks of programming produced or provided by any local
resident, the city, or any local public or private agency that provides
services to residents of the greater Cincinnati metro area, or any
transmission of a meeting or proceeding of any local, state, or federal
governmental entity



(Ord. 4-2008, passed 5-7-08)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.07  FEE PAYMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   Any VSP fee required to be paid to the city by a VSP shall be made
quarterly and be remitted directly to the city via a negotiable instrument
made payable to the City of Montgomery, 10101 Montgomery Road, Montgomery,
Ohio 45242, not later than 60 days after the end of a calendar quarter.



(Ord. 4-2008, passed 5-7-08)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.08  PEG ORIGINATION POINTS.



   The PEG programming origination point of the city for the delivery of
VSP access services shall be located at the 10101 Montgomery Road,
Montgomery, Ohio 45242 building/location.



(Ord. 4-2008, passed 5-7-08)



§ 112.09  NOTICE REQUIREMENT.



   Any notice to the City that is required of a VSP in accordance with of
R.C. §§ 1332.21 et seq. shall be provided in written form to the City
Manager either by certified mail, express mail or upon personal delivery, all
evidenced by a return receipt.



(Ord. 4-2008, passed 5-7-08)



§ 112.10  APPLICATION TO INCUMBENT CABLE PROVIDERS.



   Nothing in this section shall apply to incumbent cable providers until
they are granted a video service authorization in accordance with R.C. §§
1332.21 et seq.



(Ord. 4-2008, passed 5-7-08)



§ 112.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined not more than $500 or
imprisoned not more than 60 days, or both.  A separate offense shall be
deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.



(Ord. 4-2008, passed 5-7-08)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



      Chapter




         130.   GENERAL PROVISIONS





         131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY





         132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE





         133.   SEX OFFENSES





         134.   GAMBLING OFFENSES





         135.   OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS





         136.   OFFENSES AGAINST JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION





         137.   WEAPONS CONTROL





         138.   DRUG OFFENSES




CHAPTER 130:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   130.01   Application of Title XIII



   130.02   Definitions



   130.03   Classification of offenses



   130.04   Common law offenses abrogated



   130.05   Rule of construction



   130.06   Limitations of criminal prosecutions



   130.07   Requirements for criminal liability; voluntary intoxication



   130.08   Culpable mental states



   130.09   Organizational criminal liability



   130.10   Personal accountability for organizational conduct



   130.11   Attempt



   130.12   Complicity



   130.13   Presumption of innocence; proof of offense; affirmative
defense



   130.14   Battered woman syndrome



   130.15   Delinquency adjudications deemed convictions



   130.16   Criminal law jurisdiction



   130.17   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property held by
Police Department



   130.18   Imposing sentence for misdemeanor



   130.19   Multiple sentences



   130.20   Apprehension, detention, or arrest of persons on bond



   130.21   Self defense: limitations on duty to retreat prior to using
force



 



   130.99   Penalty for Title XIII



Statutory reference:



   DNA testing of certain delinquent children and certain prisoners, see
R.C. §§ 2152.74 and 2901.07



   Mayor's Court generally, see R.C. Chapter 1905



   Municipal Court generally, see R.C. Chapter 1901



   Trials, Magistrate Courts, see R.C. Chapter 2938



§ 130.01  APPLICATION OF TITLE XIII.



   (A)   Title XIII of this code of ordinances embodies and prescribes
penalties for offenses against the municipality not classifiable in previous
titles and chapters.  The word MISDEMEANORS, as used in this Title, is not
exhaustive and does not imply that offenses found elsewhere in this code of
ordinances are not also misdemeanors and punishable as such.



   (B)   Each act or omission for which a fine, imprisonment, or both
is provided under this Title or elsewhere in this code, or each act or
omission which is declared a violation of this code, is unlawful and is
hereby made a misdemeanor.  Upon conviction, the penalty or penalties so
provided shall be imposed by the court.



§ 130.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CONTRABAND. Any property that is illegal for a person to acquire or
possess under a statute, ordinance, or rule, or that a trier of fact lawfully
determines to be illegal to possess by reason of the property’s involvement
in an offense. The term includes but is not limited to all of the following:



      (1)   Any controlled substance, as defined in R.C. § 3719.01,
or any device or paraphernalia related thereto;



      (2)   Any unlawful gambling device or paraphernalia;



      (3)   Any dangerous ordnance or obscene material.



   DANGEROUS OFFENDER. A person who has committed an offense, whose
history, character and condition reveal a substantial risk that he or she
will be a danger to others, and whose conduct has been characterized by a
pattern of repetitive, compulsive or aggressive behavior with heedless
indifference to the consequences.



   DEADLY FORCE. Any force that carries a substantial risk that it will
proximately result in the death of any person.



   FORCE. Any violence, compulsion, or constraint physically exerted by
any means upon or against a person or thing.



   LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any of the following:



      (1)   A Sheriff, deputy sheriff, constable, police officer of
a township or joint police district, Marshal, deputy marshal, municipal
police officer, member of a police force employed by a metropolitan housing
authority under R.C. § 3735.31(D) or state highway patrol trooper.



      (2)   An officer, agent, or employee of the state or any of
its agencies, instrumentalities, or political subdivisions, upon whom, by
statute, a duty to conserve the peace or to enforce all or certain laws is
imposed and the authority to arrest violators is conferred, within the limits
of such statutory duty and authority.



      (3)   The Mayor, in a capacity as chief conservator of the
peace within the municipality.



      (4)   A member of an auxiliary police force organized by the
county, township, or municipal law enforcement authorities, within the scope
of the member’s appointment or commission.



      (5)   A person lawfully called pursuant to R.C. § 311.07 to
aid a sheriff in keeping the peace, for the purposes and during the time when
the person is called.



      (6)   A person appointed by a Mayor pursuant to R.C. § 737.01
as a special patrolling officer during a riot or emergency, for the purposes
and during the time when the person is appointed.



      (7)   A member of the organized militia of this state or the
armed forces of the United States, lawfully called to duty to aid civil
authorities in keeping the peace or protect against domestic violence.



      (8)   A prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney,
secret service officer, or municipal prosecutor.



      (9)   A veterans’ home police officer appointed under R.C.
§ 5907.02.



      (10)   A member of a police force employed by a regional
transit authority under R.C. § 306.35(Y).



      (11)   A special police officer employed by a port authority
under R.C. § 4582.04 or 4582.28.



      (12)   The House of Representatives Sergeant at Arms if the
House of Representatives Sergeant at Arms has arrest authority pursuant to
R.C. § 101.311(E)(1) and an Assistant House of Representatives Sergeant at
Arms.



      (13)   The Senate Sergeant at Arms and an Assistant Senate
Sergeant at Arms;



      (14)   A special police officer employed by a municipal
corporation at a municipal airport, or other municipal air navigation
facility, that has scheduled operations, as defined in 14 C.F.R. § 119.3, as
amended, and that is required to be under a security program and is governed
by aviation security rules of the Transportation Security Administration of
the United States Department of Transportation as provided in 49 C.F.R. parts
1542 and 1544, as amended.



   NOT GUILTY BY REASON OF INSANITY. A person is “not guilty by reason
of insanity” relative to a charge of an offense only if the person proves,
in the manner specified in R.C. § 2901.05, that at the time of the
commission of the offense, he or she did not know, as a result of a severe
mental disease or defect, the wrongfulness of his or her acts.



   OFFENSE OF VIOLENCE.



      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2903.01, 2903.02, 2903.03,
2903.04, 2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.15, 2903.21, 2903.211, 2903.22,
2905.01, 2905.02, 2905.11, 2905.32, 2907.02, 2907.03, 2907.05, 2909.02,
2909.03, 2909.24, 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2917.01, 2917.02, 2917.03,
2917.31, 2919.25, 2921.03, 2921.04, 2921.34, or 2923.161, division (A)(1),
(A)(2) or (A)(3) of R.C. § 2911.12, or of division (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3) or
(B)(4) of R.C. § 2919.22, or felonious sexual penetration in violation of
former R.C. § 2907.12;



      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance
or law of this or any other state or of the United States, substantially
equivalent to any section, division or offense listed in division (1) of this
definition;



      (3)   An offense, other than a traffic offense, under an
existing or former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or
of the United States, committed purposely or knowingly, and involving
physical harm to persons or a risk of serious physical harm to persons;



      (4)   A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing, any offense under division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.



   PERSON.



      (1)   (a)   Subject to division (2) of this definition, as
used in any section contained in Title XIII of this code that sets forth a
criminal offense, the term includes all of the following:



            1.   An individual, corporation, business trust,
estate, trust, partnership and association.



            2.   An unborn human who is viable.



         (b)   As used in any section contained in Title XIII of
this code that does not set forth a criminal offense, the term includes an
individual, corporation, business trust, estate, partnership and association.



         (c)   As used in division (1)(a)2. of this definition,
“unborn human” means an individual organism of the species Homo sapiens
from fertilization until live birth. “Viable” means the stage of
development of a human fetus at which there is a realistic probability of
maintaining and nourishing of a life outside the womb with or without
temporary artificial life-sustaining support.



      (2)   Notwithstanding division (1)(a) of this definition, in
no case shall the portion of the definition of the term “person” that is
set forth in division (1)(a)2. of this definition be applied or construed in
any section contained in Title XIII of this code that sets forth a criminal
offense in any of the following manners:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (2)(a) of
this definition, in a manner so that the offense prohibits or is construed as
prohibiting any pregnant woman or her physician from performing an abortion
with the consent of the pregnant woman, with the consent of the pregnant
woman implied by law in a medical emergency, or with the approval of one
otherwise authorized by law to consent to medical treatment on behalf of the
pregnant woman. An abortion that violates the conditions described in the
immediately preceding sentence may be punished as a violation of R.C. §
2903.01, 2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04, 2903.05, 2903.06, 2903.08, 2903.11,
2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.14, 2903.21 or 2903.22, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, as applicable. An abortion that does not
violate the conditions described in the second immediately preceding sentence
but that does violate R.C. § 2919.12, 2919.13(B), 2919.151, 2919.17 or
2919.18, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, may be punished
as a violation of such section, as applicable. Consent is sufficient under
this division if it is of the type otherwise adequate to permit medical
treatment to the pregnant woman, even if it does not comply with R.C. §
2919.12.



         (b)   In a manner so that the offense is applied or is
construed as applying to a woman based on an act or omission of the woman
that occurs while she is or was pregnant and that results in any of the
following:



            1.   Her delivery of a stillborn baby;



            2.   Her causing, in any other manner, the death
in utero of a viable, unborn human that she is carrying;



            3.   Her causing the death of her child who is
born alive but who dies from one or more injuries that are sustained while
the child is a viable, unborn human;



            4.   Her causing her child who is born alive to
sustain one or more injuries while the child is a viable, unborn human;



            5.   Her causing, threatening to cause, or
attempting to cause, in any other manner, an injury, illness, or other
psychological illness or condition, regardless of its duration or gravity, to
a viable, unborn human that she is carrying.



   PHYSICAL HARM TO PERSONS. Any injury, illness, or other physiological
impairment, regardless of its gravity or duration.



   PHYSICAL HARM TO PROPERTY. Any tangible or intangible damage to
property that, in any degree, results in loss to its value or interferes with
its use or enjoyment. The term does not include wear and tear occasioned by
normal use.



   PRIVILEGE. An immunity, license, or right conferred by law, or bestowed
by express or implied grant, or arising out of status, position, office, or
relationship, or growing out of necessity.



   PROPERTY.



      (1)   Any property, real or personal, tangible or intangible,
and any interest or license in that property. The term includes but is not
limited to cable television service, other telecommunications service,
telecommunications devices, information service, computers, data, computer
software, financial instruments associated with computers, other documents
associated with computers, or copies of the documents, whether in machine or
human-readable form, trade secrets, trademarks, copyrights, patents, and
property protected by a trademark, copyright or patent. “Financial
instruments associated with computers” include but are not limited to
checks, drafts, warrants, money orders, notes of indebtedness, certificates
of deposit, letters of credit, bills of credit or debit cards, financial
transaction authorization mechanisms, marketable securities, or any computer
system representations of any of them.



      (2)   As used in this definition, “trade secret” has the
same meaning as in R.C. § 1333.61, and “telecommunications service” and
“information service” have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.



      (3)   As used in this definition and in the definition of
“contraband” in this section, “cable television service,”
“computer,” “computer network,” “computer software,” “computer
system,” “data,” and “telecommunications device” have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.



   REPEAT OFFENDER. A person who has a history of persistent criminal
activity and whose character and condition reveal a substantial risk that he
or she will commit another offense. It is prima facie evidence that a person
is a repeat offender if any of the following applies:



      (1)   Having been convicted of one or more offenses of
violence, as defined in R.C. § 2901.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant
to sentence for one or more of those offenses, he or she commits a subsequent
offense of violence;



      (2)   Having been convicted of one or more sexually oriented
offenses, as defined in R.C. § 2950.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant
to sentence for one or more of those offenses, he or she commits a subsequent
sexually oriented offense;



      (3)   Having been convicted of one or more theft offenses, as
defined in R.C. § 2913.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence
for one or more of those offenses, he or she commits a subsequent theft
offense;



      (4)   Having been convicted of one or more felony drug abuse
offenses, as defined in R.C. § 2925.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant
to sentence for one or more of those offenses, he or she commits a subsequent
felony drug abuse offense;



      (5)   Having been convicted of two or more felonies, and
having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for any such offense, he or she
commits a subsequent offense;



      (6)   Having been convicted of three or more offenses of any
type or degree other than traffic offenses, alcoholic intoxication offenses,
or minor misdemeanors, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for
any such offense, he or she commits a subsequent offense.



   RISK. A significant possibility, as contrasted with a remote
possibility, that a certain result may occur or that certain circumstances
may exist.



   SCHOOL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.



   SCHOOL ACTIVITY. Any activity held under the auspices of a board of
education of a city, local, exempted village, joint vocational, or
cooperative education school district; a governing authority of a community
school established under R.C. Chapter 3314; a governing board of an
educational service center; or the governing body of a nonpublic school for
which the State Board of Education prescribes minimum standards under R.C. §
3301.07.



   SCHOOL BUILDING. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.



   SCHOOL BUS. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.



   SCHOOL PREMISES. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.



   SCHOOL SAFETY ZONE. Consists of a school, school building, school
premises, school activity, and school bus.



   SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM TO PERSONS. Any of the following:



      (1)   Any mental illness or condition of such gravity as would
normally require hospitalization or prolonged psychiatric treatment;



      (2)   Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of
death;



      (3)   Any physical harm that involves some permanent
incapacity, whether partial or total, or that involves some temporary,
substantial incapacity;



      (4)   Any physical harm that involves some permanent
disfigurement, or that involves some temporary, serious disfigurement;



      (5)   Any physical harm that involves acute pain of such
duration as to result in substantial suffering, or that involves any degree
of prolonged or intractable pain.



   SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM TO PROPERTY. Any physical harm to property that
does either of the following:



      (1)   Results in substantial loss to the value of the
property, or requires a substantial amount of time, effort, or money to
repair or replace;



      (2)   Temporarily prevents the use or enjoyment of the
property, or substantially interferes with its use or enjoyment for an
extended period of time.



   SUBSTANTIAL RISK. A strong possibility, as contrasted with a remote or
significant possibility, that a certain result may occur or that certain
circumstances may exist.



(R.C. §§ 2901.01, 2935.36(E))



§ 130.03  CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENSES.



   As used in this Title:



   (A)   Offenses include misdemeanors of the first, second, third, and
fourth degree, minor misdemeanors, and offenses not specifically classified.



   (B)   Regardless of the penalty that may be imposed, any offense
specifically classified as a misdemeanor is a misdemeanor.



   (C)   Any offense not specifically classified is a misdemeanor if
imprisonment for not more than one year may be imposed as a penalty.



   (D)   Any offense not specifically classified is a minor misdemeanor
if the only penalty that may be imposed is one of the following:



      (1)   For an offense committed prior to January 1, 2004, a
fine not exceeding $100;



      (2)   For an offense committed on or after January 1, 2004, a
fine not exceeding $150, community service under R.C. § 2929.27(D), or a
financial sanction other than a fine under R.C. § 2929.28.



(R.C. § 2901.02)



§ 130.04  COMMON LAW OFFENSES ABROGATED.



   (A)   No conduct constitutes a criminal offense against the
municipality unless it is defined as an offense in this code.



   (B)   An offense is defined when one or more sections of this code
state a positive prohibition or enjoin a specific duty, and provide a penalty
for violation of such prohibition or failure to meet such duty.



   (C)   This section does not affect the power of a court to punish
for contempt or to employ any sanction authorized by law to enforce an order,
civil judgment or decree.



(R.C. § 2901.03)



§ 130.05  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C) or (D) of this
section, sections of this code defining offenses or penalties shall be
strictly construed against the municipality and liberally construed in favor
of the accused.



   (B)   Rules of criminal procedure and sections of this code
providing for criminal procedure shall be construed so as to effect the fair,
impartial, speedy, and sure administration of justice.



   (C)   Any provision of a section of this code that refers to a
previous conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of a section of this
code, the Revised Code  or a division of a section of this code or the
Revised Code shall be construed to also refer to a previous conviction of or
plea of guilty to a substantially equivalent offense under an existing or
former law of this municipality, state, another state, or the United States
or under an existing or former municipal ordinance.



   (D)   Any provision of this code that refers to a section, or to a
division of a section, of this code that defines or specifies a criminal
offense shall be construed to also refer to an existing or former law of this
state, another state, or the United States, to an existing or former
municipal ordinance, or to an existing or former division of any such
existing or former law or ordinance that defines or specifies, or that
defined or specified, a substantially equivalent offense.



(R.C. § 2901.04)



§ 130.06  LIMITATION OF CRIMINAL PROSECUTIONS.



   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in division (A)(2), (A)(3) or
(A)(4) of this section or as otherwise provided in this section, a
prosecution shall be barred unless it is commenced within the following
periods after an offense is committed:



         (a)   For a felony, six years;



         (b)   For a misdemeanor other than a minor misdemeanor,
two years;



         (c)   For a minor misdemeanor, six months.



      (2)   There is no period of limitation for the prosecution of
a violation of R.C. § 2903.01 or R.C. § 2903.02.



      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (B) through
(J) of this section, a prosecution of any of the following offenses shall be
barred unless it is commenced within 20 years after the offense is committed:



         (a)   A violation of R.C. § 2903.03, 2903.04, 2905.01,
2905.32, 2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.21, 2909.02, 2909.22, 2909.23, 2909.24,
2909.26, 2909.27, 2909.28, 2909.29, 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2911.12, or
2917.02, a violation of R.C. § 2903.11 or 2903.12 if the victim is a peace
officer, a violation of R.C. § 2903.13 that is a felony, or a violation of
former R.C. § 2907.12.



         (b)   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or
complicity in committing a violation set forth in division (A)(3)(a) of this
section.



      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (D) to (L) of
this section, a prosecution of a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03 or a
conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in committing a
violation of either section shall be barred unless it is commenced within 25
years after the offense is committed.



   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2) of
this section, if the period of limitation provided in division (A)(1) or
(A)(3) of this section has expired, prosecution shall be commenced for an
offense of which an element is fraud or breach of fiduciary duty within one
year after discovery of the offense either by an aggrieved person or by the
aggrieved person’s legal representative who is not a party to the offense.



      (2)   If the period of limitation provided in division (A)(1)
or (A)(3) of this section has expired, prosecution for a violation of R.C. §
2913.49 shall be commenced within five years after discovery of the offense
either by an aggrieved person or the aggrieved person’s legal
representative who is not a party to the offense.



   (C)   (1)   If the period of limitation provided in division
(A)(1) or (A)(3) of this section has expired, prosecution shall be commenced
for the following offenses during the following specified periods of time:



         (a)   For an offense involving misconduct in office by a
public servant at any time while the accused remains a public servant, or
within two years thereafter;



         (b)   For an offense by a person who is not a public
servant but whose offense is directly related to the misconduct in office of
a public servant, at any time while that public servant remains a public
servant, or within two years thereafter.



      (2)   As used in this division:



         OFFENSE IS DIRECTLY RELATED TO THE MISCONDUCT IN OFFICE OF
A PUBLIC SERVANT. The phrase includes but is not limited to a violation of
R.C. § 101.71, 101.91, 121.61 or 2921.13, 102.03(F) or (H), 2921.02(A),
2921.43(A) or (B), or 3517.13(F) or (G), that is directly related to an
offense involving misconduct in office of a public servant, or a violation of
any municipal ordinance substantially equivalent to those Ohio Revised Code
sections listed in this division (C)(2).



         PUBLIC SERVANT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.01.



   (D)   (1)   If a DNA record made in connection with the criminal
investigation of the commission of a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03
is determined to match another DNA record that is of an identifiable person
and if the time of the determination is later than 25 years after the offense
is committed, prosecution of that person for a violation of the section may
be commenced within five years after the determination is complete.



      (2)   If a DNA record made in connection with the criminal
investigation of the commission of a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03
of the Revised Code is determined to match another DNA record that is of an
identifiable person and if the time of the determination is within 25 years
after the offense is committed, prosecution of that person for a violation of
the section may be commenced within the longer of 25 years after the offense
is committed or five years after the determination is complete.



      (3)   As used in this division, DNA RECORD has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 109.573.



   (E)   An offense is committed when every element of the offense
occurs. In the case of an offense of which an element is a continuing course
of conduct, the period of limitation does not begin to run until such course
of conduct or the accused’s accountability for it terminates, whichever
occurs first.



   (F)   A prosecution is commenced on the date an indictment is
returned or an information filed, or on the date a lawful arrest without a
warrant is made, or on the date a warrant, summons, citation, or other
process is issued, whichever occurs first. A prosecution is not commenced by
the return of an indictment or the filing of an information unless reasonable
diligence is exercised to issue and execute process on the same. A
prosecution is not commenced upon issuance of a warrant, summons, citation,
or other process unless reasonable diligence is exercised to execute the same.



   (G)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time when
the corpus delicti remains undiscovered.



   (H)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time when
the accused purposely avoids prosecution. Proof that the accused departed
this municipality or conceals the accused’s identity or whereabouts is
prima facie evidence of the accused’s purpose to avoid prosecution.



   (I)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time a
prosecution against the accused based on the same conduct is pending in this
state, even though the indictment, information, or process that commenced the
prosecution is quashed or the proceedings on the indictment, information, or
process are set aside or reversed on appeal.



   (J)   The period of limitation for a violation of this Title XIII or
Title XXIX of the Ohio Revised Code that involves a physical or mental wound,
injury, disability, or condition of a nature that reasonably indicates abuse
or neglect of a child under 18 years of age or of a mentally retarded,
developmentally disabled, or physically impaired child under 21 years of age
shall not begin to run until either of the following occurs:



      (1)   The victim of the offense reaches the age of majority.



      (2)   A public children services agency, or a municipal or
county peace officer that is not the parent or guardian of the child, in the
county in which the child resides or in which the abuse or neglect is
occurring or has occurred has been notified that abuse or neglect is known,
suspected, or believed to have occurred.



   (K)   As used in this section, PEACE OFFICER has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 2935.01.



   (L)   The amendments to divisions (A) and (D) of this section apply
to a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03 committed on and after July 16,
2015 and apply to a violation of either of those sections committed prior to
July 16, 2015 if prosecution for that violation was not barred under this
section as it existed on July 15, 2015.



(R.C. § 2901.13)



Statutory reference:



   Limitation for income tax violations, see R.C. § 718.12



§ 130.07  REQUIREMENTS FOR CRIMINAL LIABILITY; VOLUNTARY INTOXICATION.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, a person
is not guilty of an offense unless both of the following apply:



      (1)   The person’s liability is based on conduct that
includes either a voluntary act, or an omission to perform an act or duty
that the person is capable of performing;



      (2)   The person has the requisite degree of culpability for
each element as to which a culpable mental state is specified by the language
defining the offense.



   (B)   When the language defining an offense does not specify any
degree of culpability, and plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict
criminal liability for the conduct described in the section, then culpability
is not required for a person to be guilty of the offense. The fact that one
division of a section plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict liability
for an offense defined in that division does not by itself plainly indicate a
purpose to impose strict criminal liability for an offense defined in other
divisions of the section that do not specify a degree of culpability.



   (C)   (1)   When language defining an element of an offense that
is related to knowledge or intent or to which mens rea could fairly be
applied neither specifies culpability nor plainly indicates a purpose to
impose strict liability, the element of the offense is established only if a
person acts recklessly.



      (2)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not apply to
offenses defined in R.C. Title XLV.



      (3)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not relieve the
prosecution of the burden of proving the culpable mental state required by
any definition incorporated into the offense.



   (D)   Voluntary intoxication may not be taken into consideration in
determining the existence of a mental state that is an element of a criminal
offense.  Voluntary intoxication does not relieve a person of a  duty to
act if failure to act constitutes a criminal offense.  Evidence that a
person was voluntarily intoxicated may be admissible to show whether or not
the person was physically capable of performing the act with which the person
is charged.



   (E)   As used in this section:



      CULPABILITY.  Purpose, knowledge, recklessness, or negligence,
as defined in R.C. § 2901.22.



      INTOXICATION.  Includes but is not limited to intoxication
resulting from the ingestion of alcohol, a drug, or alcohol and a drug.



      INVOLUNTARY ACTS.  Reflexes, convulsions, body movements during
unconsciousness or sleep, and body movements that are not otherwise a product
of the actor’s volition are involuntary acts.



      POSSESSION.  A voluntary act if the possessor knowingly procured
or received the thing possessed, or was aware of the possessor’s control of
the thing possessed for a sufficient time to have ended possession.



(R.C. § 2901.21)



§ 130.08  CULPABLE MENTAL STATES.



   (A)   A person acts purposely when it is the person’s specific
intention to cause a certain result, or, when the gist of the offense is a
prohibition against conduct of a certain nature, regardless of what the
offender intends to accomplish thereby, it is the offender’s specific
intention to engage in conduct of that nature.



   (B)   A person acts knowingly, regardless of purpose, when the
person is aware that the person’s conduct will probably cause a certain
result or will probably be of a certain nature. A person has knowledge of
circumstances when the person is aware that such circumstances probably
exist. When knowledge of the existence of a particular fact is an element of
an offense, such knowledge is established if a person subjectively believes
that there is a high probability of its existence and fails to make inquiry
or acts with a conscious purpose to avoid learning the fact.



   (C)   A person acts recklessly when, with heedless indifference to
the consequences, the person disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk
that the person’s conduct is likely to cause a certain result or is likely
to be of a certain nature. A person is reckless with respect to circumstances
when, with heedless indifference to the consequences, the person disregards a
substantial and unjustifiable risk that such circumstances are likely to
exist.



   (D)   A person acts negligently when, because of a substantial lapse
from due care, the person fails to perceive or avoid a risk that the
person’s conduct may cause a certain result or may be of a certain
nature.  A person is negligent with respect to circumstances when, because
of a substantial lapse from due care, the person fails to perceive or avoid a
risk that such circumstances may exist.



   (E)   When the section defining an offense provides that negligence
suffices to establish an element thereof, then recklessness, knowledge, or
purpose is also sufficient culpability for such element.  When recklessness
suffices to establish an element of an offense, then knowledge or purpose is
also sufficient culpability for such element.  When knowledge suffices to
establish an element of an offense, then purpose is also sufficient
culpability for such element.



(R.C. § 2901.22)



§ 130.09  ORGANIZATIONAL CRIMINAL LIABILITY.



   (A)   An organization may be convicted of an offense under any of
the following circumstances:



      (1)   The offense is a minor misdemeanor committed by an
officer, agent, or employee of the organization acting in its behalf and
within the scope of the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s office or
employment, except that if the section defining the offense designates the
officers, agents, or employees for whose conduct the organization is
accountable or the circumstances under which it is accountable, those
provisions shall apply.



      (2)   A purpose to impose organizational liability plainly
appears in the section defining the offense, and the offense is committed by
an officer, agent, or employee of the organization acting in its behalf and
within the scope of the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s office or
employment, except that if the section defining the offense designates the
officers, agents, or employees for whose conduct the organization is
accountable or the circumstances under which it is accountable, those
provisions shall apply.



      (3)   The offense consists of an omission to discharge a
specific duty imposed by law on the organization.



      (4)   If, acting with the kind of culpability otherwise
required for the commission of the offense, its commission was authorized,
requested, commanded, tolerated, or performed by the board of directors,
trustees, partners, or by a high managerial officer, agent, or employee
acting in behalf of the organization and within the scope of such a board’s
or person’s office or employment.



   (B)   If strict liability is imposed for the commission of an
offense, a purpose to impose organizational liability shall be presumed,
unless the contrary plainly appears.



   (C)   In a prosecution of an organization for an offense other than
one for which strict liability is imposed, it is a defense that the high
managerial officer, agent, or employee having supervisory responsibility over
the subject matter of the offense exercised due diligence to prevent its
commission.  This defense is not available if it plainly appears
inconsistent with the purpose of the section defining the offense.



   (D)   As used in this section, ORGANIZATION means a corporation for
profit or not for profit, partnership, limited partnership, joint venture,
unincorporated nonprofit association, estate, trust, or other commercial or
legal entity.  ORGANIZATION does not include an entity organized as or by a
governmental agency for the execution of a governmental program.



(R.C. § 2901.23)



§ 130.10  PERSONAL ACCOUNTABILITY FOR  ORGANIZATIONAL CONDUCT.



   (A)   An officer, agent, or employee of an organization, as defined
in R.C. § 2901.23, may be prosecuted for an offense committed by such
organization, if he or she acts with the kind of culpability required for the
commission of the offense, and any of the following apply:



      (1)   In the name of the organization or in its behalf, he or
she engages in conduct constituting the offense, or causes another to engage
in such conduct, or tolerates such conduct when it is of a type for which he
or she has direct responsibility;



      (2)   He or she has primary responsibility to discharge a duty
imposed on the organization by law, and such duty is not discharged.



   (B)   When a person is convicted of an offense by reason of this
section, he or she is subject to the same penalty as if he or she had acted
in his or her own behalf.



(R.C. § 2901.24)



§ 130.11  ATTEMPT.



   (A)   No person, purposely or knowingly, and when purpose or
knowledge is sufficient culpability for the commission of an offense, shall
engage in conduct that, if successful, would constitute or result in the
offense.



   (B)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that, in
retrospect, commission of the offense that was the object of the attempt was
either factually or legally impossible under the attendant circumstances, if
that offense could have been committed had the attendant circumstances been
as the actor believed them to be.



   (C)   No person who is convicted of committing a specific offense,
of complicity in the commission of an offense, or of conspiracy to commit an
offense, shall be convicted of an attempt to commit the same offense in
violation of this section.



   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section
that the actor abandoned his or her effort to commit the offense or otherwise
prevented its commission, under circumstances manifesting a complete and
voluntary renunciation of his or her criminal purpose.



   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of an attempt
to commit an offense. An attempt to commit aggravated murder, murder, or an
offense for which the maximum penalty is imprisonment for life is a felony of
the first degree, to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. An attempt to
commit a drug abuse offense for which the penalty is determined by the amount
or number of unit doses of the controlled substance involved in the drug
abuse offense is an offense of the same degree as the drug abuse offense
attempted would be if that drug abuse offense had been committed and had
involved an amount or number of unit doses of the controlled substance that
is within the next lower range of controlled substance amounts than was
involved in the attempt. An attempt to commit any other offense is an offense
of the next lesser degree than the offense attempted. In the case of an
attempt to commit an offense other than a violation of R.C. Chapter 3734 that
is not specifically classified, an attempt is a misdemeanor of the first
degree if the offense attempted is a felony, and a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree if the offense attempted is a misdemeanor. In the case of an attempt
to commit a violation of any provision of R.C. Chapter 3734, other than R.C.
§ 3734.18, that relates to hazardous wastes, an attempt is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. An attempt to commit a minor
misdemeanor, or to engage in conspiracy, is not an offense under this section.



      (2)   In addition to any other sanctions imposed pursuant to
division (E)(1) of this section for an attempt to commit aggravated murder or
murder in violation of division (A) of this section, if the offender used a
motor vehicle as the means to attempt to commit the offense, the court shall
impose upon the offender a class two suspension of the offender's driver's
license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit,
probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege as specified in R.C.
§ 4510.02(A)(2).



      (3)   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to
attempted rape and also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a specification
of the type described in R.C. § 2941.1418, 2941.1419, or 2941.1420, the
offender shall be sentenced to a prison term or term of life imprisonment
pursuant to R.C. § 2971.03.



   (F)   As used in this section:



      DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.



      MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.



(R.C. § 2923.02)



Statutory reference:



   Conspiracy, see R.C. § 2923.01



   Solid and hazardous wastes, see R.C. Chapter 3734



§ 130.12  COMPLICITY.



   (A)   No person, acting with the kind of culpability required for
the commission of an offense, shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Solicit or procure another to commit the offense;



      (2)   Aid or abet another in committing the offense;



      (3)   Conspire with another to commit the offense in violation
of R.C. § 2923.01;



      (4)   Cause an innocent or irresponsible person to commit the
offense.



   (B)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that no person
with whom the accused was in complicity has been convicted as a principal
offender.



   (C)   No person shall be convicted of complicity under this section
unless an offense is actually committed, but a person may be convicted of
complicity in an attempt to commit an offense in violation of R.C. § 2923.02
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



   (D)   If an alleged accomplice of the defendant testifies against
the defendant in a case in which the defendant is charged with complicity in
the commission of or an attempt to commit an offense, an attempt to commit an
offense, or an offense, the court shall charge the jury in accordance with
R.C. § 2923.03(D).



   (E)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section
that, prior to the commission of or attempt to commit the offense, the actor
terminated his or her complicity, under circumstances manifesting a complete
and voluntary renunciation of his or her criminal purpose.



   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of complicity in the
commission of an offense, and shall be prosecuted and punished as if he or
she were a principal offender.  A charge of complicity may be stated in
terms of this section, or in terms of the principal offense.



(R.C. § 2923.03)



Statutory reference:



   Conspiracy, see R.C. § 2923.01



§ 130.13  PRESUMPTION OF INNOCENCE; PROOF OF OFFENSE; AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE.



   (A)   Every person accused of an offense is presumed innocent until
proven guilty beyond a reasonable doubt, and the burden of proof for all
elements of the offense is upon the prosecution. The burden of going forward
with the evidence of an affirmative defense, and the burden of proof by a
preponderance of the evidence, for an affirmative defense, is upon the
accused.



   (B)   (1)   Subject to division (B)(2) of this section, a person
is presumed to have acted in self defense or defense of another when using
defensive force that is intended or likely to cause death or great bodily
harm to another if the person against whom the defensive force is used is in
the process of unlawfully and without privilege to do so entering, or has
unlawfully and without privilege to do so entered, the residence or vehicle
occupied by the person using the defensive force.



      (2)   (a)   The presumption set forth in division (B)(1) of
this section does not apply if the person against whom the defensive force is
used has a right to be in, or is a lawful resident of, the residence or
vehicle.



         (b)   The presumption set forth in division (B)(1) of
this section does not apply if the person who uses the defensive force uses
it while in a residence or vehicle and the person is unlawfully, and without
privilege to be, in that residence or vehicle.



      (3)   The presumption set forth in division (B)(1) of this
section is a rebuttable presumption and may be rebutted by a preponderance of
the evidence.



   (C)   As part of its charge to the jury in a criminal case, the
court shall read the definitions of "reasonable doubt" and "proof beyond a
reasonable doubt", contained in division (D) of this section.



   (D)   As used in this section:



      AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE. An affirmative defense is either of the
following:



         (a)   A defense expressly designated as affirmative;



         (b)   A defense involving an excuse or justification
peculiarly within the knowledge of the accused, on which the accused can
fairly be required to adduce supporting evidence.



      DWELLING. Means a building or conveyance of any kind that has a
roof over it and that is designed to be occupied by people lodging in the
building or conveyance at night, regardless of whether the building or
conveyance is temporary or permanent or is mobile or immobile. As used in
this division, a building or conveyance includes but is not limited to an
attached porch, and a building or conveyance with a roof over it includes but
is not limited to a tent.



      PROOF BEYOND A REASONABLE DOUBT. Proof of such character that an
ordinary person would be willing to rely and act upon it in the most
important of the person's own affairs.



      REASONABLE DOUBT. Reasonable doubt is present when the jurors,
after they have carefully considered and compared all the evidence, cannot
say they are firmly convinced of the truth of the charge. It is a doubt based
on reasonable and common sense. The term is not mere possible doubt, because
everything relating to human affairs or depending on moral evidence is open
to some possible or imaginary doubt.



      RESIDENCE. Means a dwelling in which a person resides either
temporarily or permanently or is visiting as a guest.



      VEHICLE. Means a conveyance of any kind, whether or not
motorized, that is designed to transport people or property.



(R.C. § 2901.05)



§ 130.14  BATTERED WOMAN SYNDROME.



   (A)   The municipality hereby declares that it recognizes both of
the following, in relation to the "battered woman syndrome":  that the
syndrome currently is a matter of commonly accepted scientific knowledge, and
that the subject matter and details of the syndrome are not within the
general understanding or experience of a person who is a member of the
general populace and are not within the field of common knowledge.



   (B)   If a person is charged with an offense involving the use of
force against another and the person, as a defense to the offense charged,
raises the affirmative defense of self-defense, the person may introduce
expert testimony of the "battered woman syndrome" and expert testimony that
the person suffered from that syndrome as evidence to establish the requisite
belief of an imminent danger of death or great bodily harm that is necessary,
as an element of the affirmative defense, to justify the person's use of
force in question.  The introduction of any expert testimony under this
division shall be in accordance with the Ohio Rules of Evidence.



(R.C. § 2901.06)



§ 130.15  DELINQUENCY ADJUDICATIONS DEEMED CONVICTIONS.



   (A)   If a person is alleged to have committed an offense and if the
person previously has been adjudicated a delinquent child or juvenile traffic
offender for a violation of a law or ordinance, except as provided in
division (B) of this section, the adjudication as a delinquent child or as a
juvenile traffic offender is a conviction for a violation of the law for
purposes of determining the offense with which the person should be charged
and, if the person is convicted of or pleads guilty to an offense, the
sentence to be imposed upon the person relative to the conviction or guilty
plea.



   (B)   A previous adjudication of a person as a delinquent child or
juvenile traffic offender for a violation of a law or ordinance is not a
conviction for a violation of the law or ordinance for purposes of
determining whether the person is a repeat violent offender, as defined in
R.C. § 2929.01, or whether the person should be sentenced as a repeat
violent offender under R.C. § 2929.14(B)(2) and R.C. § 2941.149.



(R.C. § 2901.08)



Statutory reference:



   DNA testing of certain delinquent children, see R.C. § 2151.315



§ 130.16  CRIMINAL LAW JURISDICTION.



   (A)   A person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in
this municipality if any of the following occur:



      (1)   The person commits an offense under the laws of this
municipality, any element of which takes place in this municipality;



      (2)   While in this municipality, the person attempts to
commit, or is guilty of complicity in the commission of, an offense in
another jurisdiction, which offense is an offense under both the laws of this
municipality and the other jurisdiction, or, while in this municipality, the
person conspires to commit an offense in another jurisdiction, which offense
is an offense under both the laws of this municipality and the other
jurisdiction, and a substantial overt act in furtherance of the conspiracy is
undertaken in this municipality by the person or another person involved in
the conspiracy, subsequent to the person's entrance into the conspiracy. In
any case in which a person attempts to commit, is guilty of complicity in the
commission of, or conspires to commit an offense in another jurisdiction as
described in this division, the person is subject to criminal prosecution and
punishment in this municipality for the attempt, complicity, or conspiracy,
and for any resulting offense that is committed or completed in the other
jurisdiction;



      (3)   While out of this municipality, the person conspires or
attempts to commit, or is guilty of complicity in the commission of, an
offense in this municipality;



      (4)   While out of this municipality, the person omits to
perform a legal duty imposed by the laws of this municipality, which omission
affects a legitimate interest of the municipality in protecting, governing or
regulating any person, property, thing, transaction, or activity in this
municipality;



      (5)   While out of this municipality, the person unlawfully
takes or retains property and subsequently brings any of the unlawfully taken
or retained property into this municipality;



      (6)   While out of this municipality, the person unlawfully
takes or entices another person and subsequently brings the other person into
this municipality;



      (7)   The person, by means of a computer, computer system,
computer network, telecommunication, telecommunications device,
telecommunications service, or information service, causes or knowingly
permits any writing, data, image or other telecommunication to be
disseminated or transmitted into this municipality in violation of the law of
this state or municipality.



   (B)   In homicide, the element referred to in division (A)(1) of
this section includes the act that causes death, the physical contact that
causes death, the death itself, or any other element that is set forth in the
offense in question. If any part of the body of a homicide victim is found in
this municipality, the death is presumed to have occurred within this
municipality.



   (C)   (1)   This municipality includes the land and water within
its boundaries and the air space above that land and water, with respect to
which this municipality has either exclusive or concurrent legislative
jurisdiction.  Where the boundary between this municipality and another
jurisdiction is disputed, the disputed territory is conclusively presumed to
be within this municipality for purposes of this section.



      (2)   The courts of common pleas of Adams, Athens, Belmont,
Brown, Clermont, Columbiana, Gallia, Hamilton, Jefferson, Lawrence, Meigs,
Monroe, Scioto, and Washington counties have jurisdiction beyond the north or
northwest shore of the Ohio river extending to the opposite shore line,
between the extended boundary lines of any adjacent counties or adjacent
state. Each of those courts of common pleas has concurrent jurisdiction on
the Ohio river with any adjacent court of common pleas that borders on that
river and with any court of Kentucky or of West Virginia that borders on the
Ohio river and that has jurisdiction on the Ohio river under the law of
Kentucky or the law of West Virginia, whichever is applicable, or under
federal law.



   (D)   When an offense is committed under the laws of this
municipality, and it appears beyond a reasonable doubt that the offense or
any element of the offense took place either in this municipality or in
another jurisdiction or jurisdictions, but it cannot reasonably be determined
in which it took place, the offense or element is conclusively presumed to
have taken place in this municipality for purposes of this section.



   (E)   When a person is subject to criminal prosecution and
punishment in this municipality for an offense committed or completed outside
this municipality, the person is subject to all specifications for that
offense that would be applicable if the offense had been committed within
this municipality.



   (F)   Any act, conduct, or element that is a basis of a person being
subject under this section to criminal prosecution and punishment in this
municipality need not be committed personally by the person as long as it is
committed by another person who is in complicity or conspiracy with the
person.



   (G)   This section shall be liberally construed, consistent with
constitutional limitations, to allow this municipality the broadest possible
jurisdiction over offenses and persons committing offenses in, or affecting,
this municipality.



   (H)   For purposes of division (A)(2) of this section, an overt act
is substantial when it is of a character that manifests a purpose on the part
of the actor that the object of the conspiracy should be completed.



   (I)   As used in this section, COMPUTER, COMPUTER SYSTEM, COMPUTER
NETWORK, INFORMATION SERVICE, TELECOMMUNICATION, TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE,
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE, DATA and WRITING have the same meanings as in
R.C. § 2913.01.



(R.C. § 2901.11)



Statutory reference:



   State criminal law jurisdiction, see R.C. § 2901.11



§ 130.17  DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED OR FORFEITED PROPERTY HELD BY POLICE
DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   Safekeeping of property in custody.



      (1)   (a)   Any property that has been lost, abandoned,
stolen, seized pursuant to a search warrant, or otherwise lawfully seized or
forfeited and that is in the custody of the Police Department shall be kept
safely by the Police Department, pending the time it no longer is needed as
evidence or for another lawful purpose, and shall be disposed of pursuant to
this section or R.C. §§ 2981.12 and 2981.13.



         (b)   This section does not apply to the custody and
disposal of any of the following:



            1.   Vehicles subject to forfeiture under R.C.
Title 45, except as provided in division (B)(1)(f) of this section;



            2.   Abandoned junk motor vehicles or other
property of negligible value;



            3.   Property held by a department of
rehabilitation and correction institution that is unclaimed, that does not
have an identified owner, that the owner agrees to dispose of, or that is
identified by the department as having little value;



            4.   Animals taken, and devices used in unlawfully
taking animals, under R.C. § 1531.20;



            5.   Controlled substances sold by a peace officer
in the performance of the officer's official duties under R.C. § 3719.141;



            6.   Property recovered by a township law
enforcement agency under R.C. §§ 505.105 to 505.109;



            7.   Property held and disposed of under an
ordinance of the municipality or under R.C. §§ 737.29 to 737.33, except
that if the municipality has received notice of a citizens' reward program as
provided in division (B)(5) of this section and disposes of property under an
ordinance shall pay 25% of any moneys acquired from any sale or auction to
the citizens' reward program.



      (2)   (a)   The Police Department shall adopt and comply
with a written internal control policy that does all of the following:



            1.   Provides for keeping detailed records as to
the amount of property acquired by the Police Department and the date
property was acquired;



            2.   Provides for keeping detailed records of the
disposition of the property, which shall include but not be limited to both
of the following:



               a.   The manner in which it was disposed,
the date of disposition, detailed financial records concerning any property
sold, and the name of any person who received the property. The record shall
not identify or enable identification of the individual officer who seized
any item of property.



               b.   The general types of expenditures made
with amounts that are gained from the sale of the property and that are
retained by the agency, including the specific amount expended on each
general type of expenditure, except that the policy shall not provide for or
permit the identification of any specific expenditure that is made in an
ongoing investigation.



            3.   Complies with R.C. § 2981.13 if the Police
Department has a Law Enforcement Trust Fund or similar fund created under
that section.



         (b)   The records kept under the internal control policy
shall be open to public inspection during the Police Department’s regular
business hours. The policy adopted under this section is a public record open
for inspection under R.C. § 149.43.



      (3)   The Police Department, with custody of property to be
disposed of under this section or R.C. §§ 2981.12 or 2981.13, shall make a
reasonable effort to locate persons entitled to possession of the property,
to notify them of when and where it may be claimed, and to return the
property to them at the earliest possible time. In the absence of evidence
identifying persons entitled to possession, it is sufficient notice to
advertise in a newspaper of general circulation in the county and to briefly
describe the nature of the property in custody and inviting persons to view
and establish their right to it.



      (4)   As used in this section:



         CITIZENS' REWARD PROGRAM. Has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 9.92.



         LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. Includes correctional institutions.



         TOWNSHIP LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. Means an organized police
department of a township, a township police district, a joint police
district, or the office of a township constable.



(R.C. § 2981.11)



   (B)   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property.



      (1)   Unclaimed or forfeited property in the custody of the
Police Department, other than property described in division (A)(1)(b) of
this section, shall be disposed of by order of any court of record that has
territorial jurisdiction over the municipality, as follows:



         (a)   Drugs shall be disposed of pursuant to R.C. §
3719.11 or placed in the custody of the Secretary of the Treasury of the
United States for disposal or use for medical or scientific purposes under
applicable federal law.



         (b)   Firearms and dangerous ordnance suitable for
police work may be given to a law enforcement agency for that purpose.
Firearms suitable for sporting use or as museum pieces or collectors’ items
may be sold at public auction pursuant to division (B)(2) of this section.
The Police Department may sell other firearms and dangerous ordnance to a
federally licensed firearms dealer in a manner that the court considers
proper. The Police Department shall destroy any firearms or dangerous
ordnance not given to a law enforcement agency or sold or shall send them to
the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation for destruction by
the Bureau.



         (c)   Obscene materials shall be destroyed.



         (d)   Beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol seized from
a person who does not hold a permit issued under R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303
or otherwise forfeited to the state for an offense under R.C. § 4301.45 or
R.C. § 4301.53 shall be sold by the Division of Liquor Control if the
Division determines that it is fit for sale or shall be placed in the custody
of the Investigations Unit in the Ohio Department of Public Safety and be
used for training relating to law enforcement activities. The Ohio Department
of Public Safety, with the assistance of the Division of Liquor Control,
shall adopt rules in accordance with R.C. Chapter 119 to provide for the
distribution to state or local law enforcement agencies upon their request.
If any tax imposed under R.C. Title 43 has not been paid in relation to the
beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol, any moneys acquired from the sale
shall first be used to pay the tax. All other money collected under this
division (B)(1)(d) shall be paid into the State Treasury. Any beer,
intoxicating liquor, or alcohol that the Division determines to be unfit for
sale shall be destroyed.



         (e)   Money received by an inmate of a correctional
institution from an unauthorized source or in an unauthorized manner shall be
returned to the sender, if known, or deposited in the Inmates' Industrial and
Entertainment Fund of the institution if the sender is not known.



         (f)   1.   Any mobile instrumentality forfeited under
R.C. Chapter 2981 may be given to the law enforcement agency that initially
seized the mobile instrumentality for use in performing its duties, if the
agency wants the mobile instrumentality. The agency shall take the mobile
instrumentality subject to any security interest or lien on the mobile
instrumentality.



            2.   Vehicles and vehicle parts forfeited under
R.C. §§ 4549.61 to 4549.63 may be given to a law enforcement agency for use
in performing its duties. Those parts may be incorporated into any other
official vehicle. Parts that do not bear vehicle identification numbers or
derivatives of them may be sold or disposed of as provided by rules of the
Director of Public Safety. Parts from which a vehicle identification number
or derivative of it has been removed, defaced, covered, altered, or destroyed
and that are not suitable for police work or incorporation into an official
vehicle shall be destroyed and sold as junk or scrap.



         (g)   Computers, computer networks, computer systems,
and computer software suitable for police work may be given to a law
enforcement agency for that purpose or disposed of under division (B)(2) of
this section.



         (h)   Money seized in connection with a violation of
R.C. § 2905.32, 2907.21, or 2907.22 shall be deposited in the Victims of
Human Trafficking Fund created by R.C. § 5101.87.



      (2)   Unclaimed or forfeited property that is not described in
division (B)(1) of this section or division (A)(1)(b) of this section, with
court approval, may be used by the law enforcement agency in possession of
it. If it is not used by the agency, it may be sold without appraisal at a
public auction to the highest bidder for cash or disposed of in another
manner that the court considers proper.



      (3)   Except as provided in divisions (B)(1) and (B)(5) of
this section and after compliance with division (B)(4) of this section when
applicable, any moneys acquired from the sale of property disposed of
pursuant to this section shall be placed in the General Revenue Fund of the
state, or the General Fund of the municipality.



      (4)   If the property was in the possession of the Police
Department in relation to a delinquent child proceeding in a juvenile court,
10% of any moneys acquired from the sale of property disposed of under this
section shall be applied to one or more community addiction services
providers, as defined in R.C. § 5119.01. A juvenile court shall not specify
a services provider, except as provided in this division, unless the services
provider is in the same county as the court or in a contiguous county. If no
services provider is located in any of those counties, the juvenile court may
specify a services provider anywhere in Ohio. The remaining 90% of the
proceeds or cash shall be applied as provided in division (B)(3) of this
section.



      (5)   (a)   If the Board of County Commissioners recognizes
a citizens' reward program under R.C. § 9.92, the Board shall notify the
Police Department of the recognition by filing a copy of its resolution
conferring that recognition with the Police Department. When the Board
recognizes a citizens' reward program and the county includes a part, but not
all, of the territory of the municipality, the Board shall so notify the
Police Department of the recognition of the citizens' reward program only if
the county contains the highest percentage of the municipality's population.



         (b)   Upon being so notified, the Police Department
shall pay 25% of any forfeited proceeds or cash derived from each sale of
property disposed of pursuant to this section to the citizens' reward program
for use exclusively to pay rewards. No part of the funds may be used to pay
expenses associated with the program. If a citizens' reward program that
operates in more than one county or in another state in addition to this
state receives funds under this section, the funds shall be used to pay
rewards only for tips and information to law enforcement agencies concerning
offenses committed in the county from which the funds were received.



      (6)   Any property forfeited under R.C. Chapter 2981 not be
used to pay any fine imposed upon a person who is convicted of or pleads
guilty to an underlying criminal offense or a different offense arising out
of the same facts and circumstances.



      (7)   Any moneys acquired from the sale of personal effects,
tools, or other property seized because the personal effects, tools, or other
property were used in the commission of a violation of R.C. § 2905.32,
2907.21, or 2907.22 or derived from the proceeds of the commission of a
violation of R.C. § 2905.32, 2907.21, or 2907.22 and disposed of pursuant to
this division (B) shall be placed in the Victims of Human Trafficking Fund
created by R.C. § 5101.87.



(R.C. § 2981.12)



   (C)   Disposition of contraband, proceeds, or instrumentalities.
Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 2981.13, property ordered forfeited
as contraband, proceeds, or an instrumentality pursuant to R.C. Chapter 2981
shall be disposed of, used, or sold pursuant to division (B) of this section
or R.C. § 2981.12. If the property is to be sold under division (B) of this
section or R.C. § 2981.12, the prosecutor shall cause notice of the proposed
sale to be given in accordance with law.



(R.C. § 2981.13(A))



Statutory reference:



   Forfeiture of property generally, see R.C. Chapter 2981



§ 130.18  IMPOSING SENTENCE FOR MISDEMEANOR.



   (A)   (1)   Unless a mandatory jail term is required to be
imposed by R.C. §§ 1547.99(G), 4510.14(B), or 4511.19(G), or any other
provision of the Revised Code, or any municipal ordinance, a court that
imposes a sentence under this chapter upon an offender for a misdemeanor or
minor misdemeanor has discretion to determine the most effective way to
achieve the purposes and principles of sentencing set forth in § 130.99(B).



      (2)   Unless a specific sanction is required to be imposed or
is precluded from being imposed by the section setting forth an offense or
the penalty for an offense or by any provision of §§ 130.99 or 133.99 of
this Code or R.C. §§ 2929.23 to 2929.28, a court that imposes a sentence
upon an offender for a misdemeanor may impose on the offender any sanction or
combination of sanctions under § 130.99(C) to (G). The court shall not
impose a sentence that imposes an unnecessary burden on local government
resources.



   (B)   (1)   In determining the appropriate sentence for a
misdemeanor, the court shall consider all of the following factors:



         (a)   The nature and circumstances of the offense or
offenses;



         (b)   Whether the circumstances regarding the offender
and the offense or offenses indicate that the offender has a history of
persistent criminal activity and that the offender's character and condition
reveal a substantial risk that the offender will commit another offense;



         (c)   Whether the circumstances regarding the offender
and the offense or offenses indicate that the offender's history, character,
and condition reveal a substantial risk that the offender will be a danger to
others and that the offender's conduct has been characterized by a pattern of
repetitive, compulsive, or aggressive behavior with heedless indifference to
the consequences;



         (d)   Whether the victim's youth, age, disability, or
other factor made the victim particularly vulnerable to the offense or made
the impact of the offense more serious;



         (e)   Whether the offender is likely to commit future
crimes in general, in addition to the circumstances described in divisions
(B)(1)(b) and (c) of this section;



         (f)   Whether the offender has an emotional, mental, or
physical condition that is traceable to the offender’s service in the armed
forces of the United States and that was a contributing factor in the
offender’s commission of the offense or offenses;



         (g)   The offender’s military service record.



      (2)   In determining the appropriate sentence for a
misdemeanor, in addition to complying with division (B)(1) of this section,
the court may consider any other factors that are relevant to achieving the
purposes and principles of sentencing set forth in § 130.99(B).



   (C)   Before imposing a jail term as a sentence for a misdemeanor, a
court shall consider the appropriateness of imposing a community control
sanction or a combination of community control sanctions under § 130.99(D),
(E), (F), and (G). A court may impose the longest jail term authorized under
§ 130.99(C) only upon offenders who commit the worst forms of the offense or
upon offenders whose conduct and response to prior sanctions for prior
offenses demonstrate that the imposition of the longest jail term is
necessary to deter the offender from committing a future crime.



   (D)   (1)   A sentencing court shall consider any relevant oral
or written statement made by the victim, the defendant, the defense attorney,
or the prosecuting authority regarding sentencing for a misdemeanor. This
division does not create any rights to notice other than those rights
authorized by R.C. Chapter 2930.



      (2)   At the time of sentencing for a misdemeanor or as soon
as possible after sentencing, the court shall notify the victim of the
offense of the victim's right to file an application for an award of
reparations pursuant to R.C. §§ 2743.51 to 2743.72.



(R.C. § 2929.22)



§ 130.19  MULTIPLE SENTENCES.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, R.C. §
2929.14(C), or R.C. § 2971.03(D) or (E), a prison term, jail term, or
sentence of imprisonment shall be served concurrently with any other prison
term, jail term, or sentence of imprisonment imposed by a court of this
municipality, the state, another state, or the United States. Except as
provided in division (B)(2) of this section, a jail term or sentence of
imprisonment for misdemeanor shall be served concurrently with a prison term
or sentence of imprisonment for felony served in a state or federal
correctional institution.



   (B)   (1)   A jail term or sentence of imprisonment for a
misdemeanor shall be served consecutively to any other prison term, jail
term, or sentence of imprisonment when the trial court specifies that it is
to be served consecutively or when it is imposed for a misdemeanor violation
of R.C. § 2907.322, 2921.34 or 2923.131.  When consecutive sentences are
imposed for misdemeanors under this division, the term to be served is the
aggregate of the consecutive terms imposed, except that the aggregate term to
be served shall not exceed 18 months.



      (2)   A jail term or sentence of imprisonment imposed for a
misdemeanor violation of R.C. §§ 4510.11, 4510.14, 4510.16, 4510.21, or
4511.19, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, shall be served
consecutively to a prison term that is imposed for a felony violation of R.C.
§§ 2903.06, 2903.07, 2903.08 or 4511.19 or a felony violation of R.C. §
2903.04 involving the operation of a motor vehicle by the offender and that
is served in a state correctional institution when the trial court specifies
that it is to be served consecutively. When consecutive jail terms or
sentences of imprisonment and prison terms are imposed for one or more
misdemeanors and one or more felonies under this division, the term to be
served is the aggregate of the consecutive terms imposed, and the offender
shall serve all terms imposed for a felony before serving any term imposed
for a misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 2929.41)



§ 130.20  APPREHENSION, DETENTION, OR ARREST OF PERSON ON BOND.



   (A)   No person, other than a law enforcement officer, shall
apprehend, detain, or arrest a principal on bond, wherever issued, unless
that person meets all of the following criteria:



      (1)   The person is any of the following:



         (a)   Qualified, licensed, and appointed as a surety
bail bond agent under R.C. §§ 3905.83 through 3905.95;



         (b)   Licensed as a surety bail bond agent by the state
where the bond was written;



         (c)   Licensed as a private investigator under R.C.
Chapter 4749;



         (d)   Licensed as a private investigator by the state
where the bond was written;



         (e)   An off-duty peace officer, as defined in R.C. §
2921.51.



      (2)   The person, prior to apprehending, detaining, or
arresting the principal, has entered into a written contract with the surety
or with a licensed surety bail bond agent appointed by the surety, which
contract sets forth the name of the principal who is to be apprehended,
detained, or arrested. For purposes of this division (A)(2), SURETY has the
same meaning as in R.C. § 3905.83.



      (3)   The person, prior to apprehending, detaining, or
arresting the principal, has notified the local law enforcement agency having
jurisdiction over the area in which such activities will be performed and has
provided any form or identification or other information requested by the law
enforcement agency.



   (B)   No person shall represent the person's self to be a bail
enforcement agent or bounty hunter, or claim any similar title, in this
municipality.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal bail bond
agent practices.



      (1)   A violation of division (A) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of division (A) of
this section, or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (2)   A violation of division (B) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of division (B) of
this section, or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2927.27)



§ 130.21  SELF DEFENSE: LIMITATIONS ON DUTY TO RETREAT PRIOR TO USING FORCE.



   (A)   As used in this section, RESIDENCE and VEHICLE have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 2901.05.



   (B)   For purposes of any section of this code that sets forth a
criminal offense, a person who lawfully is in that person's residence has no
duty to retreat before using force in self defense, defense of another, or
defense of that person's residence, and a person who lawfully is an occupant
of that person's vehicle or who lawfully is an occupant in a vehicle owned by
an immediate family member of the person has no duty to retreat before using
force in self defense or defense of another.



(R.C. § 2901.09)



§ 130.99  PENALTY FOR TITLE XIII.



   (A)   Except where otherwise specifically classified within the body
of the section of a chapter of this title, a violation of such section shall
be deemed a misdemeanor punishable upon conviction by a fine of not more than
$500, imprisonment of not more than six months, or both.



(R.C. § 715.67)



   (B)   Considerations in misdemeanor sentencing.



      (1)   A court that sentences an offender for a misdemeanor or
minor misdemeanor violation of any provision of the Ohio Revised Code, or of
any municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to a misdemeanor or
minor misdemeanor violation of a provision of the Ohio Revised Code, shall be
guided by the overriding purposes of misdemeanor sentencing. The overriding
purposes of misdemeanor sentencing are to protect the public from future
crime by the offender and others and to punish the offender. To achieve those
purposes, the sentencing court shall consider the impact of the offense upon
the victim and the need for changing the offender’s behavior,
rehabilitating the defender, and making restitution to the victim of the
offense, the public, or the victim and the public.



      (2)   A sentence imposed for a misdemeanor or minor
misdemeanor violation of an Ohio Revised Code provision or for a violation of
a municipal ordinance that is subject to division (B)(1) of this section
shall be reasonably calculated to achieve the two overriding purposes of
misdemeanor sentencing set forth in division (B)(1) of this section,
commensurate with and not demeaning to the seriousness of the offender’s
conduct and its impact upon the victim, and consistent with sentences imposed
for similar offenses committed by similar offenders.



      (3)   A court that imposes a sentence upon an offender for a
misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor violation of an Ohio Revised Code provision
or for a violation of a municipal ordinance that is subject to division
(B)(1) of this section shall not base the sentence upon the race, ethnic
background, gender, or religion of the offender.



      (4)   Divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2) of this section shall not
apply to any offense that is disposed of by a traffic violations bureau of
any court pursuant to Traffic Rule 13 and shall not apply to any violation of
any provision of the Ohio Revised Code that is a minor misdemeanor and that
is disposed of without a court appearance. Divisions (B)(1) through (B)(3) of
this section do not affect any penalties established by the municipality for
a violation of its ordinances that are not substantially equivalent to a
misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor violation of a provision of the Ohio Revised
Code.



(R.C. § 2929.21)



   (C)   Misdemeanor jail terms.



      (1)   Except as provided in § 130.18 or 133.99 of this code
or R.C. § 2929.22 or 2929.23 or division (C)(5) or (C)(6) of this section
and unless another term is required or authorized pursuant to law, if the
sentencing court imposing a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor
elects or is required to impose a jail term on the offender pursuant to this
chapter, the court shall impose a definite jail term that shall be one of the
following:



         (a)   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more
than 180 days;



         (b)   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more
than 90 days;



         (c)   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more
than 60 days;



         (d)   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more
than 30 days.



      (2)   (a)   A court that sentences an offender to a jail
term under division (C) of this section may permit the offender to serve the
sentence in intermittent confinement or may authorize a limited release of
the offender as provided in division (E)(2) of this section.  The court
retains jurisdiction over every offender sentenced to jail to modify the jail
sentence imposed at any time, but the court shall not reduce any mandatory
jail term.



         (b)   1.   If a prosecutor, as defined in R.C. §
2935.01, has filed a notice with the court that the prosecutor wants to be
notified about a particular case and if the court is considering modifying
the jail sentence of the offender in that case, the court shall notify the
prosecutor that the court is considering modifying the jail sentence of the
offender in that case. The prosecutor may request a hearing regarding the
court’s consideration of modifying the jail sentence of the offender in
that case, and, if the prosecutor requests a hearing, the court shall notify
the eligible offender of the hearing.



            2.   If the prosecutor requests a hearing
regarding the court’s consideration of modifying the jail sentence of the
offender in that case, the court shall hold the hearing before considering
whether or not to release the offender from the offender’s jail sentence.



      (3)   If a court sentences an offender to a jail term under
division (C) of this section and the court assigns the offender to a county
jail that has established a county jail industry program pursuant to R.C. §
5147.30, the court shall specify, as part of the sentence, whether the
offender may be considered for participation in the program. During the
offender’s term in the county jail, the court retains jurisdiction to
modify its specification regarding the offender’s participation in the
county jail industry program.



      (4)   If a person sentenced to a jail term pursuant to
division (C) of this section, the court may impose as part of the sentence
pursuant to R.C. § 2929.28 a reimbursement sanction, and, if the local
detention facility in which the term is to be served is covered by a policy
adopted pursuant to R.C. § 307.93, 341.14, 341.19, 341.21, 341.23, 753.02,
753.04, 753.16, 2301.56, or 2947.19 and R.C. § 2929.37, both of the
following apply:



         (a)   The court shall specify both of the following as
part of the sentence:



            1.   If the person is presented with an itemized
bill pursuant to R.C. § 2929.37 for payment of the costs of confinement, the
person is required to pay the bill in accordance with that section.



            2.   If the person does not dispute the bill
described in division (C)(4)(a)1. of this section and does not pay the bill
by the times specified in R.C. § 2929.37, the clerk of the court may issue a
certificate of judgment against the person as described in that section.



         (b)   The sentence automatically includes any
certificate of judgment issued as described in division (C)(4)(a)2. of this
section.



      (5)   If an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of R.C. § 4511.19(B), or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, also is convicted of or also pleads guilty to a specification of
the type described in R.C. § 2941.1414 and if the court imposes a jail term
on the offender for the underlying offense, the court shall impose upon the
offender an additional definite jail term of not more than six months. The
additional jail term shall not be reduced pursuant to any provision of the
Ohio Revised Code. The offender shall serve the additional jail term
consecutively to and prior to the jail term imposed for the underlying
offense and consecutively to any other mandatory term imposed in relation to
the offense.



      (6)   (a)   If an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty
to a misdemeanor violation of R.C. § 2907.23, 2907.24, 2907.241, or 2907.25,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and to a specification
of the type described in R.C. § 2941.1421 and if the court imposes a jail
term on the offender for the misdemeanor violation, the court may impose upon
the offender an additional definite jail term as follows:



            1.   Subject to division (C)(6)(a)2. of this
section, an additional definite jail term of not more than 60 days;



            2.   If the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to one or more misdemeanor or felony violations of R.C.
§ 2907.22, 2907.23, 2907.24, 2907.241, or 2907.25, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, and also was convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a specification of the type described in R.C. § 2941.1421 regarding one
or more of those violations, an additional definite jail term of not more
than 120 days.



         (b)   In lieu of imposing an additional definite jail
term under division (C)(6)(a) of this section, the court may directly impose
on the offender a sanction that requires the offender to wear a real-time
processing, continual tracking electronic monitoring device during the period
of time specified by the court. The period of time specified by the court
shall equal the duration of an additional jail term that the court could have
imposed upon the offender under division (C)(6)(a) of this section. A
sanction imposed under this division shall commence on the date specified by
the court, provided that the sanction shall not commence until after the
offender has served the jail term imposed for the misdemeanor violation of
R.C. § 2907.23, 2907.24, 2907.241, or 2907.25, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, and any residential sanction imposed for the
violation under division (E) of this section or R.C. § 2929.26. A sanction
imposed under this division shall be considered to be a community control
sanction for purposes of division (D) or this section or R.C. § 2929.25, and
all provisions of this code and the Ohio Revised Code that pertain to
community control sanctions shall apply to a sanction imposed under this
division, except to the extent that they would by their nature be clearly
inapplicable. The offender shall pay all costs associated with a sanction
imposed under this division, including the cost of the use of the monitoring
device.



      (7)   If an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
misdemeanor violation of R.C. § 2903.13 and also is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a specification of the type described in R.C. § 2941.1423 that
charges that the victim of the violation was a woman whom the offender knew
was pregnant at the time of the violation, the court shall impose on the
offender a mandatory jail term that is a definite term of at least 30 days.



      (8)   If a court sentences an offender to a jail term under
this division (C), the sentencing court retains jurisdiction over the
offender and the jail term. Upon motion of either party or upon the court’s
own motion, the court, in the court’s sole discretion and as the
circumstances warrant, may substitute one or more community control sanctions
under division (E) or (F) of this section for any jail days that are not
mandatory jail days.



(R.C. § 2929.24)



   (D)   Misdemeanor community control sanctions.



      (1)   (a)   Except as provided in §§ 130.18 and 133.99 of
this Code or R.C. §§ 2929.22 and 2929.23 or when a jail term is required by
law, in sentencing an offender for a misdemeanor, other than a minor
misdemeanor, the sentencing court may do either of the following:



            1.   Directly impose a sentence that consists of
one or more community control sanctions authorized by divisions (E), (F), or
(G) of this section. The court may impose any other conditions of release
under a community control sanction that the court considers appropriate. If
the court imposes a jail term upon the offender, the court may impose any
community control sanction or combination of community control sanctions in
addition to the jail term.



            2.   Impose a jail term under division (C) of this
section from the range of jail terms authorized under that division for the
offense, suspend all or a portion of the jail term imposed, and place the
offender under a community control sanction or combination of community
control sanctions authorized under divisions (E), (F), or (G) of this section.



         (b)   The duration of all community control sanctions
imposed upon an offender and in effect for an offender at any time shall not
exceed five years.



         (c)   At sentencing, if a court directly imposes a
community control sanction or combination of community control sanctions
pursuant to division (D)(1)(a)1. of this section, the court shall state the
duration of the community control sanctions imposed and shall notify the
offender that if any of the conditions of the community control sanctions are
violated the court may do any of the following:



            1.   Impose a longer time under the same community
control sanction if the total time under all of the offender’s community
control sanctions does not exceed the five-year limit specified in division
(D)(1)(b) of this section;



            2.   Impose a more restrictive community control
sanction under division (E), (F), or (G) of this section, but the court is
not required to impose any particular sanction or sanctions;



            3.   Impose a definite jail term from the range of
jail terms authorized for the offense under division (C) of this section.



      (2)   If a court sentences an offender to any community
control sanction or combination of community control sanctions pursuant to
division (D)(1)(a)1. of this section, the sentencing court retains
jurisdiction over the offender and the period of community control for the
duration of the period of community control. Upon the motion of either party
or on the court’s own motion, the court, in the court’s sole discretion
and as the circumstances warrant, may modify the community control sanctions
or conditions of release previously imposed, substitute a community control
sanction or condition of release for another community control sanction or
condition of release previously imposed, or impose an additional community
control sanction or condition of release.



      (3)   (a)   If a court sentences an offender to any
community control sanction or combination of community control sanctions
authorized under division (E), (F), or (G) of this section, the court shall
place the offender under the general control and supervision of the court or
of a department of probation in the jurisdiction that serves the court for
purposes of reporting to the court a violation of any of the conditions of
the sanctions imposed. If the offender resides in another jurisdiction and a
department of probation has been established to serve the municipal court or
county court in that jurisdiction, the sentencing court may request the
municipal court or the county court to receive the offender into the general
control and supervision of that department of probation for purposes of
reporting to the sentencing court a violation of any of the conditions of the
sanctions imposed. The sentencing court retains jurisdiction over any
offender whom it sentences for the duration of the sanction or sanctions
imposed.



         (b)   The sentencing court shall require as a condition
of any community control sanction that the offender abide by the law and not
leave the state without the permission of the court or the offender’s
probation officer. In the interests of doing justice, rehabilitating the
offender, and ensuring the offender’s good behavior, the court may impose
additional requirements on the offender. The offender’s compliance with the
additional requirements also shall be a condition of the community control
sanction imposed upon the offender.



      (4)   (a)   If the court imposing sentence upon an offender
sentences the offender to any community control sanction or combination of
community control sanctions authorized under division (E), (F), or (G) of
this section, and the offender violates any of the conditions of the
sanctions, the public or private person or entity that supervises or
administers the program or activity that comprises the sanction shall report
the violation directly to the sentencing court or to the department of
probation or probation officer with general control and supervision over the
offender. If the public or private person or entity reports the violation to
the department of probation or probation officer, the department or officer
shall report the violation to the sentencing court.



         (b)   If an offender violates any condition of a
community control sanction, the sentencing court may impose upon the violator
one or more of the following penalties:



            1.   A longer time under the same community
control sanction if the total time under all of the community control
sanctions imposed on the violator does not exceed the five-year limit
specified in division (D)(1)(b) of this section;



            2.   A more restrictive community control sanction;



            3.   A combination of community control sanctions,
including a jail term.



         (c)   If the court imposes a jail term upon a violator
pursuant to division (D)(4)(b) of this section, the total time spent in jail
for the misdemeanor offense and the violation of a condition of the community
control sanction shall not exceed the maximum jail term available for the
offense for which the sanction that was violated was imposed. The court may
reduce the longer period of time that the violator is required to spend under
the longer sanction or the more restrictive sanction imposed under division
(D)(4)(b) of this section by all or part of the time the violator
successfully spent under the sanction that was initially imposed.



      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if an
offender, for a significant period of time, fulfills the conditions of a
community control sanction imposed pursuant to division (E), (F), or (G) of
this section in an exemplary manner, the court may reduce the period of time
under the community control sanction or impose a less restrictive community
control sanction. Fulfilling the conditions of a community control sanction
does not relieve the offender of a duty to make restitution under division
(G) of this section.



(R.C. § 2929.25)



   (E)   Community residential sanction.



      (1)   Except when a mandatory jail term is required by law,
the court imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a minor
misdemeanor, may impose upon the offender any community residential sanction
or combination of community residential sanctions under this division (E).
Community residential sanctions include, but are not limited to, the
following:



         (a)   A term of up to 180 days in a halfway house or a
term in a halfway house not to exceed the longest jail term available for the
offense, whichever is shorter, if the political subdivision that would have
responsibility for paying the costs of confining the offender in a jail has
entered into a contract with the halfway house for use of the facility for
misdemeanor offenders;



         (b)   If the offender is an eligible offender, as
defined in R.C. § 307.932, a term in a community alternative sentencing
center or district community alternative sentencing center established and
operated in accordance with that section, in the circumstances specified in
that section, with one of the conditions of the sanction being that the
offender successfully complete the portion of the sentence to be served in
the center.



      (2)   A sentence to a community residential sanction under
division (E)(1)(b) of this section shall be in accordance with R.C. §
307.932. In all other cases, the court that sentences an offender to a
community residential sanction under this division (E) may do either or both
of the following:



         (a)   Permit the offender to serve the offender’s
sentence in intermittent confinement, overnight, on weekends or at any other
time or times that will allow the offender to continue at the offender’s
occupation or care for the offender’s family;



         (b)   Authorize the offender to be released so that the
offender may seek or maintain employment, receive education or training,
receive treatment, perform community service, or otherwise fulfill an
obligation imposed by law or by the court. A release pursuant to this
division shall be only for the duration of time that is needed to fulfill the
purpose of the release and for travel that reasonably is necessary to fulfill
the purposes of release.



      (3)   The court may order that a reasonable portion of the
income earned by the offender upon a release pursuant to division (E)(2) of
this section be applied to any financial sanction imposed under division (G)
of this section.



      (4)   No court shall sentence any person to a prison term for
a misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor or to a jail term for a minor misdemeanor.



      (5)   If a court sentences a person who has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor to a community residential sanction as
described in division (E)(1) of this section, at the time of reception and at
other times the person in charge of the operation of the halfway house,
community alternative sentencing center, district community alternative
sentencing center, or other place at which the offender will serve the
residential sanction determines to be appropriate, the person in charge of
the operation of the halfway house, community alternative sentencing center,
district community alternative sentencing center, or other place may cause
the convicted offender to be examined and tested for tuberculosis, HIV
infection, hepatitis, including, but not limited to, hepatitis A, B, and C,
and other contagious diseases. The person in charge of the operation of the
halfway house, community alternative sentencing center, district community
alternative sentencing center, or other place at which the offender will
serve the residential sanction may cause a convicted offender in the halfway
house, community alternative sentencing center, district community
alternative sentencing center, or other place who refuses to be tested or
treated for tuberculosis, HIV infection, hepatitis, including, but not
limited to, hepatitis A, B, and C, or another contagious disease to be tested
and treated involuntarily.



      (6)   The municipality may enter into a contract with a
halfway house for use of the halfway house to house misdemeanor offenders
under a sanction imposed under division (E)(1)(a) of this section.



(R.C. § 2929.26)



   (F)   Nonresidential sanction where jail term is not mandatory.



      (1)   Except when a mandatory jail term is required by law,
the court imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a minor
misdemeanor, may impose upon the offender any nonresidential sanction or
combination of nonresidential sanctions authorized under this division.
Nonresidential sanctions include, but are not limited to, the following:



         (a)   A term of day reporting;



         (b)   A term of house arrest with electronic monitoring
or continuous alcohol monitoring or both electronic monitoring and continuous
alcohol monitoring, a term of electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol
monitoring without house arrest, or a term of house arrest without electronic
monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring;



         (c)   A term of community service of up to 500 hours for
misdemeanor of the first degree or 200 hours for a misdemeanor of the second,
third, or fourth degree;



         (d)   A term in a drug treatment program with a level of
security for the offender as determined necessary by the court;



         (e)   A term of intensive probation supervision;



         (f)   A term of basic probation supervision;



         (g)   A term of monitored time;



         (h)   A term of drug and alcohol use monitoring,
including random drug testing;



         (i)   A curfew term;



         (j)   A requirement that the offender obtain employment;



         (k)   A requirement that the offender obtain education
or training;



         (l)   Provided the court obtains the prior approval of
the victim, a requirement that the offender participate in victim-offender
mediation;



         (m)   If authorized by law, suspension of the
offender’s privilege to operate a motor vehicle, immobilization or
forfeiture of the offender’s motor vehicle, a requirement that the offender
obtain a valid motor vehicle operator’s license, or any other related
sanction;



         (n)   A requirement that the offender obtain counseling
if the offense is a violation of R.C. § 2919.25 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or a violation of R.C. § 2903.13 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance involving a person who was a
family or household member at the time of the violation, if the offender
committed the offense in the vicinity of one or more children who are not
victims of the offense, and if the offender or the victim of the offense is a
parent, guardian, custodian, or person in loco parentis of one or more of
those children. This division does not limit the court in requiring that the
offender obtain counseling for any offense or in any circumstance not
specified in this division.



      (2)   If the court imposes a term of community service
pursuant to division (F)(1)(c) of this section, the offender may request that
the court modify the sentence to authorize the offender to make a reasonable
contribution, as determined by the court, to the general fund of the county,
municipality, or other local entity that provides funding to the court. The
court may grant the request if the offender demonstrates a change in
circumstances from the date the court imposes the sentence or that the
modification would otherwise be in the interests of justice. If the court
grants the request, the offender shall make a reasonable contribution to the
court, and the clerk of the court shall deposit that contribution into the
general fund of the county, municipality, or other local entity that provides
funding to the court. If more than one entity provides funding to the court,
the clerk shall deposit a percentage of the reasonable contribution equal to
the percentage of funding the entity provides to the court in that entity’s
general fund.



      (3)   In addition to the sanctions authorized under division
(F)(1) of this section, the court imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor,
other than a minor misdemeanor, upon an offender who is not required to serve
a mandatory jail term may impose any other sanction that is intended to
discourage the offender or other persons from committing a similar offense if
the sanction is reasonably related to the overriding purposes and principles
of misdemeanor sentencing.



      (4)   The court imposing a sentence for a minor misdemeanor
may impose a term of community service in lieu of all or part of a fine. The
term of community service imposed for a minor misdemeanor shall not exceed 30
hours.  After imposing a term of community service, the court may modify the
sentence to authorize a reasonable contribution, as determined by the court,
to the appropriate general fund as provided in division (F)(2) of this
section.



(R.C. § 2929.27)



   (G)   Financial sanctions.



      (1)   In addition to imposing court costs pursuant to R.C. §
2947.23, the court imposing a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor,
including a minor misdemeanor, may sentence the offender to any financial
sanction or combination of financial sanctions authorized under this division
(G). If the court in its discretion imposes one or more financial sanctions,
the financial sanctions that may be imposed pursuant to this section include
but are not limited to the following:



         (a)   Restitution.



            1.   Unless the misdemeanor offense is a minor
misdemeanor or could be disposed of by the Traffic Violations Bureau serving
the court under Traffic Rule 13, restitution by the offender to the victim of
the offender’s crime or any survivor of the victim, in an amount based upon
the victim’s economic loss. The court may not impose restitution as a
sanction pursuant to this division if the offense is a minor misdemeanor or
could be disposed of by the Traffic Violations Bureau serving the court under
Traffic Rule 13. If the court requires restitution, the court shall order
that the restitution be made to the victim in open court or to the adult
probation department that serves the jurisdiction or the clerk of the court
on behalf of the victim.



            2.   If the court imposes restitution, the court
shall determine the amount of restitution to be paid by the offender. If the
court imposes restitution, the court may base the amount of restitution it
orders on an amount recommended by the victim, the offender, a presentence
investigation report, estimates or receipts indicating the cost of repairing
or replacing property, and other information, provided that the amount the
court orders as restitution shall not exceed the amount of economic loss
suffered by the victim as a direct and proximate result of the commission of
the offense. If the court decides to impose restitution, the court shall hold
an evidentiary hearing on restitution if the offender, victim, or survivor
disputes the amount of restitution. If the court holds an evidentiary
hearing, at the hearing the victim or survivor has the burden to prove by a
preponderance of the evidence the amount of restitution sought from the
offender.



            3.   All restitution payments shall be credited
against any recovery of economic loss in a civil action brought by the victim
or any survivor of the victim against the offender.  No person may introduce
evidence of an award of restitution under this section in a civil action for
purposes of imposing liability against an insurer under R.C. § 3937.18.



            4.   If the court imposes restitution, the court
may order that the offender pay a surcharge, of not more than 5% of the
amount of the restitution otherwise ordered, to the entity responsible for
collecting and processing restitution payments.



            5.   The victim or survivor of the victim may
request that the prosecutor in the case file a motion, or the offender may
file a motion, for modification of the payment terms of any restitution
ordered. If the court grants the motion, it may modify the payment terms as
it determines appropriate.



         (b)   Fines. A fine of the type described in divisions
(G)(1)(b)1. and (G)(1)(b)2. of this section payable to the appropriate entity
as required by law:



            1.   A fine in the following amount:



               a.   For a misdemeanor of the first degree,
not more than $1,000;



               b.   For a misdemeanor of the second degree,
not more than $750;



               c.   For a misdemeanor of the third degree,
not more than $500;



               d.   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree,
not more than $250;



               e.   For a minor misdemeanor, not more than
$150.



            2.   A state fine or cost as defined in R.C. §
2949.111.



         (c)   Reimbursement.



            1.   Reimbursement by the offender of any or all
of the costs of sanctions incurred by the government, including but not
limited to the following:



               a.   All or part of the costs of
implementing any community control sanction, including a supervision fee
under R.C. § 2951.021;



               b.   All or part of the costs of confinement
in a jail or other residential facility, including but not limited to a per
diem fee for room and board, the costs of medical and dental treatment, and
the costs of repairing property damaged by the offender while confined;



               c.   All or part of the cost of purchasing
and using an immobilizing or disabling device, including a certified ignition
interlock device, or a remote alcohol monitoring device that a court orders
an offender to use under R.C. § 4510.13.



            2.   The amount of reimbursement under division
(G)(1)(c)1. of this section shall not exceed the total amount of
reimbursement the offender is able to pay and shall not exceed the actual
cost of the sanctions. The court may collect any amount of reimbursement the
offender is required to pay under that division. If the court does not order
reimbursement under that division, confinement costs may be assessed pursuant
to a repayment policy adopted under R.C. § 2929.37. In addition, the
offender may be required to pay the fees specified in R.C. § 2929.38 in
accordance with that section.



      (2)   (a)   If the court determines a hearing is necessary,
the court may hold a hearing to determine whether the offender is able to pay
the financial sanction imposed pursuant to this division (G) or court costs
or is likely in the future to be able to pay the sanction or costs.



         (b)   If the court determines that the offender is
indigent and unable to pay the financial sanction or court costs, the court
shall consider imposing and may impose a term of community service under
division (F)(1) of this section in lieu of imposing a financial sanction or
court costs. If the court does not determine that the offender is indigent,
the court may impose a term of community service under division (F)(1) of
this section in lieu of or in addition to imposing a financial sanction under
this division (G) and in addition to imposing court costs. The court may
order community service for a minor misdemeanor pursuant to division (F)(4)
of this section in lieu of or in addition to imposing a financial sanction
under this section and in addition to imposing court costs. If a person fails
to pay a financial sanction or court costs, the court may order community
service in lieu of the financial sanction or court costs.



      (3)   (a)   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed
upon the offender pursuant to division (G)(1)(c) of this section to pay the
costs incurred by a county pursuant to any sanction imposed under division
(E), (F), or (G) of this section or in operating a facility used to confine
offenders pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (E) of this section
to the county treasurer. The county treasurer shall deposit the
reimbursements in the county’s General Fund. The county shall use the
amounts deposited in the fund to pay the costs incurred by the county
pursuant to any sanction imposed under division (E), (F), or (G) of this
section or in operating a facility used to confine offenders pursuant to a
sanction imposed under division (E) of this section.



         (b)   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed upon
the offender pursuant to division (G)(1)(c) of this section to pay the costs
incurred by a municipal corporation pursuant to any sanction imposed under
division (E), (F), or (G) of this section or in operating a facility used to
confine offenders pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (E) of this
section to the treasurer of the municipal corporation. The treasurer shall
deposit the reimbursements in the municipal corporation’s General Fund. The
municipal corporation shall use the amounts deposited in the fund to pay the
costs incurred by the municipal corporation pursuant to any sanction imposed
under division (E), (F), or (G) of this section or in operating a facility
used to confine offenders pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (E)
of this section.



         (c)   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed
pursuant to division (G)(1)(c) of this section for the costs incurred by a
private provider pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (E), (F), or
(G) of this section to the provider.



      (4)   In addition to any other fine that is or may be imposed
under this division (G), the court imposing sentence upon an offender for
misdemeanor domestic violence or menacing by stalking may impose a fine of
not less than $70 nor more than $500, which shall be transmitted to the
Treasurer of Ohio to be credited to the address confidentiality program fund
created by R.C. § 111.48.



      (5)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this division
(G)(5), a financial sanction imposed under division (G)(1) of this section is
a judgment in favor of the state or the political subdivision that operates
the court that imposed the financial sanction, and the offender subject to
the financial sanction is the judgment debtor. A financial sanction of
reimbursement imposed pursuant to division (G)(1)(c)1.a. of this section upon
an offender is a judgment in favor of the entity administering the community
control sanction, and the offender subject to the financial sanction is the
judgment debtor. A financial sanction of reimbursement imposed pursuant to
division (G)(1)(c)1.b. of this section upon an offender confined in a jail or
other residential facility is a judgment in favor of the entity operating the
jail or other residential facility, and the offender subject to the financial
sanction is the judgment debtor. A financial sanction of restitution imposed
pursuant to division (G)(1)(a) of this section is an order in favor of the
victim of the offender’s criminal act that can be collected through a
certificate of judgment as described in division (G)(5)(b)1. of this section,
through execution as described in division (G)(5)(b)2. of this section or
through an order as described in division (G)(5)(b)3. of this section and the
offender shall be considered for purposes of the collection as a judgment
debtor.



         (b)   Once a financial sanction is imposed as a judgment
or order under this division, the victim, private provider, state, or
political subdivision may do any of the following:



            1.   Obtain from the clerk of the court in which
the judgment was entered a certificate of judgment that shall be in the same
manner and form as a certificate of judgment issued in a civil action;



            2.   Obtain execution of the judgment or order
through any available procedure, including any of the procedures identified
in R.C. § 2929.18(D)(1) and (D)(2) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.



            3.   Obtain an order for the assignment of wages
of the judgment debtor under R.C. § 1321.33 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.



      (6)   The civil remedies authorized under division (G)(5) of
this section for the collection of the financial sanction supplement, but do
not preclude, enforcement of the criminal sentence.



      (7)   Each court imposing a financial sanction upon an
offender under this division (G) may designate the clerk of the court or
another person to collect the financial sanction. The clerk, or another
person authorized by law or the court to collect the financial sanction may
do the following:



         (a)   Enter into contracts with one or more public
agencies or private vendors for the collection of amounts due under the
sanction. Before entering into a contract for the collection of amounts due
from an offender pursuant to any financial sanction imposed pursuant to this
division (G), a court shall comply with R.C. §§ 307.86 through 307.92.



         (b)   Permit payment of all or any portion of the
sanction in installments, by financial transaction device if the court is a
county court or a municipal court operated by a county, or by any other
reasonable method, in any time, and on any terms that the court considers
just, except that the maximum time permitted for payment shall not exceed
five years. If the court is a county court or a municipal court operated by a
county, the acceptance of payments by any financial transaction device shall
be governed by the policy adopted by the board of county commissioners of the
county pursuant to R.C. § 301.28. If the court is a municipal court not
operated by a county, the clerk may pay any fee associated with processing an
electronic transfer out of public money or may charge the fee to the offender.



         (c)   To defray administrative costs, charge a
reasonable fee to an offender who elects a payment plan rather than a lump
sum payment of any financial sanction.



      (8)   No financial sanction imposed under this division (G)
shall preclude a victim from bringing a civil action against the offender.



(R.C. § 2929.28)



   (H)   Organizational penalties.



      (1)   Regardless of the other penalties provided in this
section, an organization convicted of an offense pursuant to § 130.09 shall
be fined by the court as follows:



         (a)   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more
than $5,000;



         (b)   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more
than $4,000;



         (c)   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more
than $3,000;



         (d)   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more
than $2,000;



         (e)   For a minor misdemeanor, not more than $1,000;



         (f)   For a misdemeanor not specifically classified, not
more than $2,000;



         (g)   For a minor misdemeanor not specifically
classified, not more than $1,000.



      (2)   When an organization is convicted of an offense not
specifically classified, and the section defining the offense or penalty
plainly indicates a purpose to impose the penalty provided for violation upon
organizations, then such penalty shall be imposed in lieu of the penalty
provided in this section.



      (3)   When an organization is convicted of an offense not
specifically classified, and the penalty provided includes a higher fine than
that provided in this section, then the penalty imposed shall be pursuant to
the penalty provided for violation of the section defining the offense.



      (4)   This section does not prevent the imposition of
available civil sanctions against an organization convicted of an offense
pursuant to § 130.09, either in addition to or in lieu of a fine imposed
pursuant to this section.



(R.C. § 2929.31)



Cross-reference:



   Sentencing for sexually oriented offenses; sexual predators;
registration, see § 133.99



Statutory reference:



   Citation issuance and limitations on arrest for minor misdemeanors, see
R.C. § 2935.26



   Crime victim's reparations fund, see R.C. § 2929.32



   Habitual sex offender and sexual predator registration, see R.C.
Chapter 2950



   Reimbursement for costs of confinement, see R.C. §§ 2929.36 et seq.



   Reports to health care licensing boards of criminal offenses, see R.C.
§ 2929.42



CHAPTER 131:  OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY



Section



   131.01   Definitions



   131.02   Arson; determining property value or amount of physical harm



   131.03   Criminal damaging or endangering; vehicular vandalism



   131.04   Criminal mischief



   131.05   Damaging or endangering aircraft or airport operations



   131.06   Criminal trespass; aggravated trespass



   131.07   Tampering with coin machines



   131.08   Theft



   131.09   Unauthorized use of a vehicle



   131.10   Unauthorized use of property, including telecommunication
property and computers; possession of municipal property



   131.11   Passing bad checks



   131.12   Misuse of credit cards



   131.13   Making or using slugs



   131.14   Prima facie evidence of purpose to defraud



   131.15   Tampering with records



   131.16   Securing writings by deception



   131.17   Defrauding creditors



   131.18   Receiving stolen property



   131.19   Value of stolen property



   131.20   Degree of offense when certain property involved



   131.21   Injuring vines, bushes, trees, or crops



   131.22   Detention and arrest of shoplifters and those committing
motion picture piracy; protection of institutional property



   131.23   Insurance fraud; workers' compensation fraud; medicaid fraud



   131.24   Injury to property by hunters



   131.25   Evidence of intent to commit theft of rented property;
evidence of lack of capacity to consent



   131.26   Forgery of identification cards



   131.27   Criminal simulation



   131.28   Personating an officer



   131.29   Trademark counterfeiting



   131.30   Diminishing or interfering with forfeitable property



   131.31   Recording credit card, telephone or Social Security numbers



   131.32   Prosecutions for theft of utilities



   131.33   Motion picture piracy



Statutory reference:



   Cable television service devices, unauthorized sale or possession,
felony, see R.C. § 2913.041



   Deceptive acts or practices in connection with consumer transactions,
see O.A.C. Ch. 109:4-3



   Disrupting public services, felony offense, see R.C. § 2909.04



   E-mail advertisements, civil offenses and felony forgery offense, see
R.C. § 2307.64



   E-mail spam, civil offenses and felony offenses, see R.C. § 2913.421



   Food stamps, illegal use, see R.C. § 2913.46



   Telecommunications: fraud and unlawful use of a device, felony
offenses, see R.C. §§ 2913.05 and 2913.06



   Terrorism involving agricultural products or equipment, see R.C. §
901.511



§ 131.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACTIVE DUTY SERVICE MEMBER. Any member of the armed forces of the
United States performing active duty under Title 10 of the United States Code.



   ANHYDROUS AMMONIA. A compound formed by the combination of two gaseous
elements, nitrogen and hydrogen, in the manner described below. Anhydrous
ammonia is one part nitrogen to three parts hydrogen (NH3). Anhydrous ammonia
by weight is fourteen parts nitrogen to three parts hydrogen, which is
approximately 82% nitrogen to 18% hydrogen.



   ASSISTANCE DOG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 955.011.



   CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE. Any services provided by or through the
facilities of any cable television system or other similar closed circuit
coaxial cable communications system, or any microwave or similar transmission
service used in connection with any cable television system or other similar
closed circuit coaxial cable communications system.



   COIN MACHINE. Any mechanical or electronic device designed to do both
of the following:



      (1)   Receive a coin or bill, or token made for that purpose;



      (2)   In return for the insertion or deposit of a coin, bill,
or token, automatically dispense property, provide a service, or grant a
license.



   COMPUTER. An electronic device that performs logical, arithmetic, and
memory functions by the manipulation of electronic or magnetic impulses. The
term includes but is not limited to all input, output, processing, storage,
computer program, or communication facilities that are connected, or related,
in a computer system or network to an electronic device of that nature.



   COMPUTER CONTAMINANT. Means a computer program that is designed to
modify, damage, destroy, disable, deny or degrade access to, allow
unauthorized access to, functionally impair, record, or transmit information
within a computer, computer system, or computer network without the express
or implied consent of the owner or other person authorized to give consent
and that is of a type or kind described in divisions (1) through (4) of this
definition or of a type or kind similar to a type or kind described in
divisions (1) through (4) of this definition:



      (1)   A group of computer programs commonly known as "viruses"
and "worms" that are self-replicating or self-propagating and that are
designed to contaminate other computer programs, compromise computer
security, consume computer resources, modify, destroy, record, or transmit
data, or disrupt the normal operation of the computer, computer system, or
computer network;



      (2)   A group of computer programs commonly known as "Trojans"
or "Trojan horses" that are not self-replicating or self-propagating and that
are designed to compromise computer security, consume computer resources,
modify, destroy, record, or transmit data, or disrupt the normal operation of
the computer, computer system, or computer network;



      (3)   A group of computer programs commonly known as "zombies"
that are designed to use a computer without the knowledge and consent of the
owner, or other person authorized to give consent, and that are designed to
send large quantities of data to a targeted computer network for the purpose
of degrading the targeted computer's or network's performance, or denying
access through the network to the targeted computer or network, resulting in
what is commonly known as "denial of service" or "distributed denial of
service" attacks;



      (4)   A group of computer programs commonly known as "trap
doors", "back doors", or "root kits" that are designed to bypass standard
authentication software and that are designed to allow access or use of a
computer without the knowledge or consent of the owner, or other person
authorized to give consent.



   COMPUTER HACKING.



      (1)   The term means any of the following:



         (a)   Gaining access or attempting to gain access to all
or part of a computer, computer system, or a computer network without express
or implied authorization with the intent to defraud or with intent to commit
a crime;



         (b)   Misusing computer or network services including
but not limited to mail transfer programs, file transfer programs, proxy
servers, and web servers by performing functions not authorized by the owner
of the computer, computer system, or computer network or other person
authorized to give consent. As used in this division, "misuse of computer and
network services" includes but is not limited to the unauthorized use of any
of the following:



            1.   Mail transfer programs to send mail to
persons other than the authorized users of that computer or computer network;



            2.   File transfer program services or proxy
servers to access other computers, computer systems, or computer networks;



            3.   Web servers to redirect users to other web
pages or web servers.



         (c)   1.   Subject to division (1)(c)2. of this
definition, using a group of computer programs commonly known as "port
scanners" or "probes" to intentionally access any computer, computer system,
or computer network without the permission of the owner of the computer,
computer system, or computer network or other person authorized to give
consent. The group of computer programs referred to in this division includes
but is not limited to those computer programs that use a computer network to
access a computer, computer system, or another computer network to determine
any of the following: the presence or types of computers or computer systems
on a network; the computer network's facilities and capabilities; the
availability of computer or network services; the presence or versions of
computer software including but not limited to operating systems, computer
services, or computer contaminants; the presence of a known computer software
deficiency that can be used to gain unauthorized access to a computer,
computer system, or computer network; or any other information about a
computer, computer system, or computer network not necessary for the normal
and lawful operation of the computer initiating the access.



            2.   The group of computer programs referred to in
division (1)(c)1. of this definition does not include standard computer
software used for the normal operation, administration, management, and test
of a computer, computer system, or computer network including but not limited
to domain name services, mail transfer services, and other operating system
services, computer programs commonly called "ping", "tcpdump", and
"traceroute" and other network monitoring and management computer software,
and computer programs commonly knows as "nslookup" and "whois" and other
systems administration computer software.



         (d)   The intentional use of a computer, computer
system, or a computer network in a manner that exceeds any right or
permission granted by the owner of the computer, computer system, or computer
network or other person authorized to give consent.



      (2)   The term does not include the introduction of a computer
contaminant, as defined in this section, into a computer, computer system,
computer program, or computer network.



   COMPUTER NETWORK. A set of related and remotely-connected computers and
communication facilities that includes more than one computer system that has
the capability to transmit among the connected computers and communication
facilities through the use of computer facilities.



   COMPUTER PROGRAM. An ordered set of data representing coded
instructions or statements that, when executed by a computer, causes the
computer to process data.



   COMPUTER SERVICES. Includes but is not limited to the use of a computer
system, computer network, computer program, data that is prepared for
computer use, or data that is contained within a computer system or computer
network.



   COMPUTER SOFTWARE. Computer programs, procedures, and other
documentation associated with the operation of a computer system.



   COMPUTER SYSTEM. A computer and related devices, whether connected or
unconnected, including but not limited to data input, output, and storage
devices, data communications links, and computer programs and data that make
the system capable of performing specified special purpose data processing
tasks.



   COUNTERFEIT TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. A telecommunications device
that, alone or with another telecommunications device, has been altered,
constructed, manufactured, or programmed to acquire, intercept, receive, or
otherwise facilitate the use of a telecommunications service or information
service without the authority or consent of the provider of the
telecommunications service or information service. The phrase includes but is
not limited to a clone telephone, clone microchip, tumbler telephone, or
tumbler microchip; a wireless scanning device capable of acquiring,
intercepting, receiving, or otherwise facilitating the use of
telecommunications service or information service without immediate
detection; or a device, equipment, hardware, or software designed for, or
capable of, altering or changing the electronic serial number in a wireless
telephone.



   CREATE A SUBSTANTIAL RISK OF SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM TO ANY PERSON.
Includes the creation of a substantial risk of serious physical harm to any
emergency personnel.



   CREDIT CARD. Includes but is not limited to a card, code, device, or
other means of access to a customer's account for the purpose of obtaining
money, property, labor, or services on credit, or for initiating an
electronic fund transfer at a point-of-sale terminal, an automated teller
machine, or a cash dispensing machine. It also includes a county procurement
card issued under R.C. § 301.29.



   DANGEROUS DRUG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.



   DANGEROUS ORDNANCE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2923.11.



   DATA. A representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts, or
instructions that are being or have been prepared in a formalized manner and
that are intended for use in a computer, computer system, or computer network.



   DECEPTION. To knowingly deceive another or cause another to be deceived
by any false or misleading representation, by withholding information, by
preventing another from acquiring information, or by any other conduct, act,
or omission that creates, confirms, or perpetuates a false impression in
another, including a false impression as to law, value, state of mind, or
other objective or subjective fact.



   DEFRAUD. To knowingly obtain, by deception, some benefit for oneself or
another, or to knowingly cause, by deception, some detriment to another.



   DEPRIVE. To do any of the following:



      (1)   To withhold property of another permanently, or for a
period that appropriates a substantial portion of its value or use, or with
purpose to restore it only upon payment of a reward or other consideration;



      (2)   To dispose of property so as to make it unlikely that
the owner will recover it;



      (3)   To accept, use, or appropriate money, property, or
services, with purpose not to give proper consideration in return for the
money, property, or services, and without reasonable justification or excuse
for not giving proper consideration.



   DISABLED ADULT. A person who is 18 years of age or older and has some
impairment of body or mind that makes the person unable to work at any
substantially remunerative employment that the person otherwise would be able
to perform and that will, with reasonable probability, continue for a period
of at least 12 months without any present indication of recovery from the
impairment, or who is 18 years of age or older and has been certified as
permanently and totally disabled by an agency of this state or the United
States that has the function of so classifying persons.



   DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.



   ELDERLY PERSON. A person who is 65 years of age or older.



   ELECTRONIC FUND TRANSFER. Has the same meaning as in 92 Stat. 3728, 15
U.S.C. § 1693a, as amended.



   EMERGENCY PERSONNEL. Means any of the following persons:



      (1)   A peace officer, as defined in R.C. § 2935.01;



      (2)   A member of a fire department or other firefighting
agency of a municipal corporation, township, township fire district, joint
fire district, other political subdivision, or combination of political
subdivisions;



      (3)   A member of a private fire company, as defined in R.C.
§ 9.60, or a volunteer firefighter;



      (4)    A member of a joint ambulance district or joint
emergency medical services district;



      (5)   An emergency medical technician-basic, emergency medical
technician-intermediate, emergency medical technician-paramedic, ambulance
operator, or other member of an emergency medical service that is owned or
operated by a political subdivision or a private entity;



      (6)   The State Fire Marshal, the Chief Deputy State Fire
Marshal, or an assistant state fire marshal;



      (7)   A fire prevention officer of a political subdivision or
an arson, fire, or similar investigator of a political subdivision.



   FEDERALLY-LICENSED FIREARMS DEALER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5502.63.



   FIREARM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2923.11.



   FORGE. To fabricate or create, in whole or in part and by any means,
any spurious writing, or to make, execute, alter, complete, reproduce, or
otherwise purport to authenticate any writing, when the writing in fact is
not authenticated by that conduct.



   GAIN ACCESS. To approach, instruct, communicate with, store data in,
retrieve data from, or otherwise make use of any resources of a computer,
computer system, or computer network, or any cable service or cable system
both as defined in R.C. § 2913.04.



   INFORMATION SERVICE.



      (1)   Subject to division (2) of this definition, the offering
of a capability for generating, acquiring, storing, transforming, processing,
retrieving, utilizing, or making available information via
telecommunications, including but not limited to electronic publishing.



      (2)   The term does not include any use of a capability of a
type described in division (1) of this definition for the management,
control, or operation of a telecommunications system or the management of a
telecommunications service.



   INTERNET. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 341.42.



   MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.



   OCCUPIED STRUCTURE. Means any house, building, outbuilding, watercraft,
aircraft, railroad car, truck, trailer, tent, or other structure, vehicle, or
shelter, or any portion thereof, to which any of the following applies:



      (1)   It is maintained as a permanent or temporary dwelling,
even though it is temporarily unoccupied and whether nor not any person is
actually present;



      (2)   At the time, it is occupied as the permanent or
temporary habitation of any person, whether or not any person is actually
present;



      (3)   At the time, it is specially adapted for the overnight
accommodation of any person, whether or not any person is actually present;



      (4)   At the time, any person is present or likely to be
present in it.



   OWNER. Unless the context requires a different meaning, any person,
other than the actor, who is the owner of, who has possession or control of,
or who has any license or interest in property or services, even though the
ownership, possession, control, license, or interest is unlawful.



   POLICE DOG OR HORSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.321.



   POLITICAL SUBDIVISION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2744.01.



   RENTED PROPERTY. Personal property in which the right of possession and
use of the property is for a short and possibly indeterminate term in return
for consideration; the rentee generally controls the duration of possession
of the property within any applicable minimum or maximum term; and the amount
of consideration is generally determined by the duration of possession of the
property.



   SERVICES. Includes labor, personal services, professional services,
rental services, public utility services including wireless service as
defined in R.C. § 128.01(F)(1), common carrier services, and food, drink,
transportation, entertainment, and cable television services and, for
purposes of R.C. § 2913.04 or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, includes cable services as defined in that section.



   SLUG. An object that, by virtue of its size, shape, composition, or
other quality, is capable of being inserted or deposited in a coin machine as
an improper substitute for a genuine coin, bill, or token made for that
purpose.



   STATE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2744.01.



   TELECOMMUNICATION. The origination, emission, dissemination,
transmission, or reception of data, images, signals, sounds, or other
intelligence or equivalence or intelligence of any nature over any
communications system by any method, including but not limited to a fiber
optic, electronic, magnetic, optical, digital or analog method.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Any instrument, equipment, machine, or other
device that facilitates telecommunication, including but not limited to a
computer, computer network, computer chip, computer circuit, scanner,
telephone, cellular telephone, pager, personal communications device,
transponder, receiver, radio, modem, or device that enables the use of a
modem.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. The providing, allowing, facilitating, or
generating of any form of telecommunication through the use of a
telecommunications device over a telecommunications system.



   THEFT OFFENSE. Any of the following:



      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11,
2911.12, 2911.13, 2911.31, 2911.32, 2913.02, 2913.03, 2913.04, 2913.041,
2913.11, 2913.21, 2913.31, 2913.32, 2913.33, 2913.34, 2913.40, 2913.42,
2913.43, 2913.44, 2913.45, 2913.47, 2913.48, former R.C. § 2913.47 or
2913.48, or R.C. § 2913.51, 2915.05, or 2921.41;



      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance
or law of this or any other state or of the United States substantially
equivalent to any section listed in division (1) of this definition, or a
violation of R.C. § 2913.41, 2913.81 or 2915.06 as it existed prior to July
1, 1996;



      (3)   An offense under an existing or former municipal
ordinance or law of this or any other state or the United States involving
robbery, burglary, breaking and entering, theft, embezzlement, wrongful
conversion, forgery, counterfeiting, deceit, or fraud;



      (4)   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity
in committing any offense under division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.



   UTTER. To issue, publish, transfer, use, put or send into circulation,
deliver, or display.



   WRITING. Any computer software, document, letter, memorandum, note,
paper, plate, data, film, or other thing having in or upon it any written,
type-written, or printed matter, and any token, stamp, seal, credit card,
badge, trademark, label, or other symbol of value, right, privilege, license,
or identification.



(R.C. §§ 2909.01, 2913.01)



§ 131.02  ARSON; DETERMINING PROPERTY VALUE OR AMOUNT OF PHYSICAL HARM.



   (A)   Arson.



      (1)   No person, by means of fire or explosion, shall
knowingly cause or create a substantial risk of physical harm to any property
of another without the other person's consent.



      (2)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of arson. 
Except as otherwise provided in this division, violation of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the value of the property or the amount
of physical harm involved is $1,000 or more, then the violation is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2909.03)



   (B)   Determining property value or amount of physical harm.



      (1)   The following criteria shall be used in determining the
value of property or amount of physical harm involved in a violation of
division (A):



         (a)   If the property is an heirloom, memento,
collector's item, antique, museum piece, manuscript, document, record, or
other thing that is either irreplaceable or is replaceable only on the
expenditure of substantial time, effort, or money, the value of the property
or the amount of physical harm involved is the amount that would compensate
the owner for its loss.



         (b)   If the property is not covered under division
(B)(1)(a) of this section, and the physical harm is such that the property
can be restored substantially to its former condition, the amount of physical
harm involved is the reasonable cost of restoring the property.



         (c)   If the property is not covered under division
(B)(1)(a) of this section, and the physical harm is such that the property
cannot be restored substantially to its former condition, the value of the
property, in the case of personal property, is the cost of replacing the
property with new property of like kind and quality, and in the case of real
property or real property fixtures, is the difference in the fair market
value of the property immediately before and immediately after the offense.



      (2)   As used in this section, FAIR MARKET VALUE has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 2913.61.



      (3)   Prima facie evidence of the value of property, as
provided in R.C. § 2913.61(D), may be used to establish the value of
property pursuant to this section.



(R.C. § 2909.11(B) - (D))



Statutory reference:



   Aggravated arson, felony provisions, see R.C. § 2909.02



   Arson, felony provisions generally, see R.C. § 2909.03



   Convicted arsonist to make restitution to public agency, see R.C. §
2929.71



§ 131.03  CRIMINAL DAMAGING OR ENDANGERING; VEHICULAR VANDALISM.



   (A)   Criminal damaging or endangering.



      (1)   No person shall cause or create a substantial risk of
physical harm to any property of another without the other person's consent:



         (a)   Knowingly, by any means; or



         (b)   Recklessly, by means of fire, explosion, flood,
poison gas, poison, radioactive material, caustic or corrosive material, or
other inherently dangerous agency or substance.



      (2)   Whoever violates this division (A) is guilty of criminal
damaging or endangering, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If violation of
this division (A) creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal
damaging or endangering is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the property
involved in a violation of this division (A) is an aircraft, an aircraft
engine, propeller, appliance, spare part, or any other equipment or implement
used or intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft and if the
violation creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal damaging or
endangering is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the
property involved in a violation of this division (A) is an aircraft, an
aircraft engine, propeller, appliance, spare part, or any other equipment or
implement used or intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft and if
the violation creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person or if
the property involved in a violation of this division (A) is an occupied
aircraft, criminal damaging or endangering is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2909.06)



   (B)   Vehicular vandalism.



      (1)   As used in this division (B):



         ALLEY, STREET, and VEHICLE. Have the same meanings as in
R.C. § 4511.01.



         HIGHWAY. Means any highway as defined in R.C. § 4511.01 or
any lane, road, street, alley, bridge, or overpass.



         VESSEL and WATERS IN THIS STATE. Have the same meanings as
in R.C. § 1547.01.



      (2)   No person shall knowingly, and by any means, drop or
throw any object at, onto, or in the path of any of the following:



         (a)   Any vehicle on a highway;



         (b)   Any boat or vessel on any of the waters in this
state.



      (3)   Whoever violates this division (B) is guilty of
vehicular vandalism. Except as otherwise provided in this division (B)(3),
vehicular vandalism is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation of
this division (B) creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person
or the violation of this division (B) causes serious physical harm to
property, vehicular vandalism is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law. If the violation of this division (B) causes physical harm to any
person or serious physical harm to any person, vehicular vandalism is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2909.09)



Statutory reference:



   Disrupting public services, felony offense, see R.C. § 2909.04



   Railroad grade crossing device vandalism, see R.C. § 2909.101



   Vandalism, felony offense, see R.C. § 2909.05



§ 131.04  CRIMINAL MISCHIEF.



   (A)   No person shall:



      (1)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface,
damage, destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper with the property of another;



      (2)   With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of
property of another, employ a tear gas device, stink bomb, smoke generator,
or other device releasing a substance that is harmful or offensive to persons
exposed, or that tends to cause public alarm;



      (3)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface,
damage, destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper with a bench mark,
triangulation station, boundary marker, or other survey station, monument, or
marker;



      (4)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface,
damage, destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper with any safety device, the
property of another, or the property of the offender when required or placed
for the safety of others, so as to destroy or diminish its effectiveness or
availability for its intended purpose.



      (5)   With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of
the property of another, set a fire on the land of another or place personal
property that has been set on fire on the land of another, which fire or
personal property is outside and apart from any building, other structure, or
personal property that is on that land;



      (6)   Without privilege to do so, and with intent to impair
the functioning of any computer, computer system, computer network, computer
software, or computer program, knowingly do any of the following:



         (a)   In any manner or by any means, including but not
limited to, computer hacking, alter, damage, destroy, or modify a computer,
computer system, computer network, computer software, or computer program or
data contained in a computer, computer system, computer network, computer
software, or computer program;



         (b)   Introduce a computer contaminant into a computer,
computer system, computer network, computer software, or computer program.



   (B)   As used in this section, SAFETY DEVICE means any fire
extinguisher, fire hose, or fire axe, or any fire escape, emergency exit, or
emergency escape equipment, or any life line, life-saving ring, life
preserver, or life boat or raft, or any alarm, light, flare, signal, sign, or
notice intended to warn of danger or emergency, or intended for other safety
purposes, or any guard railing or safety barricade, or any traffic sign or
signal, or any railroad grade crossing sign, signal, or gate, or any first
aid or survival equipment, or any other device, apparatus, or equipment
intended for protecting or preserving the safety of persons or property.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal mischief,
and shall be punished as provided in division (C)(1) or (C)(2) of this
section.



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, criminal
mischief committed in violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4),
or (A)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third degree. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, if the violation of division (A)(1),
(A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5) of this section creates a risk of physical
harm to any person, criminal mischief committed in violation of division
(A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.  If the property involved in the violation of division
(A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5) of this section is an aircraft, an
aircraft engine, propeller, appliance, spare part, fuel, lubricant, hydraulic
fluid, any other equipment, implement, or material used or intended to be
used in the operation of an aircraft, or any cargo carried or intended to be
carried in an aircraft and if the violation creates any risk of physical harm
to any person, or if the aircraft in question is an occupied aircraft,
criminal mischief committed in violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3),
(A)(4), or (A)(5) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, criminal
mischief committed in violation of division (A)(6) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the value of the computer, computer
system, computer network, computer software, computer program, or data
involved in the violation of division (A)(6) of this section or the loss to
the victim resulting from the violation is $1,000 or more, or if the
computer, computer system, computer network, computer software, computer
program, or data involved in the violation of division (A)(6) is used or
intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft and the violation creates
any risk of physical harm to any person, or if the aircraft in question is an
occupied aircraft, criminal mischief committed in violation of division
(A)(6) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.



(R.C. § 2909.07)



§ 131.05  DAMAGING OR ENDANGERING AIRCRAFT OR AIRPORT OPERATIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      AIR GUN.  A hand pistol or rifle that propels its projectile by
means of releasing compressed air, carbon dioxide, or other gas.



      AIRPORT OPERATIONAL SURFACE.  Any surface of land or water that
is developed, posted, or marked so as to give an observer reasonable notice
that the surface is designed and developed for the purpose of storing,
parking, taxiing, or operating aircraft, or any surface of land or water that
is actually being used for any of those purposes.



      FIREARM.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2923.11.



      SPRING-OPERATED GUN.  A hand pistol or rifle that propels a
projectile not less than four or more than five millimeters in diameter by
means of a spring.



   (B)   No person shall do either of the following:



      (1)   Knowingly throw an object at, or drop an object upon,
any moving aircraft.



      (2)   Knowingly shoot with a bow and arrow, or knowingly
discharge a firearm, air gun, or spring-operated gun, at or toward any
aircraft.



   (C)   No person shall knowingly or recklessly shoot with a bow and
arrow, or shall knowingly or recklessly discharge a firearm, air gun, or
spring-operated gun, upon or over any airport operational surface. This
division does not apply to the following:



      (1)   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any other
state or of the United States, or a law enforcement officer, authorized to
discharge firearms and acting within the scope of his or her duties.



      (2)   A person who, with the consent of the owner or operator
of the airport operational surface or the authorized agent of either, is
lawfully engaged in any hunting or sporting activity or is otherwise lawfully
discharging a firearm.



   (D)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
endangering aircraft, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the violation
creates any risk of physical harm to any person, or if the aircraft that is
the subject of the violation is occupied, endangering aircraft is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



   (E)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of
endangering airport operations, a misdemeanor of the second degree.  If the
violation creates a risk of physical harm to any person or substantial risk
of serious harm to any person, endangering airport operations is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.  In addition to any other penalty
or sanction imposed for the violation, the hunting license or permit of a
person who violates division (C) of this section while hunting shall be
suspended or revoked pursuant to R.C. § 1533.68.



(R.C. § 2909.08(A) - (E))



§ 131.06  CRIMINAL TRESPASS; AGGRAVATED TRESPASS.



   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall do any of the
following:



      (1)   Knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of
another;



      (2)   Knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of
another, the use of which is lawfully restricted to certain persons,
purposes, modes, or hours, when the offender knows the offender is in
violation of any such restriction or is reckless in that regard;



      (3)   Recklessly enter or remain on the land or premises of
another, as to which notice against unauthorized access or presence is given
by actual communication to the offender, or in a manner prescribed by law, or
by posting in a manner reasonably calculated to come to the attention of
potential intruders, or by fencing or other enclosure manifestly designed to
restrict access;



      (4)   Being on the land or premises of another, negligently
fail or refuse to leave upon being notified by signage posted in a
conspicuous place or otherwise being notified to do so by the owner or
occupant, or the agent or servant of either.



   (B)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that the land
or premises involved was owned, controlled, or in custody of a public agency.



   (C)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that the
offender was authorized to enter or remain on the land or premises involved,
when the authorization was secured by deception.



   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is
guilty of criminal trespass, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



      (2)   Notwithstanding R.C. § 2929.28, if the person, in
committing the violation of this section, used a snowmobile, off-highway
motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle, the court shall impose a fine of two
times the usual amount imposed for the violation.



      (3)   If an offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section, R.C. § 2911.21 or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and the offender, in
committing each violation, used a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or
all-purpose vehicle, the court, in addition to or independent of all other
penalties imposed for the violation, may impound the certificate of
registration of that snowmobile or off-highway motorcycle or the certificate
of registration and license plate of that all-purpose vehicle for not less
than 60 days. In such a case, R.C. § 4519.47 applies.



   (E)   Notwithstanding any provision of the Ohio Revised Code, if the
offender, in committing the violation of this section, used an all-purpose
vehicle, the Clerk of the Court shall pay the fine imposed pursuant to this
section to the State Recreational Vehicle Fund created by R.C. § 4519.11.



   (F)   As used in this section:



      (1)   ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLE, OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLE, and
SNOWMOBILE have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4519.01.



      (2)   LAND or PREMISES includes any land, building, structure,
or place belonging to, controlled by, or in custody of another, and any
separate enclosure or room, or portion thereof.



(R.C. § 2911.21)



   (G)   Aggravated trespass.



      (1)   No person shall enter or remain on the land or premises
of another with purpose to commit on that land or those premises a
misdemeanor, the elements of which involve causing physical harm to another
person or causing another person to believe that the offender will cause
physical harm to him or her.



      (2)   Whoever violates this division (G) is guilty of
aggravated trespass, a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 2911.211)



   (H)   Criminal trespass on a place of public amusement.



      (1)   As used in this division (H), PLACE OF PUBLIC AMUSEMENT
means a stadium, theater, or other facility, whether licensed or not, at
which a live performance, sporting event, or other activity takes place for
entertainment of the public and to which access is made available to the
public, regardless of whether admission is charged.



      (2)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly
enter or remain on any restricted portion of a place of public amusement and,
as a result of that conduct, interrupt or cause the delay of the live
performance, sporting event, or other activity taking place at the place of
public amusement after a printed written notice has been given as provided in
division (H)(4)(a) of this section that the general public is restricted from
access to that restricted portion of the place of public amusement. A
restricted portion of a place of public amusement may include but is not
limited to a playing field, an athletic surface, or a stage located at the
place of public amusement.



      (3)   An owner or lessee of a place of public amusement, an
agent of the owner or lessee, or a performer or participant at a place of
public amusement may use reasonable force to restrain and remove a person
from a restricted portion of the place of public amusement if the person
enters or remains on the restricted portion of the place of public amusement
and, as a result of that conduct, interrupts or causes the delay of the live
performance, sporting event, or other activity taking place at the place of
public amusement. This division does not provide immunity from criminal
liability for any use of force beyond reasonable force by an owner or lessee
of a place of public amusement, an agent of either the owner or lessee, or a
performer or participant at a place of public amusement.



      (4)   (a)   Notice has been given that the general public
is restricted from access to a portion of a place of public amusement if a
printed written notice of the restricted access has been conspicuously posted
or exhibited at the entrance to that portion of the place of public
amusement. If a printed written notice is posted or exhibited as described in
this division regarding a portion of a place of public amusement, in addition
to that posting or exhibition, notice that the general public is restricted
from access to that portion of the place of public amusement also may be
given, but is not required to be given, by either of the following means:



            1.   By notifying the person personally, either
orally or in writing, that access to that portion of the place of public
amusement is restricted;



            2.   By broadcasting over the public address
system of the place of public amusement an oral warning that access to that
portion of the place of public amusement is restricted.



         (b)   If notice that the general public is restricted
from access to a portion of a place of public amusement is provided by the
posting or exhibition of a printed written notice as described in division
(H)(4)(a) of this section, the municipality, in a criminal prosecution for a
violation of division (H)(2) of this section, is not required to prove that
the defendant received actual notice that the general public is restricted
from access to a portion of a place of public amusement.



      (5)   (a)   Whoever violates division (H)(2) of this
section is guilty of criminal trespass on a place of public amusement, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.



         (b)   In addition to any jail term, fine, or other
sentence, penalty, or sanction it imposes upon the offender pursuant to
division (H)(5)(a) of this section, a court may require an offender who
violates this section to perform not less than 30 and not more than 120 hours
of supervised community service work.



(R.C. § 2911.23)



Cross-reference:



   Violation of protection orders, see § 135.23



§ 131.07  TAMPERING WITH COIN MACHINES.



   (A)   No person, with purpose to commit theft or to defraud, shall
knowingly enter, force an entrance into, tamper with, or insert any part of
an instrument into any coin machine.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of tampering with coin
machines, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the offender previously has
been convicted of a violation of this section or of any theft offense as
defined in R.C. § 2913.01, tampering with coin machines is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2911.32)



§ 131.08  THEFT.



   (A)   No person, with purpose to deprive the owner of property or
services, shall knowingly obtain or exert control over either the property or
services in any of the following ways:



      (1)   Without the consent of the owner or person authorized to
give consent;



      (2)   Beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of
the owner or person authorized to give consent;



      (3)   By deception;



      (4)   By threat;



      (5)   By intimidation.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of theft. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, a violation of this section is petty
theft, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If any of the following criteria
are met, then a violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law:



      (1)   If the value of the property or services is $1,000 or
more;



      (2)   If the property stolen is any of the property listed in
R.C. § 2913.71;



      (3)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person,
disabled adult, active duty service member, or spouse of an active duty
service member;



      (4)   If the property stolen is a firearm or dangerous
ordnance;



      (5)   If the property stolen is a motor vehicle;



      (6)   If the property stolen is any dangerous drug, or if the
offender previously has been convicted of a felony drug abuse offense;



      (7)   If the property stolen is a police dog or horse or an
assistance dog and the offender knows or should know that the property stolen
is a police dog or horse or an assistance dog;



      (8)   If the property stolen is anhydrous ammonia; or



      (9)   If the property stolen is a special purchase article as
defined in R.C. § 4737.04 or is a bulk merchandise container as defined in
R.C. § 4737.012.



   (C)   In addition to the penalties described in division (B) of this
section, if the offender committed the violation by causing a motor vehicle
to leave the premises of an establishment at which gasoline is offered for
retail sale without the offender making full payment for gasoline that was
dispensed into the fuel tank of the motor vehicle or into another container,
the court may do one of the following:



      (1)   Unless division (C)(2) of this section applies, suspend
for not more than six months the offenders driver’s license, probationary
driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, or nonresident operating privilege;



      (2)   If the offender’s driver’s license, probationary
driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, or nonresident operating privilege has previously been suspended
pursuant to division (C)(1) of this section, or any other substantially
equivalent state or local law, impose a class seven suspension of the
offender’s license, permit, or privilege from the range specified in R.C.
§ 4510.02(A)(7), provided that the suspension shall be at least six months;



      (3)   The court, in lieu of suspending the offender’s
driver’s or commercial driver’s license, probationary driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, or nonresident operating privilege pursuant to
division (C)(1) or (C)(2) of this section, instead may require the offender
to perform community service for a number of hours determined by the court.



   (D)   In addition to the penalties described in division (B) of this
section, if the offender committed the violation by stealing rented property
or rental services, the court may order that the offender make restitution
pursuant to R.C. § 2929.18 or R.C. § 2929.28. Restitution may include, but
is not limited to, the cost of repairing or replacing the stolen property, or
the cost of repairing the stolen property and any loss of revenue resulting
from deprivation of the property due to theft of rental services that is less
than or equal to the actual value of the property at the time it was rented.
Evidence of intent to commit theft of rented property or rental services
shall be determined pursuant to the provisions of R.C. § 2913.72.



   (E)   The sentencing court that suspends an offender’s license,
permit, or nonresident operating privilege under division (C) of this section
may grant the offender limited driving privileges during the period of the
suspension in accordance with R.C. Chapter 4510.



(R.C. § 2913.02)



Statutory reference:



   Felony theft provisions, see R.C. § 2913.02(B)



§ 131.09  UNAUTHORIZED USE OF A VEHICLE.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly use or operate an aircraft, motor
vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat, or other motor-propelled vehicle without the
consent of the owner or person authorized to give consent.



   (B)   No person shall knowingly use or operate an aircraft, motor
vehicle, motorboat, or other motor-propelled vehicle without the consent of
the owner or person authorized to give consent, and either remove it from
this state, or keep possession of it for more than 48 hours.



   (C)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this
section:



      (1)   At the time of the alleged offense, the actor, though
mistaken, reasonably believed that he or she was authorized to use or operate
the property.



      (2)   At the time of the alleged offense, the actor reasonably
believed that the owner or person empowered to give consent would authorize
the actor to use or operate the property.



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unauthorized use of
a vehicle.



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (D)(1), a
violation of division (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.  If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled adult
and if the victim incurs a loss as a result of the violation, a violation of
division (A) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.



      (2)   A violation of division (B) of this section is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2913.03)



Statutory reference:



   Theft offense involving a motor vehicle, offender to pay towing and
storage fees, see R.C. § 2913.82



§ 131.10  UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PROPERTY, INCLUDING TELECOMMUNICATION
PROPERTY AND COMPUTERS; POSSESSION OF MUNICIPAL PROPERTY.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly use or operate the property of
another without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give consent.



   (B)   No person, in any manner and by any means, including but not
limited to computer hacking,  shall knowingly gain access to, attempt to
gain access to, or cause access to be gained to any computer, computer
system, computer network, cable service, cable system, telecommunications
device, telecommunications service, or information service without the
consent of, or beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of, the
owner of the computer, computer system, computer network, cable service,
cable system, telecommunications device, telecommunications service, or
information service or other person authorized to give consent.



   (C)   No person shall knowingly gain access to, attempt to gain
access to, cause access to be granted to, or disseminate information gained
from access to the law enforcement automated database system created pursuant
to R.C. § 5503.10 without the consent of, or beyond the scope of the express
or implied consent of, the chair of the Law Enforcement Automated Data System
Steering Committee.



   (D)   No person shall knowingly gain access to, attempt to gain
access to, cause access to be granted to, or disseminate information gained
from access to the Ohio law enforcement gateway established and operated
pursuant to R.C. § 109.57(C)(1) without the consent of, or beyond the scope
of the express or implied consent of, the Superintendent of the Bureau of
Criminal Identification and Investigation.



   (E)   The affirmative defenses contained in R.C. § 2913.03(C) are
affirmative defenses to a charge under this section.



   (F)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of property.  Except as otherwise provided in this
division, unauthorized use of property is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



      (1)   If unauthorized use of property is committed for the
purpose of devising or executing a scheme to defraud or to obtain property or
services, unauthorized use of property is whichever of the following is
applicable:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided below, unauthorized
use of property is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



         (b)   If the value of the property or services or the
loss to the victim is $1,000 or more, it is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



      (2)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or
disabled adult, unauthorized use of property is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.



   (G)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of computer, cable, or telecommunication property, a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



   (H)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of the law enforcement automated database system, a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



   (I)   Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of the Ohio law enforcement gateway, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.



   (J)   As used in this section:



   CABLE OPERATOR means any person or group of persons that does either of
the following:



      (1)   Provides cable service over a cable system and directly
through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in that cable
system;



      (2)   Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any
arrangement, the management and operation of a cable system.



   CABLE SERVICE means any of the following:



      (1)   The one-way transmission to subscribers of video
programming or of information that a cable operator makes available to all
subscribers generally;



      (2)   Subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the
selection or use of video programming or of information that a cable operator
makes available to all subscribers generally, both as described in division
(1) of this definition:



      (3)   Any cable television service.



   CABLE SYSTEM means any facility, consisting of a set of closed
transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control
equipment that is designed to provide cable service that includes video
programming and that is provided to multiple subscribers within a community.
CABLE SYSTEM does not include any of the following:



      (1)   Any facility that serves only to retransmit the
television signals of one or more television broadcast stations;



      (2)   Any facility that serves subscribers without using any
public right-of-way;



      (3)   Any facility of a common carrier that, under 47 U.S.C.
§ 522(7)(c), is excluded from the term “cable system” as defined in 47
U.S.C. § 522(7);



      (4)   Any open video system that complies with 47 U.S.C. §
573;



      (5)   Any facility of any electric utility used solely for
operating its electric utility system.



(R.C. § 2913.04)



   (K)   Possession of municipal property.



      (1)   No person shall, without being authorized, have in his
or her control or possession any equipment, tools, implements or other
property belonging to the municipality.



(R.C. § 5589.12)



      (2)   Whoever violates this division (K) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 5589.99(B))  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Telecommunications: fraud and unlawful use of a device, felony
offenses, see R.C. §§ 2913.05 and 2913.06



§ 131.11  PASSING BAD CHECKS.



   (A)   As used in this section:



   CHECK. Includes any form of debit from a demand deposit account,
including but not limited to any of the following:



      (1)   A check, bill of exchange, draft, order of withdrawal,
or similar negotiable or non-negotiable instrument;



      (2)   An electronic check, electronic transaction, debit card
transaction, check card transaction, substitute check, web check, or any form
of automated clearing house transaction.



   ISSUE A CHECK. Causing any form of debit from a demand deposit account.



   (B)   No person, with purpose to defraud, shall issue or transfer or
cause to be issued or transferred a check or other negotiable instrument,
knowing that it will be dishonored or knowing that a person has ordered or
will order stop payment on the check or other negotiable instrument.



   (C)   For purposes of this section, a person who issues or transfers
a check or other negotiable instrument is presumed to know that it will be
dishonored if either of the following occurs:



      (1)   The drawer has no account with the drawee at the time of
issue or the stated date, whichever is later.



      (2)   The check or other negotiable instrument was properly
refused payment for insufficient funds upon presentment within 30 days after
issue or the stated date, whichever is later, and the liability of the
drawer, indorser, or any party who may be liable thereon is not discharged by
payment or satisfaction within ten days after receiving notice of dishonor.



   (D)   For purposes of this section, a person who issues or transfers
a check, bill of exchange, or other draft is presumed to have the purpose to
defraud if the drawer fails to comply with R.C. § 1349.16 by doing any of
the following when opening a checking account intended for personal, family,
or household purposes at a financial institution:



      (1)   Falsely stating that he or she has not been issued a
valid driver's or commercial driver's license or identification card issued
under R.C. § 4507.50;



      (2)   Furnishing the license or card, or another
identification document that contains false information;



      (3)   Making a false statement with respect to the drawer's
current address or any additional relevant information reasonably required by
the financial institution.



   (E)   In determining the value of the payment for purposes of
division (F) of this section, the court may aggregate all checks and other
negotiable instruments that the offender issued or transferred or caused to
be issued or transferred in violation of division (B) of this section within
a period of 180 consecutive days.



   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of passing bad
checks.  Except as otherwise provided in this division, passing bad checks
is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the check or checks or other
negotiable instrument or instruments are issued or transferred to a single
vendor or single other person for the payment of $1,000 or more, or if the
check or checks or other negotiable instrument or instruments are issued or
transferred to multiple vendors or persons for the payment of $1,500 or more,
passing bad checks is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2913.11)



§ 131.12  MISUSE OF CREDIT CARDS.



   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Practice deception for the purpose of procuring the
issuance of a credit card, when a credit card is issued in actual reliance
thereon;



      (2)   Knowingly buy or sell a credit card from or to a person
other than the issuer.



   (B)   No person, with purpose to defraud, shall do any of the
following:



      (1)   Obtain control over a credit card as security for a debt;



      (2)   Obtain property or services by the use of a credit card,
in one or more transactions, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe
that the card has expired or been revoked, or was obtained, is retained, or
is being used in violation of law;



      (3)   Furnish property or services upon presentation of a
credit card, knowing that the card is being used in violation of law;



      (4)   Represent or cause to be represented to the issuer of a
credit card that property or services have been furnished, knowing that the
representation is false.



   (C)   No person, with purpose to violate this section, shall
receive, possess, control, or dispose of a credit card.



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of misuse of credit
cards.



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3) of this
section, a violation of division (A), (B)(1), or (C) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division or
division (D)(3) of this section, a violation of division (B)(2), (3), or (4)
of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the cumulative
retail value of the property and services involved in one or more violations
of division (B)(2), (3), or (4) of this section which violations involve one
or more credit card accounts and occur within a period of 90 consecutive days
commencing on the date of the first violation, is $1,000 or more, misuse of
credit cards is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (3)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or
disabled adult, and if the offense involves a violation of division (B)(1) or
(B)(2) of this section, misuse of credit cards is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2913.21)



§ 131.13  MAKING OR USING SLUGS.



   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Insert or deposit a slug in a coin machine, with purpose
to defraud;



      (2)   Make, possess, or dispose of a slug, with purpose of
enabling another to defraud by inserting or depositing it in a coin machine.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making or using
slugs, a misdemeanor of the second degree.



(R.C. § 2913.33)



§ 131.14  PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF PURPOSE TO DEFRAUD.



   In a prosecution of a person for a theft offense that alleges that the
person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she was facilitating a
fraud, hired or rented an aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat,
sailboat, camper, trailer, horse, buggy, or other property or equipment, kept
or operated any of the same that has been hired or rented, or engaged
accommodations at a hotel, motel, inn, campground, or other hostelry, it is
prima facie evidence of purpose to defraud if the person did any of the
following:



   (A)   Used deception to induce the rental agency to furnish the
person with the aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat, sailboat,
camper, trailer, horse, buggy, or other property or equipment, or used
deception to induce the hostelry to furnish the person with accommodations;



   (B)   Hired or rented any aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle,
motorboat, sailboat, camper, trailer, horse, buggy, or other property or
equipment, or engaged accommodations, knowing that he or she is without
sufficient means to pay the hire or rental;



   (C)   Absconded without paying the hire or rental;



   (D)   Knowingly failed to pay the hire or rental as required by the
contract of hire or rental, without reasonable excuse for the failure;



   (E)   Knowingly failed to return hired or rented property as
required by the contract of hire or rental, without reasonable excuse for the
failure.



(R.C. § 2913.41)



§ 131.15  TAMPERING WITH RECORDS.



   (A)   No person, knowing that he or she has no privilege to do so,
and with purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she is facilitating a
fraud, shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Falsify, destroy, remove, conceal, alter, deface, or
mutilate any writing, computer software, data, or record;



      (2)   Utter any writing or record, knowing it to have been
tampered with as provided in division (A)(1) of this section.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of tampering with
records.



      (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(3) of this section,
if the offense does not involve data or computer software, tampering with
records is whichever of the following is applicable:



         (a)   If division (B)(1)(b) of this section does not
apply, it is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



         (b)   If the writing or record is a will unrevoked at
the time of the offense, it is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.



      (2)   Except as provided in division (B)(3) of this section,
if the offense involves a violation of division (A) of this section involving
data or computer software, tampering with records is whichever of the
following is applicable:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2)(b)
of this section, it is a misdemeanor of the first degree;



         (b)   If the value of the data or computer software
involved in the offense or the loss to the victim is $1,000 or more or if the
offense is committed for the purpose of devising or executing a scheme to
defraud or to obtain property or services and the value of the property or
services or the loss to the victim is $7,500 or more, it is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (3)   If the writing, data, computer software, or record is
kept by or belongs to a local, state, or federal governmental entity, it is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2913.42)



§ 131.16  SECURING WRITINGS BY DECEPTION.



   (A)   No person, by deception, shall cause another to execute any
writing that disposes of or encumbers property, or by which a pecuniary
obligation is incurred.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of securing writings
by deception.  Except as otherwise provided in this division, securing
writings by deception is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the value of
the property or the obligation involved is $1,000 or more, securing writings
by deception is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.  If
the victim of the offense is an elderly person, disabled adult, active duty
service member, or spouse of an active duty service member, securing writings
by deception is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2913.43)



§ 131.17  DEFRAUDING CREDITORS.



   (A)   No person, with purpose to defraud one or more of his or her
creditors, shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Remove, conceal, destroy, encumber, convey, or otherwise
deal with any of his or her property;



      (2)   Misrepresent or refuse to disclose to a fiduciary
appointed to administer or manage his or her affairs or estate, the
existence, amount, or location of any of his or her property, or any other
information regarding the property which he or she is legally required to
furnish to the fiduciary.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of defrauding
creditors.  Except as otherwise provided in this division, defrauding
creditors is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the value of the
property involved is $1,000 or more, defrauding creditors is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2913.45)



§ 131.18  RECEIVING STOLEN PROPERTY.



   (A)   No person shall receive, retain, or dispose of property of
another knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the property has
been obtained through commission of a theft offense.



   (B)   It is not a defense to a charge of receiving stolen property
in violation of this section that the property was obtained by means other
than through the commission of a theft offense if the property was explicitly
represented to the accused person as being obtained through the commission of
a theft offense.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of receiving stolen
property.  Except as otherwise provided in this division, receiving stolen
property is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If any of the following
criteria are met, then a violation of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law:



      (1)   The value of the property involved is $1,000 or more;



      (2)   The property involved is any of the property listed in
R.C. § 2913.71;



      (3)   The property involved is a firearm or dangerous
ordnance, as defined in R.C. § 2923.11;



      (4)   The property involved is a motor vehicle as defined in
R.C. § 4501.01;



      (5)   The property involved is any dangerous drug, as defined
in R.C. § 4729.01; or



      (6)   The property involved in violation of this section is a
special purchase article as defined in R.C. § 4737.04 or a bulk merchandise
container as defined in R.C. § 4737.012.



(R.C. § 2913.51)



§ 131.19  VALUE OF STOLEN PROPERTY.



   (A)   If more than one item of property or services is involved in a
theft offense or in a violation of R.C. § 1716.14(A) involving a victim who
is an elderly person or disabled adult, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the value of the property or services involved for the
purpose of determining the value as required by R.C. § 2913.61(A) is the
aggregate value of all property or services involved in the offense.



   (B)   (1)   When a series of offenses under R.C. § 2913.02, or a
series of violations of, attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to
violate, or complicity in violations of R.C. § 1716,14(A), R.C. § 2913.02,
2913.03, or 2913.04, R.C. § 2913.21 (B)(1) or (B)(2), or R.C. § 2913.31 or
2913.43 involving a victim who is an elderly person or disabled adult, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, is
committed by the offender in the offender’s same employment, capacity, or
relationship to another, all of those offenses shall be tried as a single
offense.  When a series of offenses under R.C. § 2913.02, or a series of
violations of, attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate, or
complicity in violations of R.C. § 2913.02 or 2913.43 involving a victim who
is an active duty service member or spouse of an active duty service member,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these offenses,
is committed by the offender in the offender’s same employment, capacity,
or relationship to another, all of those offenses shall be tried as a single
offense. The value of the property or services involved in the series of
offenses for the purpose of determining the value as required by R.C. §
2913.61(A) is the aggregate value of all property and services involved in
all offenses in the series.



      (2)   If an offender commits a series of offenses under R.C.
§ 2913.02 that involves a common course of conduct to defraud multiple
victims, all of the offenses may be tried as a single offense.  If an
offender is being tried for the commission of a series of violations of,
attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate, or complicity in
violations of R.C. § 1716.14(A), R.C. § 2913.02, 2913.03, or 2913.04, R.C.
§ 2913.21 (B)(1) or (B)(2), or R.C. § 2913.31 or 2913.43, whether committed
against one victim or more than one victim, involving a victim who is an
elderly person or disabled adult, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance to any of these offenses,  pursuant to a scheme or course of
conduct, all of those offenses may be tried as a single offense.  If an
offender is being tried for the commission of a series of violations of,
attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate, or complicity in
violations of R.C. § 2913.02 or 2913.43, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, whether committed against one
victim or more than one victim, involving a victim who is an active duty
service member or spouse of an active duty service member pursuant to a
scheme or course of conduct, all of those offenses may be tried as a single
offense.  If the offenses are tried as a single offense, the value of the
property or services involved for the purpose of determining the value as
required by R.C. § 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value of all property and
services involved in all of the offenses in the course of conduct.



      (3)   When a series of two or more offenses under R.C. §
2913.40, 2913.48, or 2921.41 is committed by the offender in the offender’s
same employment, capacity, or relationship to another, all of those offenses
may be tried as a single offense.  If the offenses are tried as a single
offense, the value of the property or services involved for the purpose of
determining the value as required by R.C. § 2913.61(A) is the aggregate
value of all property and services involved in all of the offenses in the
series of two or more offenses.



      (4)   In prosecuting a single offense under division (B)(1),
(B)(2) or (B)(3) of this section, it is not necessary to separately allege
and prove each offense in the series.  Rather, it is sufficient to allege
and prove that the offender, within a given span of time, committed one or
more theft offenses or violations of R.C. § 2913.40, 2913.48, or 2921.41 in
the offender’s same employment, capacity, or relationship to another as
described in division (B)(1) or (B)(3) of this section, or committed one or
more theft offenses that involve a common course of conduct to defraud
multiple victims or a scheme or course of conduct as described in division
(B)(2) of this section.  While it is not necessary to separately allege and
prove each offense in the series in order to prosecute a single offense under
division (B)(1), (B)(2), or (B)(3) of this section, it remains necessary in
prosecuting them as a single offense to prove the aggregate value of the
property or services in order to meet the requisite statutory offense level
sought by the prosecution.



   (C)   The following criteria shall be used in determining the value
of property or services involved in a theft offense:



      (1)   The value of an heirloom, memento, collector’s item,
antique, museum piece, manuscript, document, record, or other thing that has
intrinsic worth to its owner and that either is irreplaceable or is
replaceable only on the expenditure of substantial time, effort, or money, is
the amount which would compensate the owner for its loss.



      (2)   The value of personal effects and household goods, and
of materials, supplies, equipment, and fixtures used in the profession,
business, trade, occupation, or avocation of its owner, which property is not
covered under division (C)(1) of this section, and which retains substantial
utility for its purpose regardless of its age or condition, is the cost of
replacing such property with new property of like kind and quality.



      (3)   The value of any real or personal property that is not
covered under division (C)(1) or (2) of this section, and the value of
services, is the fair market value of the property or services.  As used in
this section, FAIR MARKET VALUE is the money consideration which a buyer
would give and a seller would accept for property or services, assuming that
the buyer is willing to buy and the seller is willing to sell, that both are
fully informed as to all facts material to the transaction, and that neither
is under any compulsion to act.



   (D)   Without limitation on the evidence which may be used to
establish the value of property or services involved in a theft offense:



      (1)   When the property involved is personal property held for
sale at wholesale or retail, the price at which the property was held for
sale is prima facie evidence of its value.



      (2)   When the property involved is a security or commodity
traded on an exchange, the closing price or, if there is no closing price,
the asked price, given in the latest marked quotation prior to the offense,
is prima facie evidence of the value of the security or commodity.



      (3)   When the property involved is livestock, poultry, or raw
agricultural products for which a local market price is available, the latest
local market price prior to the offense is prima facie evidence of the value
of the livestock, poultry, or products.



      (4)   When the property involved is a negotiable instrument,
the face value is prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument.



      (5)   When the property involved is a warehouse receipt, bill
of lading, pawn ticket, claim check, or other instrument entitling the holder
or bearer to receive property, the face value or, if there is no face value,
the value of the property covered by the instrument less any payment
necessary to receive the property, is prima facie evidence of the value of
the instrument.



      (6)   When the property involved is a ticket of admission,
ticket for transportation, coupon, token, or other instrument entitling the
holder or bearer to receive property or services, the face value or, if there
is no face value, the value of the property or services which may be received
by the instrument is prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument.



      (7)   When the services involved are gas, electricity, water,
telephone, transportation, shipping, or other services for which the rate is
established by law, the duly established rate is prima facie evidence of the
value of the services.



      (8)   When the services involved are services for which the
rate is not established by law, and the offender has been notified prior to
the offense of the rate for the services, either in writing, or orally, or by
posting in a manner reasonably calculated to come to the attention of
potential offenders, the rate contained in the notice is prima facie evidence
of the value of the services.



(R.C. § 2913.61(B) - (E))



§ 131.20  DEGREE OF OFFENSE WHEN CERTAIN PROPERTY INVOLVED.



   Regardless of the value of the property involved, and regardless of
whether the offender previously has been convicted of a theft offense, a
violation of § 131.08 or § 131.18 is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if the property involved is any of the following:



   (A)   A credit card;



   (B)   A printed form for a check or other negotiable instrument,
that on its face identifies the drawer or maker for whose use it is designed
or identifies the account on which it is to be drawn, and that has not been
executed by the drawer or maker or on which the amount is blank;



   (C)   A motor vehicle identification license plate as prescribed by
R.C. § 4503.22, a temporary license placard or windshield sticker as
prescribed by R.C. § 4503.182, or any comparable license plate, placard, or
sticker as prescribed by the applicable law of another state or the United
States;



   (D)   A blank form for a certificate of title or a manufacturer's or
importer's certificate to a motor vehicle, as prescribed by R.C. § 4505.07;



   (E)   A blank form for any license listed in R.C. § 4507.01.



(R.C. § 2913.71)



§ 131.21  INJURING VINES, BUSHES, TREES, OR CROPS.



   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall recklessly cut
down, destroy, girdle, or otherwise injure a vine, bush, shrub, sapling,
tree, or crop standing or growing on the land of another or upon public land.



   (B)   In addition to the penalty provided in division (C) of this
section, whoever violates this section is liable in treble damages for the
injury caused.



(R.C. § 901.51)



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 901.99(A))



§ 131.22  DETENTION AND ARREST OF SHOPLIFTERS AND THOSE COMMITTING MOTION
PICTURE PIRACY; PROTECTION OF INSTITUTIONAL PROPERTY.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply.



   ARCHIVAL INSTITUTION.  Any public or private building, structure, or
shelter in which are stored historical documents, devices, records,
manuscripts, or items of public interest, which historical materials are
stored to preserve the materials or the information in the materials, to
disseminate the information contained in the materials, or to make the
materials available for public inspection or for inspection by certain
persons who have a particular interest in, use for, or knowledge concerning
the materials.



   AUDIOVISUAL RECORDING FUNCTION and FACILITY. Have the same meaning as
in R.C. § 2913.07.



   MUSEUM.  Any public or private nonprofit institution that is
permanently organized for primarily educational or aesthetic purposes, owns
or borrows objects or items of public interest, and cares for and exhibits to
the public the objects or items.



   PRETRIAL DIVERSION PROGRAM. Means a rehabilitative, educational program
designed to reduce recidivism and promote personal responsibility that is at
least four hours in length and that has been approved by any court in this
state.



   (B)   A merchant, or an employee or agent of a merchant, who has
probable cause to believe that things offered for sale by a mercantile
establishment have been unlawfully taken by a person, may, for the purposes
set forth in division (D) below, detain the person in a reasonable manner for
a reasonable length of time within the mercantile establishment or its
immediate vicinity.



   (C)   Any officer, employee, or agent of a library, museum, or
archival institution may, for the purposes set forth in division (D) below or
for the purpose of conducting a reasonable investigation of a belief that the
person has acted in a manner described in divisions (C)(1) and (2) below,
detain a person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of time
within, or in the immediate vicinity of, the library, museum, or archival
institution, if the officer, employee, or agent has probable cause to believe
that the person has:



      (1)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly moved, defaced,
damaged, destroyed, or otherwise improperly tampered with property owned by
or in the custody of the library, museum, or archival institution; or



      (2)   With purpose to deprive the library, museum, or archival
institution of property owned by it or in its custody, knowingly obtained or
exerted control over the property without the consent of the owner or person
authorized to give consent, beyond the scope of the express or implied
consent of the owner or person authorized to give consent, by deception, or
by threat.



   (D)   An officer, agent, or employee of a library, museum, or
archival institution pursuant to division (C) above or a merchant or an
employee or agent of a merchant pursuant to division (B) above may detain
another person for any of the following purposes:



      (1)   To recover the property that is the subject of the
unlawful taking, criminal mischief, or theft;



      (2)   To cause an arrest to be made by a peace officer;



      (3)   To obtain a warrant of arrest;



      (4)   To offer the person, if the person is suspected of the
unlawful taking, criminal mischief, or theft and notwithstanding any other
provision of this Code or the Ohio Revised Code, an opportunity to complete a
pretrial diversion program and to inform the person of the other legal
remedies available to the library, museum, archival institution, or merchant.



   (E)   The owner or lessee of a facility in which a motion picture is
being shown, or the owner's or lessee's employee or agent, who has probable
cause to believe that a person is or has been operating an audiovisual
recording function of a device in violation of R.C. § 2917.07 may, for the
purpose of causing an arrest to be made by a peace officer or of obtaining an
arrest warrant, detain the person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable
length of time within the facility or its immediate vicinity.



   (F)   The officer, agent, or employee of the library, museum, or
archival institution, the merchant or an employee or agent of a merchant, or
the owner, lessee, employee, or agent of the facility acting under divisions
(B), (C) or (E) above shall not search the person detained, search or seize
any property belonging to the person detained without the person’s consent,
or use undue restraint upon the person detained.



   (G)   Any peace officer may arrest without a warrant any person that
the officer has probable cause to believe has committed any act described in
divisions (C)(1) or (2) above, that the officer has probable cause to believe
has committed an unlawful taking in a mercantile establishment, or that the
officer has reasonable cause to believe has committed an act prohibited by
R.C. § 2913.07.  An arrest under this division shall be made within a
reasonable time after the commission of the act or unlawful taking.



(R.C. § 2935.041)



Statutory reference:



   Arrest without a warrant generally, see R.C. § 2935.03



   Probable cause, see R.C. § 2933.22



§ 131.23  INSURANCE FRAUD; WORKERS' COMPENSATION FRAUD; MEDICAID FRAUD.



   (A)   Insurance fraud.



      (1)   For the purpose of this division (A), the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   DATA.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01 and additionally
includes any other representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts,
or instructions that are being or have been prepared in a formalized manner.



   DECEPTIVE.  Means that a statement, in whole or in part, would cause
another to be deceived because it contains a misleading representation,
withholds information, prevents the acquisition of information, or by any
other conduct, act, or omission creates, confirms, or perpetuates a false
impression, including, but not limited to, a false impression as to law,
value, state of mind, or other objective or subjective fact.



   INSURER.  Means any person that is authorized to engage in the
business of insurance in this state under R.C. Title 39, the Ohio Fair Plan
Underwriting Association created under R.C. § 3929.43, any health insuring
corporation, and any legal entity that is self-insured and provides benefits
to its employees or members.



   POLICY.  Means a policy, certificate, contract, or plan that is issued
by an insurer.



   STATEMENT.  Includes but is not limited to any notice, letter, or
memorandum; proof of loss; bill of lading; receipt for payment; invoice,
account, or other financial statement; estimate of property damage; bill for
services; diagnosis or prognosis; prescription; hospital, medical, or dental
chart or other record; x-ray, photograph, videotape, or movie film; test
result; other evidence of loss, injury, or expense; computer-generated
document; and data in any form.



      (2)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the
person is facilitating a fraud, shall do either of the following:



         (a)   Present to, or cause to be presented to, an
insurer any written or oral statement that is part of, or in support of, an
application for insurance, a claim for payment pursuant to a policy, or a
claim for any other benefit pursuant to a policy, knowing that the statement,
or any part of the statement, is false or deceptive;



         (b)   Assist, aid, abet, solicit, procure, or conspire
with another to prepare or make any written or oral statement that is
intended to be presented to an insurer as part of, or in support of, an
application for insurance, a claim for payment pursuant to a policy, or a
claim for any other benefit pursuant to a policy, knowing that the statement,
or any part of the statement, is false or deceptive.



      (3)   Whoever violates this division (A) is guilty of
insurance fraud.  Except as otherwise provided in this division, insurance
fraud is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the amount of the claim that
is false or deceptive is $1,000 or more, insurance fraud is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (4)   This division (A) shall not be construed to abrogate,
waive, or modify R.C. § 2317.02(A).



(R.C. § 2913.47)



   (B)   Workers' compensation fraud.



      (1)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the
person is facilitating a fraud shall do any of the following:



         (a)   Receive workers' compensation benefits to which
the person is not entitled;



         (b)   Make or present or cause to be made or presented a
false or misleading statement with the purpose to secure payment for goods or
services rendered under R.C. Chapter 4121, 4123, 4127, or 4131 or to secure
workers' compensation benefits;



         (c)   Alter, falsify, destroy, conceal, or remove any
record or document that is necessary to fully establish the validity of any
claim filed with, or necessary to establish the nature and validity of all
goods and services for which reimbursement or payment was received or is
requested from the Bureau of Workers' Compensation, or a self-insuring
employer under R.C. Chapter 4121, 4123, 4127, or 4131;



         (d)   Enter into an agreement or conspiracy to defraud
the Bureau or Workers' Compensation or a self-insuring employer by making or
presenting or causing to be made or presented a false claim for workers'
compensation benefits;



         (e)   Make or present or cause to be made or presented a
false statement concerning manual codes, classification or employees,
payroll, paid compensation, or number of personnel, when information of that
nature is necessary to determine the actual workers' compensation premium or
assessment owed to the Bureau by an employer;



         (f)   Alter, forge, or create a workers' compensation
certificate or falsely show current or correct workers' compensation coverage;



         (g)   Fail to secure or maintain workers' compensation
coverage as required by R.C. Chapter 4123 with the intent to defraud the
Bureau of Workers' Compensation.



      (2)   Whoever violates this division (B) is guilty of
workers’ compensation fraud. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
workers’ compensation fraud is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
value of premiums and assessments unpaid pursuant to actions described in
divisions (B)(1)(e), (B)(1)(f), or (B)(1)(g) of this section, or goods,
services, property, or money stolen is $1,000 or more, workers’
compensation fraud is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (3)   Upon application of the governmental body that conducted
the investigation and prosecution of a violation of this division (B), the
court shall order the person who is convicted of the violation to pay the
governmental body its costs of investigating and prosecuting the case. 
These costs are in addition to any other costs or penalty provided under
federal, state or local law.



      (4)   The remedies and penalties provided in this division (B)
are not exclusive remedies and penalties and do not preclude the use of any
other criminal or civil remedy or penalty for any act that is in violation of
this division (B).



      (5)   For the purpose of this division (B), the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



         CLAIM.  Means any attempt to cause the Bureau of Workers'
Compensation, an independent third party with whom the administrator or an
employer contracts under R.C. § 4121.44, or a self-insuring employer to make
payment or reimbursement for workers' compensation benefits.



         EMPLOYER, EMPLOYEE, and SELF-INSURING EMPLOYER.  Have the
same meanings as in R.C. § 4123.01.



         EMPLOYMENT.  Means participating in any trade, occupation,
business, service, or profession for substantial gainful remuneration.



         FALSE.  Means wholly or partially untrue or deceptive.



         GOODS.  Includes but is not limited to medical supplies,
appliances, rehabilitative equipment, and any other apparatus or furnishing
provided or used in the care, treatment, or rehabilitation of a claimant for
workers' compensation benefits.



         RECORDS.  Means any medical, professional, financial, or
business record relating to the treatment or care of any person, to goods or
services provided to any person, or to rates paid for goods or services
provided to any person, or any record that the administrator of workers'
compensation requires pursuant to rule.



         REMUNERATION.  Includes but is not limited to wages,
commissions, rebates, and any other reward or consideration.



         SERVICES. Includes but is not limited to any service
provided by any health care provider to a claimant for workers' compensation
benefits and any and all services provided by the Bureau as part of workers'
compensation insurance coverage.



         STATEMENT. Includes but is not limited to any oral,
written, electronic, electronic impulse, or magnetic communication notice,
letter, memorandum, receipt for payment, invoice, account, financial
statement, or bill for services; a diagnosis, prognosis, prescription,
hospital, medical, or dental chart or other record; and a computer generated
document.



         WORKERS' COMPENSATION BENEFITS.  Means any compensation or
benefits payable under R.C. Chapter 4121, 4123, 4127, or 4131.



(R.C. § 2913.48)



   (C)   Medicaid fraud.



      (1)   No person shall knowingly make or cause to be made a
false or misleading statement or representation for use in obtaining
reimbursement from the Medicaid program.



      (2)   No person, with purpose to commit fraud or knowing that
the person is facilitating a fraud, shall do either of the following:



         (a)   Contrary to the terms of the person’s provider
agreement, charge, solicit, accept or receive for goods or services that the
person provides under the Medicaid program any property, money or other
consideration in addition to the amount of reimbursement under the Medicaid
program and the person’s provider agreement for the goods or services and
any cost-sharing expenses authorized by R.C. § 5162.20 or rules adopted by
the Medicaid Director regarding the Medicaid program.



         (b)   Solicit, offer or receive any remuneration, other
than any cost-sharing expenses authorized by R.C. § 5162.20 or rules adopted
by the Medicaid Director regarding the Medicaid program, in cash or in kind,
including but not limited to a kickback or rebate, in connection with the
furnishing of goods or services for which whole or partial reimbursement is
or may be made under the Medicaid program.



      (3)   No person, having submitted a claim for or provided
goods or services under the Medicaid program, shall do either of the
following for a period of at least six years after a reimbursement pursuant
to that claim, or a reimbursement for those goods or services, is received
under the Medicaid program:



         (a)   Knowingly alter, falsify, destroy, conceal or
remove any records that are necessary to fully disclose the nature of all
goods or services for which the claim was submitted, or for which
reimbursement was received, by the person; or



         (b)   Knowingly alter, falsify, destroy, conceal or
remove any records that are necessary to disclose fully all income and
expenditures upon which rates of reimbursements were based for the person.



      (4)   Whoever violates this division (C) is guilty of Medicaid
fraud. Except as otherwise provided in this division, Medicaid fraud is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the property, services or
funds obtained in violation of this section is $1,000 or more, Medicaid fraud
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate State law.



      (5)   Upon application of the governmental agency, office or
other entity that conducted the investigation and prosecution in a case under
this section, the court shall order any person who is convicted of a
violation of this section for receiving any reimbursement for furnishing
goods or services under the Medicaid program to which the person is not
entitled to pay to the applicant its cost of investigating and prosecuting
the case. The costs of investigation and prosecution that a defendant is
ordered to pay pursuant to this division shall be in addition to any other
penalties for the receipt of that reimbursement that are provided in this
section, R.C. § 2913.40 or 5164.35, or any other provision of law.



      (6)   The provisions of this section are not intended to be
exclusive remedies and do not preclude the use of any other criminal or civil
remedy for any act that is in violation of this section.



      (7)   As used in this division (C):



         PROVIDER. Means any person who has signed a provider
agreement with the Department of Medicaid to provide goods or services
pursuant to the Medicaid program or any person who has signed an agreement
with a party to such a provider agreement under which the person agrees to
provide goods or services that are reimbursable under the Medicaid program.



         PROVIDER AGREEMENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5164.01.



         RECIPIENT. Means any individual who receives goods or
services from a provider under the Medicaid program.



         RECORDS. Means any medical, professional, financial or
business records relating to the treatment or care of any recipient, to goods
or services provided to any recipient, or to rates paid for goods or services
provided to any recipient, and any records that are required by the rules of
the Medicaid Director to be kept for the Medicaid program.



         STATEMENT or REPRESENTA-TION. Means any oral, written,
electronic, electronic impulse or magnetic communication that is used to
identify an item of goods or a service for which reimbursement may be made
under the Medicaid program or that states income and expense and is or may be
used to determine a rate of reimbursement under the Medicaid program.



(R.C. § 2913.40)



   (D)   Medicaid eligibility fraud.



      (1)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following in an
application for enrollment in the Medicaid program or in a document that
requires a disclosure of assets for the purpose of determining eligibility
for the Medicaid program:



         (a)   Make or cause to be made a false or misleading
statement;



         (b)   Conceal an interest in property;



         (c)   1.   Except as provided in division (D)(1)(c)2.
of this section, fail to disclose a transfer of property that occurred during
the period beginning 36 months before submission of the application or
document and ending on the date the application or document was submitted;



            2.   Fail to disclose a transfer of property that
occurred during the period beginning 60 months before submission of the
application or document and ending on the date the application or document
was submitted and that was made to an irrevocable trust a portion of which is
not distributable to the applicant for or recipient of Medicaid or to a
revocable trust.



      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates this division (D) is guilty of
Medicaid eligibility fraud. Except as otherwise provided in this division, a
violation of this division (D) is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
value of the Medicaid services paid as a result of the violation is $1,000 or
more, a violation of this division (D) is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



         (b)   In addition to imposing a sentence under division
(D)(2)(a) of this section, the court shall order that a person who is guilty
of Medicaid eligibility fraud make restitution in the full amount of any
Medicaid services paid on behalf of an applicant for or recipient of Medicaid
for which the applicant or recipient was not eligible, plus interest at the
rate applicable to judgments on unreimbursed amounts from the date on which
the Medicaid services were paid to the date on which restitution is made.



         (c)   The remedies and penalties provided in this
division (D) are not exclusive and do not preclude the use of any other
criminal or civil remedy for any act that is in violation of this division
(D).



      (3)   This division (D) does not apply to a person who fully
disclosed in an application for Medicaid or in a document that requires a
disclosure of assets for the purpose of determining eligibility for Medicaid
all of the interests in property of the applicant for or recipient of
Medicaid benefits, all transfers of property by the applicant for or
recipient of Medicaid benefits, and the circumstances of all those transfers.



      (4)   Any amounts of Medicaid services recovered as
restitution under this division (D) and any interest on those amounts shall
be credited to the general revenue fund, and any applicable federal share
shall be returned to the appropriate agency or department of the United
States.



      (5)   For the purpose of this division (D), the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



         MEDICAID SERVICES. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5164.01.



         PROPERTY. Means any real or personal property or other
asset in which a person has any legal title or interest.



(R.C. § 2913.401)



§ 131.24  INJURY TO PROPERTY BY HUNTERS.



   (A)   No person in the act of hunting, pursuing, taking, or killing
a wild animal shall act in a negligent, careless, or reckless manner so as to
injure property.



(R.C. § 1533.171(A))



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.



(R.C. § 1533.99(C))



Statutory reference:



   Violation, license revocation, see R.C. § 1533.171(B) – (E)



§ 131.25  EVIDENCE OF INTENT TO COMMIT  THEFT OF RENTED PROPERTY; EVIDENCE
OF LACK OF CAPACITY TO CONSENT.



   (A)   Evidence of intent to commit theft of rented property.



      (1)   As used in this division (A):



         RENTER. Means a person who owns rented property.



         RENTEE. Means a person who pays consideration to a renter
for the use of rented property.



      (2)   Each of the following shall be considered evidence of
intent to commit theft of rented property or rental services:



         (a)   At the time of entering into the rental contract,
the rentee presented the renter with identification that was materially
false, fictitious, or not current with respect to name, address, place of
employment, or other relevant information.



         (b)   After receiving a notice demanding the return of
the rented property as provided in division (A)(3) of this section, the
rentee neither returned the rented property nor made arrangements acceptable
with the renter to return the rented property.



      (3)   To establish that a rentee has an intent to commit theft
of rented property or rental services under division (A)(2)(b) above, a
renter may issue a notice to a rentee demanding the return of the rented
property. The renter shall mail the notice by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the rentee at the address the rentee gave when the rental
contract was executed, or to the rentee at the last address the rentee or the
rentee's agent furnished in writing to the renter.



      (4)   A demand for the return of the rented property is not a
prerequisite for the prosecution of a rentee for theft of rented property or
rental services. The evidence specified in division (A)(2) above does not
constitute the only evidence that may be considered as evidence of intent to
commit theft of rented property or rental services.



(R.C. § 2913.72)



   (B)   Evidence of lack of capacity to consent.



      (1)   In a prosecution for any alleged violation of § 131.08
through 131.20, 131.23, 131.25 through 131.29, or 132.11, if the lack of
consent of the victim is an element of the provision that allegedly was
violated, evidence that, at the time of the alleged violation, the victim
lacked the capacity to give consent is admissible to show that the victim did
not give consent.



      (2)   As used in this section, LACKS THE CAPACITY TO CONSENT
means being impaired for any reason to the extent that the person lacks
sufficient understanding or capacity to make and carry out reasonable
decisions concerning the person or the person's resources.



(R.C. § 2913.73)



§ 131.26  FORGERY OF IDENTIFICATION CARDS.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly do either of the following:



      (1)   Forge an identification card.



      (2)   Sell or otherwise distribute a card that purports to be
an identification card, knowing it was forged.



   (B)   As used in this section, IDENTIFICATION CARD means a card that
includes personal information or characteristics of an individual, a purpose
of which is to establish the identity of the bearer described on the card,
whether the words "identity," "identification," "identification card," or
other similar words appear on the card.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of forging
identification cards or selling or distributing forged identification
cards.  Except as otherwise provided in this division, forging
identification cards or selling or distributing forged identification cards
is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the offender previously has been
convicted of a violation of division (A) of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, forging identification cards or
selling or distributing forged identification cards is a misdemeanor of the
first degree and, in addition, the court shall impose upon the offender a
fine not less than $250.



(R.C. § 2913.31(B), (C)(2))



Statutory reference:



   Forgery, felony provisions, see R.C. § 2913.31(A), (C)(1)



   Forgery of originating address or other routing information in
connection with the transmission of an electronic mail advertisement, felony
provisions, see R.C. § 2307.64



§ 131.27  CRIMINAL SIMULATION.



   (A)   No person, with purpose to defraud, or knowing that the person
is facilitating a fraud, shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Make or alter any object so that it appears to have
value because of antiquity, rarity, curiosity, source, or authorship, which
it does not in fact possess.



      (2)   Practice deception in making, retouching, editing, or
reproducing any photograph, movie film, video tape, phonograph record, or
recording tape.



      (3)   Falsely or fraudulently make, simulate, forge, alter, or
counterfeit any wrapper, label, stamp, cork or cap prescribed by the Liquor
Control Commission under R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303, falsely or fraudulently
cause to be made, simulated, forged, altered, or counterfeited any wrapper,
label, stamp, cork or cap prescribed by the Liquor Control Commission under
R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303, or use more than once any wrapper, label, stamp,
cork or cap prescribed by the Liquor Control Commission under R.C. Chapters
4301 and 4303.



      (4)   Offer, or possess with the purpose to offer, any object
that the person knows to have been simulated as provided in divisions (A)(1),
(2) or (3) of this section.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal
simulation.  Except as otherwise provided in this division, criminal
simulation is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the loss to the victim
is $1,000 or more, criminal simulation is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2913.32)



§ 131.28  PERSONATING AN OFFICER.



   (A)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she
is facilitating a fraud, or with purpose to induce another to purchase
property or services, shall personate a law enforcement officer, or an
inspector, investigator, or agent of any governmental agency.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of personating an
officer, a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 2913.44)



Cross-reference:



   Impersonating an officer (non-fraud offense), see § 132.12



§ 131.29  TRADEMARK COUNTERFEITING.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:



      (1)   Attach, affix, or otherwise use a counterfeit mark in
connection with the manufacture of goods or services, whether or not the
goods or services are intended for sale or resale.



      (2)   Possess, sell, or offer for sale tools, machines,
instruments, materials, articles, or other items of personal property with
the knowledge that they are designed for the production or reproduction of
counterfeit marks.



      (3)   Purchase or otherwise acquire goods, and keep or
otherwise have the goods in the person's possession, with the knowledge that
a counterfeit mark is attached to, affixed to, or otherwise used in
connection with the goods and with the intent to sell or otherwise dispose of
the goods.



      (4)   Sell, offer for sale, or otherwise dispose of goods with
the knowledge that a counterfeit mark is attached to, affixed to, or
otherwise used in connection with the goods.



      (5)   Sell, offer for sale, or otherwise provide services with
the knowledge that a counterfeit mark is used in connection with that sale,
offer for sale, or other provision of the services.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of trademark
counterfeiting.



      (1)   A violation of division (A)(1) of this section is guilty
of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (2)    Except as otherwise provided in this division, a
violation of division (A)(2) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the circumstances of the violation indicate that the tools,
machines, instruments, materials, articles, or other items of personal
property involved in the violation were intended for use in the commission of
a felony, a violation of division (A)(2) is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, a
violation of division (A)(3), (A)(4) or (A)(5) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the cumulative sales price of the goods
or services to which or in connection with which the counterfeit mark is
attached, affixed or otherwise used in the offense is $1,000 or more, a
violation of division (A)(3), (A)(4) or (A)(5) is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.



   (C)   A defendant may assert as an affirmative defense to a charge
of a violation of this section defenses, affirmative defenses, and
limitations on remedies that would be available in a civil, criminal or
administrative action or proceeding under the Lanham Act, being 15 U.S.C.
§§ 1051 through 1127, as amended, the Trademark Counterfeiting Act of 1984,
being 18 U.S.C. § 2320, as amended, R.C. Chapter 1329 or another section of
the Ohio Revised Code, or common law.



   (D)   (1)   Law enforcement officers may seize pursuant to
Criminal Rule 41, R.C. Chapter 2933, or R.C. Chapter 2981 either of the
following:



         (a)   Goods to which or in connection with which a
person attached, affixed, otherwise used, or intended to attach, affix or
otherwise use a counterfeit mark in violation of this section.



         (b)   Tools, machines, instruments, materials, articles,
vehicles or other items of personal property that are possessed, sold,
offered for sale, or used in a violation of this section or in an attempt to
commit or complicity in the commission of a violation of this section.



      (2)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of R.C. Chapter
2981, if a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this
section, an attempt to violate this section, or complicity in a violation of
this section, the court involved shall declare that the goods described in
division (D)(1)(a) of this section and the personal property described in
division (D)(1)(b) of this section are contraband and are forfeited. Prior to
the court's entry of judgment under Criminal Rule 32, the owner of a
registered trademark or service mark that is the subject to the counterfeit
mark may recommend a manner in which the forfeited goods and forfeited
personal property should be disposed of. If that owner makes a timely
recommendation of a manner of disposition, the court is not bound by the
recommendation. If that owner makes a timely recommendation of a manner of
disposition, the court may include in its entry of judgment an order that
requires appropriate persons to dispose of the forfeited goods and forfeited
personal property in the recommended manner. If the owner fails to make a
timely recommendation of a manner of disposition or if that owner makes a
timely recommendation of a manner of disposition but the court determines to
not follow the recommendation, the court shall include in its entry of
judgement an order that requires the law enforcement agency that employs the
law enforcement officer who seized the forfeited goods or the forfeited
personal property to destroy them or cause their destruction.



   (E)   This section does not affect the rights of an owner of a
trademark or service mark, or the enforcement in a civil action or in
administrative proceedings of the rights of an owner or a trademark or
service mark under the Lanham Act, being 15 U.S.C. §§ 1051 through 1127, as
amended, the Trademark Counterfeiting Act of 1984, being 18 U.S.C. § 2320,
as amended, R.C. Chapter 1329, or another section of the Ohio Revised Code,
or common law.



   (F)   As used in this section:



      COUNTERFEIT MARK.



         (a)   Except as provided in division (b) of this
definition, the term means a spurious trademark or a spurious service mark
that satisfies both of the following:



            1.   It is identical with or substantially
indistinguishable from a mark that is registered on the principal register in
the United States Patent and Trademark Office for the same goods or services
as the goods or services to which or in connection with which the spurious
trademark or spurious service mark is attached, affixed, or otherwise used,
or from a mark that is registered with the Secretary of State pursuant to
R.C. §§ 1329.54 through 1329.67 for the same goods or services as the goods
or services to which or in connection with which the spurious trademark or
spurious service mark is attached, affixed, or otherwise used, and the owner
of the registration uses that registered trademark, whether or not the
offender knows that the mark is registered in a manner described in this
division (a)1.



            2.   Its use is likely to cause confusion or
mistake or to deceive other persons.



         (b)   The term does not include a mark or other
designation that is attached to, affixed to, or otherwise used in connection
with goods or services if the holder of the right to use the mark or other
designation authorizes the manufacturer, producer, or vendor of those goods
or services to attach, affix, or otherwise use the mark or other designation
in connection with those goods or services at the time of their manufacture,
production or sale.



      CUMULATIVE SALES PRICE. Means the product of the lowest single
unit sales price charged or sought to be charged by an offender for goods to
which or in connection with which a counterfeit mark is attached, affixed, or
otherwise used or of the lowest single service transaction price charged or
sought to be charged by an offender for services in connection with which a
counterfeit mark is used, multiplied by the total number of those goods or
services, whether or not units of goods are sold or are in an offender's
possession, custody or control.



      REGISTERED TRADEMARK OR SERVICE MARK. Means a trademark or
service mark that is registered in a manner described in division (a) of the
definition of "counterfeit mark."



      SERVICE MARK. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1329.54.



      TRADEMARK. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1329.54.



(R.C. § 2913.34)



§ 131.30  DIMINISHING OR INTERFERING WITH FORFEITABLE PROPERTY.



   (A)   No person shall destroy, damage, remove, or transfer property
that is subject to forfeiture or otherwise take any action in regard to
property that is subject to forfeiture with purpose to do any of the
following:



      (1)   Prevent or impair the state's or political subdivision's
lawful authority to take the property into its custody or control under R.C.
Chapter 2981 or to continue holding the property under its lawful custody or
control;



      (2)   Impair or defeat the court's continuing jurisdiction
over the person and property;



      (3)   Devalue property that the person knows, or has
reasonable cause to believe, is subject to forfeiture proceedings under R.C.
Chapter 2981.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interference with
or diminishing forfeitable property. Except as otherwise provided in this
division (B), interference with or diminishing forfeitable property is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the property is $1,000 or
more, interference with or diminishing forfeitable property is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2981.07)



§ 131.31  RECORDING CREDIT CARD, TELEPHONE OR SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBERS.



   (A)   No person shall record or cause to be recorded either of the
following:



      (1)   A credit card account number of the other party to a
transaction, when a check, bill of exchange or other draft is presented for
payment; or



      (2)   The telephone number or Social Security account number
of the other party to a transaction, when payment is made by credit card
charge agreement, check, bill of exchange or other draft.



   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to a transaction,
if all of the following conditions are met:



      (1)   The credit card account number, Social Security account
number or telephone number is recorded for a legitimate business purpose,
including collection purposes.



      (2)   The other party to the transaction consents to the
recording of the credit card account number, Social Security account number
or telephone number.



      (3)   The credit card account number, Social Security account
number or telephone number that is recorded during the course of the
transaction is not disclosed to any third party for any purposes other than
collection purposes and is not used to market goods or services unrelated to
the goods or services purchased in the transaction.



   (C)   Nothing in this section prohibits the recording of the number
of a credit card account when given in lieu of a deposit to secure payment in
the event of default, loss, damage or other occurrence, or requires a person
to accept a check presented for payment, if the other party to the
transaction refuses to consent to the recording of the number of the party's
Social Security account or license to operate a motor vehicle.



(R.C. § 1349.17)



   (D)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 1349.99)



§ 131.32  PROSECUTIONS FOR THEFT OF UTILITIES.



   (A)   In a prosecution for a theft offense, as defined in R.C. §
2913.01, that involves alleged tampering with a gas, electric, steam or water
meter, conduit or attachment of a utility that has been disconnected by the
utility, proof that a meter, conduit or attachment of a utility has been
tampered with is prima facie evidence that the person who is obligated to pay
for the service rendered through the meter, conduit or attachment, and who is
in possession or control of the meter, conduit or attachment at the time the
tampering occurred has caused the tampering with intent to commit a theft
offense.



   (B)   In a prosecution for a theft offense, as defined in R.C. §
2913.01, that involves the alleged reconnection of a gas, electric, steam or
water meter, conduit or attachment of a utility that has been disconnected by
the utility, proof that a meter, conduit or attachment disconnected by a
utility has been reconnected without the consent of the utility is prima
facie evidence that the person in possession or control of the meter, conduit
or attachment at the time of the reconnection has reconnected the meter,
conduit or attachment with intent to commit a theft offense.



   (C)   As used in this section:



      TAMPER. Means to interfere with, damage or bypass a utility
meter, conduit or attachment with the intent to impede the correct
registration of a meter or the proper functions of a conduit or attachment so
as to reduce the amount of utility service that is registered on the meter.



      UTILITY. Means any electric light company, gas company, natural
gas company, pipe-line company, water-works company or heating or cooling
company, as defined in R.C. § 4905.03(C), (D), (E), (F), (G), or (H), its
lessees, trustees or receivers, or any similar utility owned or operated by a
political subdivision.



(R.C. § 4933.18)



   (D)   Each electric light company, gas company, natural gas company,
pipeline company, waterworks company or heating or cooling company, as
defined by R.C. § 4905.03(C), (D), (E), (F), (G), or (H), or its lessees,
trustees or receivers, and each similar utility owned or operated by a
political subdivision, shall notify its customers, on an annual basis, that
tampering with or bypassing a meter constitutes a theft offense that could
result in the imposition of criminal sanctions.



(R.C. § 4933.19)



§ 131.33  MOTION PICTURE PIRACY.



   (A)   As used in this section:



      AUDIOVISUAL RECORDING FUNCTION. Means the capability of a device
to record or transmit a motion picture or any part of a motion picture by
means of any technology existing on, or developed after, March 9, 2004.



      FACILITY. Means a movie theater.



   (B)   No person, without the written consent of the owner or lessee
of the facility and of the licensor of the motion picture, shall knowingly
operate an audiovisual recording function of a device in a facility in which
the motion picture is being shown.



   (C)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
motion picture piracy, a misdemeanor of the first degree on the first offense
and a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent
offense.



   (D)   This section does not prohibit or restrict a lawfully
authorized investigative, law enforcement, protective, or intelligence
gathering employee or agent of the government of this state or a political
subdivision of this state, or of the federal government, when acting in an
official capacity, from operating an audiovisual recording function of a
device in any facility in which a motion picture is being shown.



   (E)   Division (B) of this section does not limit or affect the
application of any other prohibition in this code or the Ohio Revised Code.
Any act that is a violation of both division (B) of this section and another
provision of this code or the Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under this
section, under the other provision of this code or the Ohio Revised Code, or
under both this section and the other provision of this code or the Ohio
Revised Code.



(R.C. § 2913.07)



CHAPTER 132:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE



Section



   132.01   Riot



   132.02   Failure to disperse



   132.03   Justifiable use of force to suppress riot



   132.04   Disorderly conduct



   132.05   Disturbing a lawful meeting



   132.06   Misconduct at an emergency



   132.07   Telecommunications harassment



   132.08   Inducing panic



   132.09   Making false alarms



   132.10   Inciting to violence



   132.11   Unlawful display of law enforcement emblem



   132.12   Impersonating a peace officer



   132.13   Safety of crowds attending live entertainment performances



   132.14   Noise



   132.15   Curfew



   132.16   Misconduct involving a public transportation system



Cross-reference:



   Personating an officer (fraud offense), see § 131.28



Statutory reference:



   Misconduct involving a public transportation system, see R.C. § 2917.41



   Misuse of "Block Parent" or "McGruff House" symbol, see R.C. § 2917.46



§ 132.01  RIOT.



   (A)   No person shall participate with four or more others in a
course of disorderly conduct in violation of R.C. § 2917.11 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance:



      (1)   With purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of a
misdemeanor, other than disorderly conduct;



      (2)   With purpose to intimidate a public official or employee
into taking or refraining from official action, or with purpose to hinder,
impede, or obstruct a function of government;



      (3)   With purpose to hinder, impede, or obstruct the orderly
process of administration or instruction at an educational institution, or to
interfere with or disrupt lawful activities carried on at the institution.



   (B)   No person shall participate with four or more others with
purpose to do an act with unlawful force or violence, even though the act
might otherwise be lawful.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of riot, a misdemeanor
of the first degree.



(R.C. § 2917.03)



   (D)   For the purposes of prosecuting violations of this section,
the prosecution is not required to allege or prove that the offender
expressly agreed with four or more others to commit any act that constitutes
a violation this section prior to or while committing those acts.



(R.C. § 2917.031)



Statutory reference:



   Aggravated riot, felony provisions, see R.C. § 2917.02



§ 132.02  FAILURE TO DISPERSE.



   (A)   Where five or more persons are participating in a course of
disorderly conduct in violation of R.C. § 2917.11 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, and there are other persons in the vicinity
whose presence creates the likelihood of physical harm to persons or property
or of serious public inconvenience, annoyance, or alarm, a law enforcement
officer or other public official may order the participants and the other
persons to disperse.  No person shall knowingly fail to obey the order.



   (B)   Nothing in this section requires persons to disperse who are
peaceably assembled for a lawful purpose.



   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to
disperse.



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(3) of this
section, failure to disperse is a minor misdemeanor.



      (3)   Failure to disperse is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree if the failure to obey the order described in division (A) of this
section creates the likelihood of physical harm to persons or is committed at
the scene of a fire, accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind.



(R.C. § 2917.04)



§ 132.03  JUSTIFIABLE USE OF FORCE TO SUPPRESS RIOT.



   A law enforcement officer or firefighter engaged in suppressing a riot
or in protecting persons or property during a riot:



   (A)   Is justified in using force, other than deadly force, when and
to the extent he or she has probable cause to believe such force is necessary
to disperse or apprehend rioters;



   (B)   Is justified in using force, including deadly force, when and
to the extent he or she has probable cause to believe such force is necessary
to disperse or apprehend rioters whose conduct is creating a substantial risk
of serious physical harm to persons.



(R.C. § 2917.05)



§ 132.04  DISORDERLY CONDUCT.



   (A)   No person shall recklessly cause inconvenience, annoyance, or
alarm to another, by doing any of the following:



      (1)   Engaging in fighting, in threatening harm to persons or
property, or in violent or turbulent behavior;



      (2)   Making unreasonable noise or an offensively coarse
utterance, gesture, or display, or communicating unwarranted and grossly
abusive language to any person;



      (3)   Insulting, taunting, or challenging another, under
circumstances in which that conduct is likely to provoke a violent response;



      (4)   Hindering or preventing the movement of persons on a
public street, road, highway, or right-of-way, or to, from, within, or upon
public or private property, so as to interfere with the rights of others, and
by any act that serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender;



      (5)   Creating a condition that is physically offensive to
persons or that presents a risk of physical harm to persons or property, by
any act that serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender.



   (B)   No person while voluntarily intoxicated shall do either of the
following:



      (1)   In a public place or in the presence of two or more
persons, engage in conduct likely to be offensive or to cause inconvenience,
annoyance, or alarm to persons of ordinary sensibilities, which conduct the
offender, if he or she were not intoxicated, should know is likely to have
such effect on others;



      (2)   Engage in conduct or create a condition that presents a
risk of physical harm to himself, herself or another, or to the property of
another.



   (C)   Violation of any statute or ordinance of which an element is
operating a motor vehicle, locomotive, watercraft, aircraft, or other vehicle
while under the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse is not a violation
of division (B) of this section.



   (D)   If a person appears to an ordinary observer to be intoxicated,
it is probable cause to believe that the person is voluntarily intoxicated
for purposes of division (B) of this section.



   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disorderly conduct.



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (E)(2) of this
section, disorderly conduct is a minor misdemeanor.



      (2)   Disorderly conduct is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree
if any of the following applies:



         (a)   The offender persists in disorderly conduct after
reasonable warning or request to desist.



         (b)   The offense is committed in the vicinity of a
school or in a school safety zone.



         (c)   The offense is committed in the presence of any
law enforcement officer, firefighter, rescuer, medical person, emergency
medical services person, or other authorized person who is engaged in the
person's duties at the scene of a fire, accident, disaster, riot, or
emergency of any kind.



         (d)   The offense is committed in the presence of any
emergency facility person who is engaged in the person's duties in an
emergency facility.



   (F)   As used in this section:



      COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A SCHOOL has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2925.01.



      EMERGENCY FACILITY.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.04.



      EMERGENCY FACILITY PERSON.  Is the singular of "emergency
facility personnel" as defined in R.C. § 2909.04.



      EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSON is the singular of "emergency
medical services personnel" as defined in R.C. § 2133.21.



(R.C. § 2917.11)



§ 132.05  DISTURBING A LAWFUL MEETING.



   (A)   No person, with purpose to prevent or disrupt a lawful
meeting, procession, or gathering, shall do either of the following:



      (1)   Do any act which obstructs or interferes with the due
conduct of the meeting, procession, or gathering.



      (2)   Make any utterance, gesture, or display which outrages
the sensibilities of the group.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disturbing a lawful
meeting, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 2917.12)



§ 132.06  MISCONDUCT AT AN EMERGENCY.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:



      (1)   Hamper the lawful operations of any law enforcement
officer, firefighter, rescue worker, medical person, emergency medical
services person, or other authorized person, engaged in the person's duties
at the scene of a fire, accident, disaster, riot or emergency of any kind;



      (2)   Hamper the lawful activities of any emergency facility
person who is engaged in the person's duties in an emergency facility;



      (3)   Fail to obey the lawful order of any law enforcement
officer engaged in the law enforcement officer's duties at the scene of or in
connection with a fire, accident, disaster, riot or emergency of any kind.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit access or
deny information to any news media representative in the lawful exercise of
the news media representative's duties.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of misconduct at an
emergency.  Except as otherwise provided in this division, misconduct at an
emergency is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If the violation of this
section creates a risk of physical harm to persons or property, misconduct at
an emergency is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



   (D)   As used in this section:



      EMERGENCY FACILITY.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.04.



      EMERGENCY FACILITY PERSON.  Is the singular of "emergency
facility personnel" as defined in R.C. § 2909.04.



      EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSON.  Is the singular of
"emergency medical services personnel" as defined in R.C. § 2133.21.



(R.C. § 2917.13) (Ord. 16-1993, passed 4-7-93) 



§ 132.07  TELECOMMUNICATIONS HARASSMENT.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly make or cause to be made a
telecommunication, or knowingly permit a telecommunication to be made from a
telecommunications device under the person’s control, to another, if the
caller does any of the following:



      (1)   Makes the telecommunication with purpose to harass,
intimidate, or abuse any person at the premises to which the
telecommunication is made, whether or not actual communication takes place
between the caller and a recipient;



      (2)   Describes, suggests, requests, or proposes that the
caller, the recipient of the telecommunication, or any other person engage in
sexual activity, and the recipient or another person at the premises to which
the telecommunication is made has requested, in a previous telecommunication
or in the immediate telecommunication, that the caller not make a
telecommunication to the recipient or to the premises to which the
telecommunication is made;



      (3)   During the telecommunication, violates R.C. § 2903.21
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;



      (4)   Knowingly states to the recipient of the
telecommunication that the caller intends to cause damage to or destroy
public or private property, and the recipient, any member of the
recipient’s family, or any other person who resides at the premises to
which the telecommunication is made owns, leases, resides, or works in, will
at the time of the destruction or damaging be near or in, has the
responsibility of protecting, or insures the property that will be destroyed
or damaged;



      (5)   Knowingly makes the telecommunica-tion to the recipient
of the telecommunication, to another person at the premises to which the
telecommunication is made, or to those premises, and the recipient or another
person at those premises previously has told the caller not to make a
telecommunication to those premises or to any persons at those premises;



      (6)   Knowingly makes any comment, request, suggestion, or
proposal to the recipient of the telecommunication that is threatening,
intimidating, menacing, coercive, or obscene with the intent to abuse,
threaten, or harass the recipient;



      (7)   Without a lawful business purpose, knowingly interrupts
the telecommunication service of any person;



      (8)   Without a lawful business purpose, knowingly transmits
to any person, regardless of whether the telecommunication is heard in its
entirety, any file, document, or other communication that prevents that
person from using the person’s telephone service or electronic
communication device;



      (9)   Knowingly makes any false statement concerning the
death, injury, illness, disfigurement, reputation, indecent conduct, or
criminal conduct of the recipient of the telecommunication or family or
household member of the recipient with purpose to abuse, threaten,
intimidate, or harass the recipient;



      (10)   Knowingly incites another person through a
telecommunication or other means to harass or participate in the harassment
of a person;



      (11)   Knowingly alarms the recipient by making a
telecommunication without a lawful purpose at an hour or hours known to be
inconvenient to the recipient and in an offensive or repetitive manner.



   (B)   (1)   No person shall make or cause to be made a
telecommunication or permit a telecommunication to be made from a
telecommunications device under the person’s control, with purpose to
abuse, threaten, or harass another person.



      (2)   No person shall knowingly post a text or audio statement
or an image on an internet web site or web page for the purpose of abusing,
threatening, or harassing another person.



   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of
telecommunications harassment.



      (2)   A violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(5),
(A)(6), (A)(7), (A)(8), (A)(9), (A)(10), or (A)(11) or (B) of this section is
a misdemeanor of the first degree on a first offense and a felony on each
subsequent offense, which shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(3), a
violation of division (A)(4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree on a first offense and a felony on each subsequent offense, to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.  If a violation of division (A)(4)
of this section results in economic harm of $1,000 or more,
telecommunications harassment is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.



   (D)   No cause of action may be assessed in any court of this
municipality against any provider of a telecommunications service,
interactive computer service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information
service, or against any officer, employee, or agent of a telecommunications
service, interactive computer service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or
information service, for any injury, death, or loss to person or property
that allegedly arises out of the provider’s, officer’s, employee’s, or
agent’s provision of information, facilities, or assistance in accordance
with the terms of a court order that is issued in relation to the
investigation or prosecution of an alleged violation of this section.  A
provider of a telecommunications service, interactive computer service as
defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, or an officer, employee,
or agent of a telecommunications service, interactive computer service as
defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, is immune from any civil
or criminal liability for injury, death, or loss to person or property that
allegedly arises out of the provider’s, officer’s, employees, or
agent’s provision of information, facilities, or assistance in accordance
with the terms of a court order that is issued in relation to the
investigation or prosecution of an alleged violation of this section.



   (E)   (1)   This section does not apply to a person solely
because the person provided access or connection to or from an electronic
method of remotely transferring information not under that person’s
control, including having provided capabilities that are incidental to
providing access or connection to or from the electronic method of remotely
transferring the information, and that do not include the creation of the
content of the material that is the subject of the access or connection. In
addition, any person providing access or connection to or from an electronic
method of remotely transferring information not under that person’s control
shall not be liable for any action voluntarily taken in good faith to block
the receipt or transmission through its service of any information that the
person believes is, or will be sent, in violation of this section.



      (2)   Division (E)(1) of this section does not create an
affirmative duty for any person providing access or connection to or from an
electronic method of remotely transferring information not under that
person’s control to block the receipt or transmission through its service
of any information that it believes is, or will be sent, in violation of this
section except as otherwise provided by law.



      (3)   Division (E)(1) of this section does not apply to a
person who conspires with a person actively involved in the creation or
knowing distribution of material in violation of this section or who
knowingly advertises the availability of material of that nature.



      (4)   A provider or user of an interactive computer service,
as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, shall neither be treated as the publisher or
speaker of any information provided by another information content provider,
as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, nor held civilly or criminally liable for the
creation or development of information provided by another information
content provider, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230. Nothing in this division
shall be construed to protect a person from liability to the extent that the
person developed or created any content in violation of this section.



   (F)   Divisions (A)(5) to (A)(11) and (B)(2) of this section do not
apply to a person who, while employed or contracted by a newspaper, magazine,
press association, news agency, news wire service, cable channel or cable
operator, or radio or television station, is gathering, processing,
transmitting, compiling, editing, or disseminating information for the
general public within the scope of the person’s employment in that capacity
or the person’s contractual authority in that capacity.



   (G)   As used in divisions (A) through (D) of this section;



      CABLE OPERATOR.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1332.21.



      CALLER.  Means the person described in division (A) of this
section who makes or causes to be made a telecommunication or who permits a
telecommunication to be made from a telecommunications device under that
person’s control.



      ECONOMIC HARM.  Means all direct, incidental and consequential
pecuniary harm suffered by a victim as a result of the criminal conduct. 
The term includes but is not limited to all of the following:



         (a)   All wages, salaries or other compensation lost as
a result of the criminal conduct;



         (b)   The cost of all wages, salaries or other
compensation paid to employees for time those employees are prevented from
working as a result of the criminal conduct;



         (c)   The overhead costs incurred from the time that a
business is shut down as a result of the criminal conduct;



         (d)   The loss of value to tangible or intangible
property that was damaged as a result of the criminal conduct.



      FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Means any of the following:



         (a)   Any of the following who is residing or has
resided with the recipient of the telecommunication against whom the act
prohibited in division (A)(9) of this section is committed:



            1.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse, or a
former spouse of the recipient;



            2.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the
recipient, or another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the
recipient;



            3.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person
living as a spouse, or former spouse of the recipient, or another person
related by consanguinity or affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse,
or former spouse of the recipient.



         (b)   The natural parent of any child of whom the
recipient of the telecommunication against whom the act prohibited in
division (A)(9) of this section is committed is the other natural parent or
is the putative other natural parent.



      PERSON LIVING AS A SPOUSE.  A person who is living or has lived
with the recipient of the telecommunication against whom the act prohibited
in division (A)(9) of this section is committed in a common law marital
relationship, who otherwise is cohabiting with the recipient, or who
otherwise has cohabited with the recipient within five years prior to the
date of the alleged commission of the act in question.



      SEXUAL ACTIVITY.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.01.



      TELECOMMUNICATION and TELE-COMMUNICATIONS DEVICE.  Have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.



   (F)   Nothing in this section prohibits a person from making a
telecommunication to a debtor that is in compliance with the Fair Debt
Collection Practices Act, 15 USC 1692, as amended, or the Telephone Consumer
Protection Act, 47 USC 227, as amended.



(R.C. § 2917.21)



§ 132.08  INDUCING PANIC.



   (A)   No person shall cause the evacuation of any public place, or
otherwise cause serious public inconvenience or alarm, by doing any of the
following:



      (1)   Initiating or circulating a report or warning of an
alleged or impending fire, explosion, crime, or other catastrophe, knowing
that the report or warning is false.



      (2)   Threatening to commit any offense of violence.



      (3)   Committing any offense, with reckless disregard of the
likelihood that its commission will cause serious public inconvenience or
alarm.



   (B)   Division (A)(1) of this section does not apply to any person
conducting an authorized fire or emergency drill.



   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of inducing
panic.



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(3),
inducing panic is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (3)   If a violation of this section results in physical harm
to any person, inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law. If a violation of this section results in economic harm of $1,000
or more, inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law. If the public place involved in a violation of division (A)(1) is a
school or an institution of higher education, inducing panic is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law. If a violation of this section
pertains to a purported, threatened or actual use of a weapon of mass
destruction, inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.



   (D)   (1)   It is not a defense to a charge under this section
that pertains to a purported or threatened use of a weapon of mass
destruction that the offender did not possess or have the ability to use a
weapon of mass destruction or that what was represented to be a weapon of
mass destruction was not a weapon of mass destruction.



      (2)   Any act that is a violation of this section and any
other section of the Ohio Revised Code or this code may be prosecuted under
this section, the other section, or both sections.



   (E)   As used in this section:



      BIOLOGICAL AGENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2917.33.



      ECONOMIC HARM. Means any of the following:



         (a)   All direct, incidental and consequential pecuniary
harm suffered by a victim as a result of the criminal conduct. "Economic
harm" as described in this division includes but is not limited to all of the
following:



            1.   All wages, salaries or other compensation
lost as a result of the criminal conduct;



            2.   The cost of all wages, salaries or other
compensation paid to employees for time those employees are prevented from
working as a result of the criminal conduct;



            3.   The overhead costs incurred from the time
that a business is shut down as a result of the criminal conduct;



            4.   The loss of value to tangible or intangible
property that was damaged as a result of the criminal conduct.



         (b)   All costs incurred by the state or any political
subdivision as a result of, or in making any response to, the criminal
conduct that constituted the violation of this section or R.C. § 2917.32, or
any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, including but not limited
to all costs so incurred by any law enforcement officers, firefighters,
rescue personnel, or emergency medical services personnel of the state or the
political subdivision.



      EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSONNEL. Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2133.21.



      INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION. Means any of the following:



         (a)   A state university or college as defined in R.C.
§ 3345.12(A)(1), community college, state community college, university
branch, or technical college;



         (b)   A private, nonprofit college, university or other
post-secondary institution located in this state that possesses a certificate
of authorization issued by the Ohio Board of Regents pursuant to R.C. Chapter
1713;



         (c)   A post-secondary institution with a certificate of
registration issued by the State Board of Career Colleges and Schools
pursuant to R.C. Chapter 3332.



      SCHOOL. Means any school operated by a board of education or any
school for which the State Board of Education prescribes minimum standards
under R.C. § 3301.07, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular
activities, or training provided by the school is being conducted at the time
a violation of this section is committed.



      WEAPON OF MASS DESTRUCTION. Means any of the following:



         (a)   Any weapon that is designed or intended to cause
death or serious physical harm through the release, dissemination, or impact
of toxic or poisonous chemicals, or other precursors;



         (b)   Any weapon involving a disease organism or
biological agent;



         (c)   Any weapon that is designed to release radiation
or radioactivity at a level dangerous to human life;



         (d)   Any of the following, except to the extent that
the item or device in question is expressly excepted from the definition of
"destructive device" pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 921(a)(4) and regulations
issued under that section:



            1.   Any explosive, incendiary, or poison gas
bomb, grenade, rocket having a propellant charge of more than four ounces,
missile having an explosive or incendiary charge of more than one-quarter
ounce, mine, or similar device;



            2.   Any combination of parts either designed or
intended for use in converting any item or device into any item or device
described in division (d)1. of this definition and from which an item or
device described in that division may be readily assembled.



(R.C. § 2917.31)



§ 132.09  MAKING FALSE ALARMS.



   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Initiate or circulate a report or warning of an alleged
or impending fire, explosion, crime, or other catastrophe, knowing that the
report or warning is false and likely to cause public inconvenience or alarm.



      (2)   Knowingly cause a false alarm of fire or other emergency
to be transmitted to or within any organization, public or private, for
dealing with emergencies involving a risk of physical harm to persons or
property.



      (3)   Report to any law enforcement agency an alleged offense
or other incident within its concern, knowing that the offense did not occur.



   (B)   This section does not apply to any person conducting an
authorized fire or emergency drill.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making false
alarms.  Except as otherwise provided in this division, making false alarms
is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If a violation of this section
results in economic harm of $1,000 or more, making false alarms is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.  If a violation of this
section pertains to a purported, threatened, or actual use of a weapon of
mass destruction, making false alarms is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



   (D)   (1)   It is not a defense to a charge under this section
that pertains to a purported or threatened use of a weapon of mass
destruction that the offender did not possess or have the ability to use a
weapon of mass destruction or that what was represented to be a weapon of
mass destruction was not a weapon of mass destruction.



      (2)   Any act that is a violation of this section and any
other section of the Ohio Revised Code or this Code of Ordinances may be
prosecuted under this section, the other section, or both sections.



   (E)   As used in this section, ECONOMIC HARM and WEAPON OF MASS
DESTRUCTION have the same meaning as in R.C. § 2917.31.



(R.C. § 2917.32)



§ 132.10  INCITING TO VIOLENCE.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly engage in conduct designed to urge
or incite another to commit any offense of violence when either of the
following apply:



      (1)   The conduct takes place under circumstances that create
a clear and present danger that any offense of violence will be committed.



      (2)   The conduct proximately results in the commission of any
offense of violence.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of inciting to
violence.  If the offense of violence that the other person is being urged
or incited to commit is a misdemeanor, inciting to violence is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.  If the offense of violence that the other person is
being urged or incited to commit is a felony, inciting to violence is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2917.01)



§ 132.11  UNLAWFUL DISPLAY OF LAW ENFORCEMENT EMBLEM.



   (A)   No person who is not entitled to do so shall knowingly display
on a motor vehicle the emblem of a law enforcement agency or an organization
of law enforcement officers.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of the unlawful
display of the emblem of a law enforcement agency or an organization of law
enforcement officers, a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 2913.441)



§ 132.12  IMPERSONATING A PEACE OFFICER.



   (A)   As used in this section:



      FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Means an employee of the United
States who serves in a position the duties of which are primarily the
investigation, apprehension, or detention of individuals suspected or
convicted of offenses under the criminal laws of the United States.



      IMPERSONATE. Means to act the part of, assume the identity of,
wear the uniform or any part of the uniform of, or display the identification
of a particular person or of a member of a class of persons with purpose to
make another person believe that the actor is that particular person or is a
member of that class of persons.



      INVESTIGATOR OF THE BUREAU OF CRIMINAL IDENTIFICATION AND
INVESTIGATION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2903.11.



      PEACE OFFICER. A Sheriff, deputy sheriff, Marshal, deputy
marshal, member of the organized police department of a municipal
corporation, or township constable, who is employed by a political
subdivision of this state; a member of a police force employed by a
metropolitan housing authority under R.C. § 3735.31(D); a member of a police
force employed by a regional transit authority under R.C. § 306.35(Y); a
state university law enforcement officer appointed under R.C. § 3345.04; a
veterans' home police officer appointed under R.C. § 5907.02; a special
police officer employed by a port authority under R.C. § 4582.04 or 4582.28;
an officer, agent, or employee of the state or any of its agencies,
instrumentalities, or political subdivisions, upon whom, by statute, a duty
to conserve the peace or to enforce all or certain laws is imposed and the
authority to arrest violators is conferred, within limits of that statutory
duty and authority; or a state highway patrol trooper whose primary duties
are to preserve the peace, to protect life and property, and to enforce the
laws, ordinances, or rules of the state or any of its political subdivisions.



      PRIVATE POLICE OFFICER. Means any security guard, special police
officer, private detective, or other person who is privately employed in a
police capacity.



   (B)   No person shall impersonate a peace officer, private police
officer, investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation, or federal law enforcement officer.



   (C)   No person, by impersonating a peace officer, private police
officer, investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation, or federal law enforcement officer, shall arrest or detain any
person, search any person, or search the property of any person.



   (D)   No person, with purpose to commit or facilitate the commission
of an offense, shall impersonate a peace officer, private police officer,
federal law enforcement officer, an officer, agent or employee of the
municipality or the state, or investigator of the Bureau of Criminal
Identification and Investigation.



   (E)   No person shall commit a felony while impersonating a peace
officer, private police officer, federal law enforcement officer, an officer,
agent or employee of the municipality or of the state, or investigator of the
Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation.



   (F)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (B) of
this section that the impersonation of the peace officer, private police
officer, federal law enforcement officer, an officer, agent or employee of
the municipality or of the state, or investigator of the Bureau of Criminal
Identification and Investigation was for a lawful purpose.



   (G)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Whoever violates division (C) or (D) of
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the purpose
of a violation of division (D) of this section is to commit or facilitate the
commission of a felony, a violation of division (D) is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. Whoever violates division (E) of this
section is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2921.51)



Cross-reference:



   Personating an officer (fraud offense), see § 131.28



§ 132.13  SAFETY OF CROWDS ATTENDING LIVE ENTERTAINMENT PERFORMANCES.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      CONCERT.  A musical performance of which the primary component
is a presentation by persons singing or playing musical instruments, that is
intended by its sponsors mainly, but not necessarily exclusively, for the
listening enjoyment of the audience, and that is held in a facility. A
CONCERT does not include any performance in which music is a part of the
presentation and the primary component of which is acting, dancing, a motion
picture, a demonstration of skills or talent other than singing or playing an
instrument, an athletic event, an exhibition or a speech.



      FACILITY.  Any structure that has a roof or partial roof and
that has walls that wholly surround the area on all sides, including, but not
limited to, a stadium, hall, arena, armory, auditorium, ballroom, exhibition
hall, convention center or music hall.



      LIVE ENTERTAINMENT PERFORMANCE.  Any live speech; any live
musical performance, including a concert; any live dramatic performance; any
live variety show; and any other live performance with respect to which the
primary intent of the audience can be construed to be viewing the performers.
A LIVE ENTERTAINMENT PERFORMANCE does not include any form of entertainment
with respect to which the person purchasing a ticket routinely participates
in amusements as well as views performers.



      PERSON.  Includes, in addition to an individual or entity
specified in R.C. § 1.59(C), any governmental entity.



      RESTRICTED ENTERTAINMENT AREA.  Any wholly or partially enclosed
area, whether indoors or outdoors, that has limited access through
established entrances or established turnstiles or similar devices.



   (B)   (1)   No person shall sell, offer to sell, or offer in
return for a donation, any ticket that is not numbered and that does not
correspond to a specific seat for admission to either of the following:



         (a)   A live entertainment performance that is not
exempted under division (D) of this section, that is held in a restricted
entertainment area, and for which more than 8,000 tickets are offered to the
public;



         (b)   A concert that is not exempted under division (D)
of this section and for which more than 3,000 tickets are offered to the
public.



      (2)   No person shall advertise any live entertainment
performance as described in division (B)(1)(a) of this section or any concert
as described in division (B)(1)(b) of this section, unless the advertisement
contains the words "Reserved Seats Only."



   (C)   Unless exempted by division (D)(1) of this section, no person
who owns or operates any restricted entertainment area shall fail to open,
maintain and properly staff at least the number of entrances designated under
division (E) of this section for a minimum of 90 minutes prior to the
scheduled start of any live entertainment performance that is held in the
restricted entertainment area and for which more than 3,000 tickets are sold,
offered for sale or offered in return for a donation.



   (D)   (1)   A live entertainment performance, other than a
concert, is exempted from the provisions of divisions (B) and (C) of this
section if both of the following apply:



         (a)   The restricted entertainment area in which the
performance is held has at least eight entrances or, if both entrances and
separate admission turnstiles or similar devices are used, has at least eight
turnstiles or similar devices.



         (b)   The eight entrances or, if applicable, the eight
turnstiles or similar devices, are opened, maintained and properly staffed at
least one hour prior to the scheduled start of the performance.



      (2)   (a)   The officer responsible for public safety in
the municipality may, upon application of the sponsor of a concert covered by
division (B) of this section, exempt the concert from the provisions of that
division if such officer finds that the health, safety and welfare of the
participants and spectators would not be substantially affected by failure to
comply with the provisions of that division.  In determining whether to
grant an exemption, the officer shall consider the following factors:



            1.   The size and design of the facility in which
the concert is scheduled;



            2.   The size, age and anticipated conduct of the
crowd expected to attend the concert;



            3.   The ability of the sponsor to manage and
control the expected crowd.



         If the sponsor of any concert desires to obtain an
exemption under this division, the sponsor shall apply to the appropriate
official on a form prescribed by that official. The official shall issue an
order that grants or denies the exemption within five days after receipt of
the application. The sponsor may appeal any order that denies an exemption to
the Court of Common Pleas of the county in which the facility is located.



         (b)   If an official grants an exemption under division
(D)(2)(a) of this section, the official shall designate an on-duty law
enforcement officer to be present at the concert. The designated officer has
authority to issue orders to all security personnel at the concert to protect
the health, safety and welfare of the participants and spectators.



      (3)   Notwithstanding division (D)(2) of this section, in the
case of a concert held in a facility located on the campus of an educational
institution covered by R.C. § 3345.04, a state university law enforcement
officer appointed pursuant to R.C. §§ 3345.04 and 3345.21 shall do both of
the following:



         (a)   Exercise the authority to grant exemptions
provided by division (D)(2)(a) of this section in lieu of an official
designated in that division;



         (b)   If the officer grants an exemption under division
(D)(3)(a) of this section, designate an on-duty state university law
enforcement officer to be present at the concert. The designated officer has
authority to issue orders to all security personnel at the concert to protect
the health, safety and welfare of the participants and spectators.



   (E)   (1)   Unless a live entertainment performance is exempted
by division (D)(1) of this section, the officer responsible for public safety
within the municipality shall designate, for purposes of division (C) of this
section, the minimum number of entrances required to be opened, maintained
and staffed at each live entertainment performance so as to permit crowd
control and reduce congestion at the entrances.  The designation shall be
based on such factors as the size and nature of the crowd expected to attend
the live entertainment performance, the length of time prior to the live
entertainment performance that crowds are expected to congregate at the
entrances and the amount of security provided at the restricted entertainment
area.



      (2)   Notwithstanding division (E)(1) of this section, a state
university law enforcement officer appointed pursuant to R.C. §§ 3345.04
and 3345.21 shall designate the number of entrances required to be opened,
maintained and staffed in the case of a live entertainment performance that
is held at a restricted entertainment area located on the campus of an
educational institution covered by R.C. § 3345.04.



   (F)   No person shall enter into any contract for a live
entertainment performance that does not permit or require compliance with
this section.



   (G)   (1)   This section does not apply to a live entertainment
performance held in a restricted entertainment area if one admission ticket
entitles the holder to view or participate in three or more different games,
rides, activities or live entertainment performances occurring simultaneously
at different sites within the restricted entertainment area and if the
initial admittance entrance to the restricted entertainment area, for which
the ticket is required, is separate from the entrance to any specific live
entertainment performance and an additional ticket is not required for
admission to the particular live entertainment performance.



      (2)   This section does not apply to a symphony orchestra
performance, a ballet performance, horse races, dances or fairs.



   (H)   This section does not prohibit the Legislative Authority from
imposing additional requirements, not in conflict with the section, for the
promotion or holding of live entertainment performances.



   (I)   Whoever violates division (B), (C) or (F) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If any individual suffers
physical harm to his or her person as a result of a violation of this
section, the sentencing court shall consider this factor in favor of imposing
a term of imprisonment upon the offender.



(R.C. § 2917.40)



§ 132.14  NOISE.



   (A)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms
shall be defined as follows:



      SOUND GENERATING or SOUND AMPLIFYING DEVICE.  Any radio,
television, phonograph, tape player, record player, loud speaker, stereo
system speaker, music player, digital tape player, disc player, audio system,
musical instrument, or any machine or device which produces sound received
through or from any form of broadcast, or any form of machine or device which
reproduces sound which is recorded on any medium.



      MOTOR VEHICLE. Includes not only motor vehicles, but also
emergency vehicles, public safety vehicles, school buses, commercial tractor,
agricultural tractor, truck, bus and trailer as defined in R.C. § 4511.01 or
its successor.



      SOUND.  Any kind or type of humanly audible stimulus, and with
respect to musical sound, shall include not only the vocalized word, but
shall include the musical treble and bass components of such music and the
audible response produced by either of these components.



      PERSON.  The owner, operator of a motor vehicle, person in
possession of premises, person in control of premises by reason of
employment, agency or otherwise, whether such ownership, possession or
control is exclusive or joint, or person operating or otherwise in control or
possession of a sound generating or amplifying device or other tool or
instrument producing the sound or noise in question.



   (B)   No owner or operator of a motor vehicle or person in the
physical control of a motor vehicle shall play, cause to be played, or permit
to be played, any sound generating or sound amplifying device located within
or upon such motor vehicle at such a level, volume, frequency or intensity
that the sound emitted from the motor vehicle can be heard by a person of
reasonable sensibilities at a distance of 100 feet or more. In emitting such
sounds, words or phrases need not be discernable, and the motor vehicle may
be stopped, standing, parked or moving on a street, highway, alley, parking
lot or driveway.



   (C)   No person shall generate or permit to be generated
unreasonable noise or loud sound that is likely to cause inconvenience or
annoyance to persons of ordinary sensibilities by reason of a sound
amplifying device, or by the operation of any tools, machinery or equipment
under either of the following circumstances:



      (1)   Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the
following day, when the sound is audible more than 200 feet from the source
of the sound, if it can be heard upon adjacent property, or 200 feet from the
property line of the property on which the source of the sound is located,
whichever is less.  In enforcing this section, the officer shall make a good
faith effort to determine the property line without the need to survey the
property in question;



      (2)   On private property in a residentially zoned area,
regardless of existing non-conforming uses, conditionally permitted uses or
variances, at any time of day, where the sound is audible more than 200 feet
from the property on which the source of the sound is located.



   (D)   The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the
noise level regulation set forth herein:



      (1)   Noises of warning and alarm devices, safety signals and
emergency pressure relief valves;



      (2)   Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle
when responding to an emergency call or acting in time of emergency;



      (3)   Noises resulting from any work made necessary to restore
property to a safe condition, or work required to protect persons or property
from an imminent exposure to danger;



      (4)   Any other noise resulting from activities of a temporary
duration permitted by law or for which a license or permit therefore has been
granted by the city;



      (5)   Noises resulting from the normal use of churches,
schools, athletic fields, parks and auditoriums.



   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of generating an
unreasonable noise, a minor misdemeanor. If the offender persists in
generating or permitting to be generated unreasonable noise, after reasonable
warning or request to desist, generating unreasonable noise is a misdemeanor
of the fourth degree. On a second offense within one year after the first
offense, such person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. On each
subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, such person is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(Ord. 7-1995, passed 3-1-95; Am. Ord. 19-1999, passed 9-1-99)



§ 132.15  CURFEW.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ADULT PERSON.  A person, 18 years of age or older, who is
authorized by a parent or guardian of the minor to have the care and custody
of such minor.



      EMERGENCY.  An unforeseen combination of circumstances, or the
resulting state, that call for immediate action. The term includes, but is
not limited to, a fire, natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any
situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss
of life.



      EMPLOYMENT ACTIVITY.  Any bona fide or legal service performed
for wages or salary under contract, either written, expressed or implied.



      ESTABLISHMENTS.  Any privately owned place of business operated
for a profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to,
any place of amusement or entertainment.



      GUARDIAN.  A person who under Court order is the guardian of a
minor, or a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a
Court.



      LAWFUL ACTIVITY.  Includes, but is not limited to:



         (a)   Involvement in employment activity or proceeding
to or from an employment activity without any detour or stop;



         (b)   Attending an activity organized and supervised by
adults sponsored by a municipality or township, school district, civic
organization, or other similar organization which takes responsibility for
the minor, or attending an official school or religious activity;



         (c)   Proceeding to or coming from lawful activities
without any detour or stop;



         (d)   Proceeding to or coming from any place, without
any detour or stop, if the minor's parent, guardian or adult person having
the care and custody of such minor, authorized or directed such action.



      MINOR.  Any person under 18 years of age who is not married or
otherwise emancipated.



      PARENT.  A person who is the natural parent, adoptive parent or
stepparent of a minor.



      PUBLIC PLACE.  Any place to which the public or a substantial
group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets,
highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses,
office buildings, transportation facilities, shops, shopping centers, malls
and restaurants including the parking lots thereto.



      SERIOUS BODILY INJURY.  Bodily injury that creates a substantial
risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or
protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.



   (B)   No minor shall be upon or in the public streets, parks,
buildings or establishments, or upon or in public places, open lands, or
vacant lots, within the city between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. of
the same day, except as provided in division (C) of this section.



   (C)   The provisions of division (B) of this section shall not apply
to minors who are accompanied by a parent, guardian or other adult person
having the care and custody of the minor or when the minor is on an emergency
errand or engaged in lawful activity.



   (D)   No parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and
custody of a minor shall knowingly permit such minor to be upon or in the
public streets, parks, buildings or establishments or upon or in public
places, open lands or vacant lots within the city between the hours of 12:01
a.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the same day; provided, however, this division shall
not apply to exceptions set forth in division (C).



   (E)   Violations of this section shall be punished as a minor
misdemeanor.



(Ord. 20-1999, passed 9-1-99)



§ 132.16  MISCONDUCT INVOLVING A PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM.



   (A)   As used in this section, PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM means a
county transit system operated in accordance with R.C. §§ 306.01 through
306.13, a regional transit authority operated in accordance with R.C. §§
306.30 through 306.71, or a regional transit commission operated in
accordance with R.C. §§ 306.80 through 306.90.



   (B)   No person shall evade the payment of the known fares of a
public transportation system.



   (C)   No person shall alter any transfer, pass, ticket or token of a
public transportation system with the purpose of evading the payment of fares
or of defrauding the system.



   (D)   No person shall do any of the following while in any facility
or on any vehicle of a public transportation system:



      (1)   Play sound equipment without the proper use of a private
earphone;



      (2)   Smoke, eat or drink in any area where the activity is
clearly marked as being prohibited; or



      (3)   Expectorate upon a person, facility or vehicle.



   (E)   No person shall write, deface, draw or otherwise mark on any
facility or vehicle of a public transportation system.



   (F)   No person shall fail to comply with a lawful order of a public
transportation system police officer, and no person shall resist, obstruct or
abuse a public transportation police officer in the performance of the
officer's duties.



   (G)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is
guilty of misconduct involving a public transportation system.



      (1)   A violation of division (B), (C), or (F) of this section
is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



      (2)   A violation of division (D) of this section is a minor
misdemeanor on a first offense. If a person previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to a violation of any division of this section or of a
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any division of this
section, a violation of division (D) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.



      (3)   A violation of division (E) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (H)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, 75% of each fine
paid to satisfy a sentence imposed for a violation of any of the provisions
of this section shall be deposited into the treasury of the County and 25%
shall be deposited with the county transit board, regional transit authority
or regional transit commission that operates the public transportation system
involved in the violation, unless the Board of County Commissioners operates
the public transportation system, in which case 100% of each fine shall be
deposited into the treasury of the County.



(R.C. § 2917.41)



CHAPTER 133:  SEX OFFENSES



Section



   133.01   Definitions



   133.02   Unlawful sexual conduct with a minor



   133.03   Sexual imposition



   133.04   Public indecency



   133.05   Voyeurism



   133.06   Polygraph examinations for victims: restrictions on use



   133.07   Procuring



   133.08   Soliciting; loitering to engage in



   133.09   Prostitution



   133.10   Disseminating matter harmful to juveniles



   133.11   Displaying matter harmful to juveniles



   133.12   Deception to obtain matter harmful to juveniles



   133.13   Rules of evidence



   133.14   Declaratory judgment



   133.15   Injunction; abatement of nuisance



   133.16   Notice of residence of sex offenders



   133.17   Unlawful advertising of massage



   133.99   Sentencing for sexually oriented offenses; sexual
predators; registration



Statutory reference:



   Assistance to victims of sexual assault, see R.C. §§ 2907.28 - 2907.30



   Child victim, disposition of, see R.C. § 2945.481



   Suppression of information at trial, see R.C. § 2907.11



   Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see R.C. § 2907.27



§ 133.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall
have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.



   HARMFUL TO JUVENILES. That quality of any material or performance
describing or representing nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, or
sado-masochistic abuse in any form to which all of the following apply:



      (1)   The material or performance, when considered as a whole,
appeals to the prurient interest of juveniles in sex.



      (2)   The material or performance is patently offensive to
prevailing standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what
is suitable for juveniles.



      (3)   The material or performance, when considered as a whole,
lacks serious literary, artistic, political, and scientific value for
juveniles.



   JUVENILE. Any unmarried person under 18 years of age.



   MATERIAL. Any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, poster, print,
picture, figure, image, description, motion picture film, video cassette,
laser disc, phonograph record, cassette tape, compact disc, or other tangible
thing capable of arousing interest through sight, sound, or touch and
includes an image or text appearing on a computer monitor, television screen,
liquid crystal display, or similar display device or an image or text
recorded on a computer hard disk, computer floppy disk, compact disk,
magnetic tape, or similar data storage device.



   MENTAL HEALTH CLIENT OR PATIENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2305.51.



   MENTAL HEALTH PROFESSIONAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2305.115.



   MINOR. A person under the age of 18.



   NUDITY. The showing, representation, or depiction of human male or
female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a full, opaque
covering, or of a female breast with less than a full, opaque covering of any
portion thereof below the top of the nipple, or of covered male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state.



   OBSCENE. When considered as a whole, and judged with reference to
ordinary adults or, if it is designed for sexual deviates or other specially
susceptible group, judged with reference to that group, any material or
performance is "obscene" if any of the following apply:



      (1)   Its dominant appeal is to prurient interest.



      (2)   Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or
depicting sexual activity, masturbation, sexual excitement, or nudity in a
way that tends to represent human beings as mere objects of sexual appetite.



      (3)   Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or
depicting bestiality or extreme or bizarre violence, cruelty, or brutality.



      (4)   Its dominant tendency is to appeal to scatological
interest by displaying or depicting human bodily functions of elimination in
a way that inspires disgust or revulsion in persons with ordinary
sensibilities, without serving any genuine scientific, educational,
sociological, moral, or artistic purpose.



      (5)   It contains a series of displays or descriptions of
sexual activity, masturbation, sexual excitement, nudity, bestiality, extreme
or bizarre violence, cruelty, or brutality, or human bodily functions of
elimination, the cumulative effect of which is a dominant tendency to appeal
to prurient or scatological interest, when the appeal to such an interest is
primarily for its own sake or for commercial exploitation, rather than
primarily for a genuine scientific, educational, sociological, moral, or
artistic purpose.



   PERFORMANCE. Any motion picture, preview, trailer, play, show, skit,
dance, or other exhibition performed before an audience.



   PROSTITUTE. A male or female who promiscuously engages in sexual
activity for hire, regardless of whether the hire is paid to the prostitute
or to another.



   SADO-MASOCHISTIC ABUSE. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person or
the condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restrained.



   SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Sexual conduct or sexual contact, or both.



   SEXUAL CONDUCT. Vaginal intercourse between a male and female; anal
intercourse, fellatio, and cunnilingus between persons regardless of sex;
and, without privilege to do so, the insertion, however slight, of any part
of the body or any instrument, apparatus, or other object into the vaginal or
anal opening of another. Penetration, however slight, is sufficient to
complete vaginal or anal intercourse.



   SEXUAL CONTACT. Any touching of an erogenous zone of another, including
without limitation the thigh, genitals, buttock, pubic region, or, if the
person is a female, a breast, for the purpose of sexually arousing or
gratifying either person.



   SEXUAL EXCITEMENT. The condition of human male or female genitals when
in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.



   SPOUSE. A person married to an offender at the time of an alleged
offense, except that such person shall not be considered the spouse when any
of the following apply:



      (1)   When the parties have entered into a written separation
agreement pursuant to R.C. § 3103.06.



      (2)   When an action is pending between the parties for
annulment, divorce, dissolution of marriage, or legal separation.



      (3)   In the case of an action for legal separation, after the
effective date of the judgment for legal separation.



(R.C. § 2907.01)



§ 133.02 UNLAWFUL SEXUAL CONDUCT WITH A MINOR.



   (A)   No person who is 18 years of age or older shall engage in
sexual conduct with another who is not the spouse of the offender, when the
offender knows the other person is 13 years of age or older but less than 16
years of age, or the offender is reckless in that regard.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful sexual
conduct with a minor.



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2),
unlawful sexual conduct with a minor is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(3) of this
section, if the offender is less than four years older than the other person,
unlawful sexual conduct with a minor is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (3)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a violation of R.C. §§  2907.02, 2907.03 or 2907.04, or
any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or a violation of former
R.C. § 2907.12, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
unlawful sexual conduct with a minor is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2907.04)



Statutory reference:



   DNA testing of prisoners for violating this section, see R.C. § 2901.07



§ 133.03  SEXUAL IMPOSITION.



   (A)   No person shall have sexual contact with another, not the
spouse of the offender; cause another, not the spouse of the offender, to
have sexual contact with the offender; or cause two or more other persons to
have sexual contact when any of the following applies:



      (1)   The offender knows that the sexual contact is offensive
to the other person, or one of the other persons, or is reckless in that
regard.



      (2)   The offender knows that the other person's, or one of
the other person's ability to appraise the nature of or control the
offender's or touching person's conduct is substantially impaired.



      (3)   The offender knows that the other person, or one of the
other persons, submits because of being unaware of the sexual contact.



      (4)   The other person, or one of the other persons, is 13
years of age or older but less than 16 years of age, whether or not the
offender knows the age of the person, and the offender is at least 18 years
of age and four or more years older than the other person.



      (5)   The offender is a mental health professional, the other
person or one of the other persons is a mental health client or patient of
the offender, and the offender induces the other person who is the client or
patient to submit by falsely representing to the other person who is the
client or patient that the sexual contact is necessary for mental health
treatment purposes.



   (B)   No person shall be convicted of a violation of this section
solely upon the victim's testimony unsupported by other evidence.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of sexual imposition,
a misdemeanor of the third degree.  If the offender has been convicted
previously of a violation of this section, R.C. § 2907.02, 2907.03, 2907.04,
2907.05, 2907.06, former R.C. § 2907.12, or a substantially equivalent state
law or municipal ordinance, a violation of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.



(R.C. § 2907.06)



Statutory reference:



   Gross sexual imposition, felony, see R.C. § 2907.05



   Notice to licensing board or agency upon indictment, conviction or
guilty plea of mental health professional, see R.C. §§ 2907.17 and 2907.18



§ 133.04  PUBLIC INDECENCY.



   (A)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following, under
circumstances in which the person's conduct is likely to be viewed by and
affront others who are in the person's physical proximity and who are not
members of the person's household:



      (1)   Expose the persons's private parts.



      (2)   Engage in sexual conduct or masturbation.



      (3)   Engage in conduct that to an ordinary observer would
appear to be sexual conduct or masturbation.



   (B)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following, under
circumstances in which the person's conduct is likely to be viewed by and
affront another person who is a minor, who is not the spouse of the offender,
and who resides in the person's household:



      (1)   Engage in masturbation.



      (2)   Engage in sexual conduct.



      (3)   Engage in conduct that to an ordinary observer would
appear to be sexual conduct or masturbation.



      (4)   Expose the person's private parts with the purpose of
personal sexual arousal or gratification or to lure the minor into sexual
activity.



   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of public
indecency and shall be punished as provided in divisions (C)(2), (C)(3),
(C)(4), and (C)(5) of this section.



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(2), a
violation of division (A)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
one violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a violation of division (A)(1) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the third degree or, if any person who was likely to view and
be affronted by the offender's conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the
second degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two violations of this section or a substantially equivalent state
law or municipal ordinance, a violation of division (A)(1) of this section is
a misdemeanor of the second degree or, if any person who was likely to view
and be affronted by the offender's conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to three or more violations of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of division (A)(1)
of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if any person who
was likely to view and be affronted by the offender's conduct was a minor, a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(3), a
violation of division (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the third degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state
law or municipal ordinance, a violation of division (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the second degree or, if any person who was
likely to view and be affronted by the offender's conduct was a minor, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of
division (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by the
offender's conduct was a minor, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.



      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(4), a
violation of division (B)(1), (B)(2), or (B)(3) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the second degree. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of
division (B)(1), (B)(2), or (B)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of division (B)(1),
(B)(2), or (B)(3) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(5), a
violation of division (B)(4) of this section  is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
any violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a violation of division (B)(4) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2907.09)



   (D)   A mother is entitled to breast-feed her baby in any location
of a place of public accommodation, as defined in R.C. § 4112.01, wherein
the mother otherwise is permitted.



(R.C. § 3781.55)



Statutory reference:



   Bail considerations for persons charged, see R.C. § 2907.41



§ 133.05  VOYEURISM.



   (A)   No person, for the purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying
himself or herself, shall commit trespass or otherwise surreptitiously invade
the privacy of another, to spy or eavesdrop upon another.



   (B)   No person, for the purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying
himself or herself, shall commit trespass or otherwise surreptitiously invade
the privacy of another to videotape, film, photograph, or otherwise record
the other person in a state of nudity.



   (C)   No person, for the purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying
himself or herself, shall commit trespass or otherwise surreptitiously invade
the privacy of another to videotape, film, photograph, otherwise record, or
spy or eavesdrop upon the other person in a state of nudity if the other
person is a minor.



   (D)   No person shall secretly or surreptitiously videotape, film,
photograph, or otherwise record another person under or through the clothing
being worn by that person for the purpose of viewing the body of, or the
undergarments worn by, that other person.



   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of voyeurism.



      (1)   A violation of division (A) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the third degree.



      (2)   A violation of division (B) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the second degree.



      (3)   A violation of division (D) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (4)   A violation of division (C) of this section is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2907.08)



§ 133.06  POLYGRAPH EXAMINATIONS FOR VICTIMS: RESTRICTIONS ON USE.



   (A)   (1)   A peace officer, prosecutor, or other public official
shall not ask or require a victim of an alleged sex offense to submit to a
polygraph examination as a condition for proceeding with the investigation of
the alleged sex offense.



      (2)   The refusal of the victim of an alleged sex offense to
submit to a polygraph examination shall not prevent the investigation of the
alleged sex offense, the filing of criminal charges with respect to the
alleged sex offense, or the prosecution of the alleged perpetrator of the
alleged sex offense.



   (B)   As used in this section:



      PEACE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.51.



      POLYGRAPH EXAMINATION. Means any mechanical or electrical
instrument or device of any type used or allegedly used to examine, test, or
question an individual for the purpose of determining the individual's
truthfulness.



      PROSECUTION. Means the prosecution of criminal charges in a
criminal prosecution or the prosecution of a delinquent child complaint in a
delinquency proceeding.



      PROSECUTOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01.



      PUBLIC OFFICIAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 117.01.



      SEX OFFENSE. Means a violation of any provision of §§ 133.02 to
133.05 or R.C. §§ 2907.02 to 2907.09.



(R.C. § 2907.10)



§ 133.07  PROCURING.



   (A)   No person, knowingly and for gain, shall do either of the
following:



      (1)   Entice or solicit another to patronize a prostitute or
brothel;



      (2)   Procure a prostitute for another to patronize, or take
or direct another at the other’s request to any place for the purpose of
patronizing a prostitute.



   (B)   No person, having authority or responsibility over the use of
premises, shall knowingly permit the premises to be used for the purpose of
engaging in sexual activity for hire.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of procuring. Except
as otherwise provided in this division, procuring is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the prostitute who is procured, patronized, or otherwise
involved in a violation of division (A)(2) of this section is under 18 years
of age at the time of the violation, regardless of whether the offender who
violates division (A)(2) of this section knows the prostitute’s age, or if
a prostitute who engages in sexual activity for hire in premises used in
violation of division (B) of this section is under 18 years of age at the
time of the violation, regardless of whether the offender who violates
division (B) of this section knows the prostitute’s age, procuring is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2907.23)



§ 133.08  SOLICITING; LOITERING TO ENGAGE IN.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall solicit another who is 18 years of
age or older to engage with the other person in sexual activity for hire.



      (2)   No person shall solicit another to engage with such
other person in sexual activity for hire if the other person is 16 or 17
years of age and the offender knows that the other person is 16 or 17 years
of age or is reckless in that regard.



      (3)   No person shall solicit another to engage with such
other person in sexual activity for hire if either of the following applies:



         (a)   The other person is less than 16 years of age,
whether or not the offender knows the age of the other person.



         (b)   The other person is a developmentally disabled
person and the offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe the other
person is a developmentally disabled person.



   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is
guilty of soliciting. A violation of division (A)(1) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the third degree. A violation of division (A)(2) or (A)(3) of
this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (2)   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of division (A) of this section or an attempt to commit a violation
of division (A) of this section and if the person, in committing or
attempting to commit the violation, was in, was on, or used a motor vehicle,
the court, in addition to or independent of all other penalties imposed for
the violation, may impose upon the offender a class six suspension of the
person’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege
from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(6).  In lieu of imposing upon
the offender the class six suspension, the court instead may require the
offender to perform community service for a number of hours determined by the
court.



   (C)   As used in division (A) of this section:



      DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED PERSON. Has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 2905.32.



      SEXUAL ACTIVITY FOR HIRE. Means an implicit or explicit agreement
to provide sexual activity in exchange for anything of value paid to the
person engaging in such sexual activity, to any person trafficking that
person, or to any person associated with either such person.



(R.C. § 2907.24(A), (C)(1), (D), (E))



   (D)   No person, with purpose to solicit another to engage in sexual
activity for hire and while in or near a public place, shall do any of the
following:



      (1)   Beckon to, stop or attempt to stop another;



      (2)   Engage or attempt to engage another in conversation;



      (3)   Stop or attempt to stop the operator of a vehicle or
approach a stationary vehicle;



      (4)   If the offender is the operator of or a passenger in a
vehicle, stop, attempt to stop, beckon to, attempt to beckon to, or entice
another to approach or enter the vehicle of which the offender is the
operator or in which the offender is the passenger;



      (5)   Interfere with the free passage of another.



   (E)   As used in division (D) of this section:



      PUBLIC PLACE means any of the following:



         (a)   A street, road, highway, thoroughfare, bikeway,
walkway, sidewalk, bridge, alley, alleyway, plaza, park, driveway, parking
lot or transportation facility.



         (b)   A doorway or entrance way to a building that
fronts on a place described in division (a) of this definition.



         (c)   A place not described in division (a) or (b) of
this definition that is open to the public.



      VEHICLE.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.



   (F)   Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty of
loitering to engage in solicitation, a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 2907.241)



Statutory reference:



   Offenders with knowledge that they test HIV positive, felony, see R.C.
§§ 2907.24(B) and 2907.241(B)



   Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see R.C. § 2907.27



§ 133.09  PROSTITUTION.



   (A)   No person shall engage in sexual activity for hire.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of prostitution, a
misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 2907.25)



Statutory reference:



   Offenders with knowledge that they test HIV positive, felony, see R.C.
§ 2907.25(B)



   Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see R.C. § 2907.27



§ 133.10  DISSEMINATING MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.



   (A)   No person, with knowledge of its character or content, shall
recklessly do any of following:



      (1)   Directly sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide,
exhibit, rent, or present to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law
enforcement officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement
officers posing as juveniles any material or performance that is obscene or
harmful to juveniles;



      (2)   Directly offer or agree to sell, deliver, furnish,
disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent, or present to a juvenile, a group of
juveniles, a law enforcement officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law
enforcement officers posing as juveniles any material or performance that is
obscene or harmful to juveniles;



      (3)   While in the physical proximity of the juvenile or law
enforcement officer posing as a juvenile, allow any juvenile or law
enforcement officer posing as a juvenile to review or peruse any material or
view any live performance that is harmful to juveniles.



   (B)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this
section that involves material or a performance that is harmful to juveniles
but not obscene:



      (1)   The defendant is the parent, guardian, or spouse of the
juvenile involved.



      (2)   The juvenile involved, at the time of the conduct in
question, was accompanied by his or her parent or guardian who, with
knowledge of its character, consented to the material or performance being
furnished or presented to the juvenile.



      (3)   The juvenile exhibited to the defendant or his or her
agent or employee a draft card, driver's license, birth record, marriage
license, or other official or apparently official document purporting to show
that the juvenile was 18 years of age or over or married, and the person to
whom the document was exhibited did not otherwise have reasonable cause to
believe that the juvenile was under the age of 18 and unmarried.



   (C)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this
section, involving material or a performance that is obscene or harmful to
juveniles, that the material or performance was furnished or presented for a
bona fide medical, scientific, educational, governmental, judicial, or other
proper purpose, by a physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist,
teacher, librarian, clergy, prosecutor, judge, or other proper person.



      (2)   Except as provided in division (B)(3) of this section,
mistake of age is not a defense to a charge under this section.



   (D)   (1)   A person directly sells, delivers, furnishes,
disseminates, provides, exhibits, rents, or presents or directly offers or
agrees to sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent, or
present material or a performance to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law
enforcement officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement
officers posing as juveniles in violation of this section by means of an
electronic method of remotely transmitting information if the person knows or
has reason to believe that the person receiving the information is a juvenile
or the group of persons receiving the information are juveniles.



      (2)   A person remotely transmitting information by means of a
method of mass distribution does not directly sell, deliver, furnish,
disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent, or present or directly offer or agree to
sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent, or present the
material or performance in question to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a
law enforcement officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement
officers posing as juveniles in violation of this section if either of the
following applies:



         (a)   The person has inadequate information to know or
have reason to believe that a particular recipient of the information or
offer is a juvenile.



         (b)   The method of mass distribution does not provide
the person the ability to prevent a particular recipient from receiving the
information.



   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disseminating
matter harmful to juveniles. If the material or performance involved is
harmful to juveniles except as otherwise provided in this division, a
violation of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
material or performance involved is obscene, violation of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2907.31)



   (F)   Presumptions, notice and defense.



      (1)   An owner or manager, or agent or employee of an owner or
manager, of a bookstore, newsstand, theater, or other commercial
establishment engaged in selling material or exhibiting performances, who, in
the course of business does any of the acts prohibited by this section is
presumed to have knowledge of the character of the material or performance
involved if the owner, manager, or agent or employee of the owner or manager
has actual notice of the nature of such material or performance, whether or
not the owner, manager, or agent or employee of the owner or manager has
precise knowledge of its contents.



      (2)   Without limitation on the manner in which such notice
may be given, actual notice of the character of material or a performance may
be given in writing by the chief legal officer of the municipality. Such
notice, regardless of the manner in which it is given, shall identify the
sender, identify the material or performance involved, state whether it is
obscene or harmful to juveniles, and bear the date of such notice.



      (3)   This § 133.10 does not apply to a motion picture
operator or projectionist acting within the scope of employment as an
employee of the owner or manager of the theater or other place for the
showing of motion pictures to the general public, and having no managerial
responsibility or financial interest in the operator's or projectionist's
place of employment, other than wages.



      (4)   (a)   The provisions of §§ 133.10, 133.11 and
133.12(A) do not apply to a person solely because the person provided access
or connection to or from an electronic method of remotely transferring
information not under that person's control, including having provided
capabilities that are incidental to providing access or connection to or from
the electronic method of remotely transferring the information, and that do
not include the creation of the content of the material that is the subject
of the access or connection.



         (b)   Division (E)(4)(a) of this section does not apply
to a person who conspires with an entity actively involved in the creation or
knowing distribution of material in violation of § 133.10, 133.11, or 133.12
or who knowingly advertises the availability of material of that nature.



         (c)   Division (E)(4)(a) of this section does not apply
to a person who provides access or connection to an electronic method of
remotely transferring information that is engaged in the violation of §
133.10, 133.11, or 133.12 and that contain content that person has selected
and introduced into the electronic method of remotely transferring
information or content over which that person exercises editorial control.



      (5)   An employer is not guilty of a violation of § 133.10,
133.11, or 133.12 based on the actions of an employee or agent of the
employer unless the employee's or agent's conduct is within the scope of the
employee's or agent's employment or agency, and the employer does either of
the following:



         (a)   With knowledge of the employee's or agent's
conduct, the employer authorizes or ratifies the conduct.



         (b)   The employer recklessly disregards the employee's
or agent's conduct.



      (6)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under § 133.10
or 133.11 as the section applies to an image transmitted through the internet
or other electronic method of remotely transmitting information that the
person charged with violating the section has taken, in good faith,
reasonable, effective, and appropriate actions under the circumstances to
restrict or prevent access by juveniles to material that is harmful to
juveniles, including any method that is feasible under available technology.



(R.C. § 2907.35)



§ 133.11  DISPLAYING MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.



   (A)   No person who has custody, control, or supervision of a
commercial establishment, with knowledge of the character or content of the
material involved, shall display at the establishment any material that is
harmful to juveniles and that is open to view by juveniles as part of the
invited general public.



   (B)   It is not a violation of division (A) of this section if the
material in question is displayed by placing it behind "blinder racks" or
similar devices that cover at least the lower two-thirds of the material, if
the material in question is wrapped or placed behind the counter, or if the
material in question otherwise is covered or located so that the portion that
is harmful to juveniles is not open to the view of juveniles.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of displaying matter
harmful to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  Each day during
which the offender is in violation of this section constitutes a separate
offense.



(R.C. § 2907.311)



Cross-reference:



   Presumptions, notice and defense, see § 133.10(F)



§ 133.12  DECEPTION TO OBTAIN MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.



   (A)   No person, for the purpose of enabling a juvenile to obtain
any material or gain admission to any performance which is harmful to
juveniles, shall do either of the following:



      (1)   Falsely represent that he or she is the parent,
guardian, or spouse of the juvenile.



      (2)   Furnish the juvenile with any identification or document
purporting to show that the juvenile is 18 years of age or over or married.



   (B)   No juvenile, for the purpose of obtaining any material or
gaining admission to any performance which is harmful to juveniles, shall do
either of the following:



      (1)   Falsely represent that he or she is 18 years of age or
over or married.



      (2)   Exhibit any identification or document purporting to
show that he or she is 18 years of age or over or married.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of deception to obtain
matter harmful to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the second degree.  A juvenile
who violates division (B) of this section shall be adjudged an unruly child,
with the disposition of the case as may be appropriate under R.C. Chapter
2151.



(R.C. § 2907.33)



Cross-reference:



   Presumptions, notice and defense, see § 133.10(F)



Statutory reference:



   Juvenile Court, see R.C. Chapter 2151



§ 133.13  RULES OF EVIDENCE.



   (A)   In any case in which it is necessary to prove that a place is
a brothel, evidence as to the reputation of such place and as to the
reputation of the persons who inhabit or frequent it is admissible on the
question of whether such place is or is not a brothel.



   (B)   In any case in which it is necessary to prove that a person is
a prostitute, evidence as to the reputation of such person is admissible on
the question of whether such person is or is not a prostitute.



   (C)   In any prosecution for a violation of §§ 133.07 to 133.09,
proof of a prior conviction of the accused of any such offense or
substantially equivalent offense is admissible in support of the charge.



   (D)   The prohibition contained in R.C. § 2317.02(D) against
testimony by a husband or wife concerning communications between them does
not apply, and the accused's spouse may testify concerning any such
communication in any of the following cases:



      (1)   When the husband or wife is charged with a violation of
§ 133.07 and the spouse testifying was the prostitute involved in the
offense or the person who used the offender's premises to engage in sexual
activity for hire;



      (2)   When the husband or wife is charged with a violation of
§ 133.08(A) or § 133.09.



(R.C. § 2907.26)



§ 133.14  DECLARATORY JUDGMENT.



   (A)   Without limitation on the persons otherwise entitled to bring
an action for a declaratory judgment pursuant to R.C. Chapter 2721, involving
the same issue, the following persons have standing to bring a declaratory
judgment action to determine whether particular materials or performances are
obscene or harmful to juveniles:



      (1)   The chief legal officer of the municipality if and when
there is reasonable cause to believe that R.C. § 2907.31 or R.C. § 2907.32,
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, is being or is about to be
violated;



      (2)   Any person who, pursuant to R.C. § 2907.35(B) or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, has received notice in writing
from the chief legal officer stating that particular materials or
performances are obscene or harmful to juveniles.



   (B)   Any party to an action for a declaratory judgment pursuant to
division (A) of this section is entitled, upon the party's request, to trial
on the merits within five days after joinder of the issues, and the court
shall render judgment within five days after trial is concluded.



   (C)   An action for a declaratory judgement pursuant to division (A)
of this section shall not be brought during the pendency of any civil action
or criminal prosecution when the character of the particular materials or
performances involved is at issue in the pending case, and either of the
following applies:



      (1)   Either of the parties to the action for a declaratory
judgment is a party to the pending case;



      (2)   A judgment in the pending case will necessarily
constitute res judicata as to the character of the materials or performances
involved.



   (D)   A civil action or criminal prosecution in which the character
of particular materials or performances is at issue, brought during the
pendency of an action for a declaratory judgment involving the same issue,
shall be stayed during the pendency of the action for a declaratory judgment.



   (E)   The fact that a violation of R.C. § 2907.31 or R.C. §
2907.32, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, occurs prior to a
judicial determination of the character of the material or performance
involved in the violation does not relieve the offender of criminal liability
for the violation, even though prosecution may be stayed pending the judicial
determination.



(R.C. § 2907.36)



§ 133.15  INJUNCTION; ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.



   (A)   Where it appears that R.C. § 2907.31 or R.C. § 2907.32, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, is being or is about to be
violated, the chief legal officer of the municipality may bring an action to
enjoin the violation.  The defendant, upon his or her request, is entitled
to trial on the merits within five days after the joinder of the issues, and
the court shall render judgment within five days after the trial is concluded.



   (B)   Premises used or occupied for repeated violations of R.C. §
2907.31 or R.C. § 2907.32, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, constitute a nuisance subject to abatement pursuant to R.C.
Chapter 3767.



(R.C. § 2907.37)



Statutory reference:



   Disseminating matter harmful to juveniles, felony, see R.C. § 2907.31



   Pandering obscenity, felony, see R.C. § 2907.32



§ 133.16  NOTICE OF RESIDENCE OF SEX OFFENDERS.



   (A)   (1)   The Chief of Police, upon receipt of the notice from
the County Sheriff or the Ohio Attorney General pursuant to R.C. § 2950.11,
or the administrative regulations adopted under authority of R.C. § 2950.13
(hereinafter "2950 Notice"), in addition to any notice required under R.C.
Chapter 2950 and any regulations adopted thereunder, shall provide a copy of
the 2950 Notice to all residences located within a radius of one-quarter of a
mile or three blocks, whichever is greater, of the address listed within the
2950 Notice of the residence of the sexual predator or habitual sex
offender.  The Chief of Police shall send such notice within 72 hours of the
receipt of the 2950 Notice from the County Sheriff or Ohio Attorney
General.  The delivery of this notice may be accomplished by personal
delivery to a principal adult occupant of the residences in the area
described above, or by mailing a copy of the notice by ordinary U.S. Mail
addressed to the owner or principal occupant of the residences in the
affected areas as such owner or principal occupant is identified within the
business records maintained by the Police Department.



      (2)   As a public record, the Chief of Police also is
authorized to release a copy of the 2950 Notice to a newspaper in general
circulation within the Montgomery community which regularly receives crime
reports or statistics from the Police Department. 



   (B)   The procedure set forth herein is not intended to create a
cause of action against any official, administrative officer, employee or
agent of the city, nor is the procedure adopted herein intended in any way to
impact the immunity extended to such persons pursuant to R.C. § 2950.12. 
Such statutory immunity is reserved to all protected individuals and
organizations as outlined in R.C. § 2950.12 or successor statute.  As a
public record subject to publication and disclosure, this section is intended
to provide a procedure for effectively disseminating the public information
provided to the Police Department concerning sexual predators or habitual sex
offenders residing within the community. The procedure adopted herein is
intended to ensure appropriate public safety, and it is not intended to
create any obligation upon the Police Department nor any official or employee
of the city to disseminate such information or to create liability for the
failure to disseminate such information in a timely and complete manner.



(Ord. 2-2001, passed 2-7-01)



§ 133.17 UNLAWFUL ADVERTISING OF MASSAGE.



   (A)   No person, by means of a statement, solicitation, or offer in
a print or electronic publication, sign, placard, storefront display, or
other medium, shall advertise massage, relaxation massage, any other massage
technique or method, or any related service, with the suggestion or promise
of sexual activity.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful
advertising of massage, a misdemeanor of the first degree.



   (C)   Nothing in this section prevents the municipality from
enacting any regulation of the advertising of massage further than and in
addition to the provisions of divisions (A) and (B) of this section.



   (D)   As used in this section, SEXUAL ACTIVITY has the same meaning
as in R.C. § 2907.01.



(R.C. § 2927.17)



§ 133.99  SENTENCING FOR SEXUALLY ORIENTED OFFENSES; SEXUAL PREDATORS;
REGISTRATION.



   (A)   If an offender is being sentenced for a sexually oriented
offense or child-victim oriented offense that is a misdemeanor committed on
or after January 1, 1997, and the offender is a tier III sex
offender/child-victim offender relative to the offense or the offense is any
offense listed in R.C. § 2901.07(D)(1) to (D)(3), the judge shall include in
the offender's sentence a statement that the offender is a tier III sex
offender/child-victim offender, shall comply with the requirements of R.C. §
2950.03, and shall require the offender to submit to a DNA specimen
collection procedure pursuant to R.C. § 2901.07.



   (B)   If an offender is being sentenced for a sexually oriented
offense or a child-victim oriented offense that is a misdemeanor committed on
or after January 1, 1997, the judge shall include in the sentence a summary
of the offender's duties imposed under R.C. §§ 2950.04, 2950.041, 2950.05,
and 2950.06, and the duration of the duties. The judge shall inform the
offender, at the time of sentencing, of those duties and of their duration.
If required under R.C. § 2950.03(A)(2), the judge shall perform the duties
specified in that section or, if required under R.C. § 2950.03(A)(6), the
judge shall perform the duties specified in that division.



(R.C. § 2929.23)



Cross-reference:



   Sentencing generally, see Chapter 130



CHAPTER 134:  GAMBLING OFFENSES



Section



   134.01   Definitions



   134.02   Prohibitions against gambling; exception



   134.03   Operating a gambling house



   134.04   Public gaming



   134.05   Cheating



   134.06   Regulations concerning operation of licensed bingo game



   134.07   Records to be kept



   134.08   Requirements for bingo game operators



   134.09   Bingo games for amusement only



   134.10   Prohibitions where instant bingo game is conducted



   134.11   Raffle drawings



   134.12   Instant bingo other than at bingo sessions



   134.13   Restrictions on owner or lessor of location at instant bingo



   134.14   Skill-based amusement machines; prohibited conduct



Statutory reference:



   Charitable bingo license applications, see O.A.C. Chapter 109:1-3



   Conducting an illegal bingo game, felony, see R.C. § 2915.07



   Licensing bingo games by Attorney General, see R.C. § 2915.08



   Licensing distributors of bingo supplies by Attorney General, see R.C.
§ 2915.081



   Licensing manufacturers of bingo supplies by Attorney General, see R.C.
§ 2915.082



§ 134.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BET. The hazarding of anything of value upon the result of an event,
undertaking, or contingency, but does not include a bona fide business risk.



   BINGO. Either of the following:



      (1)   A game with all of the following characteristics:



         (a)   The participants use bingo cards or sheets,
including paper formats and electronic representation or image formats, that
are divided into 25 spaces arranged in five horizontal and five vertical rows
of spaces, with each space, except the central space, being designated by a
combination of a letter and a number and with the central space being
designated as a free space;



         (b)   The participants cover the spaces on the bingo
cards or sheets that correspond to combinations of letters and numbers that
are announced by a bingo game operator;



         (c)   A bingo game operator announces combinations of
letters and numbers that appear on objects that a bingo game operator selects
by chance, either manually or mechanically, from a receptacle that contains
75 objects at the beginning of each game, each object marked by a different
combination of a letter and a number that corresponds to one of the 75
possible combinations of a letter and a number that can appear on the bingo
cards or sheets;



         (d)   The winner of the bingo game includes any
participant who properly announces during the interval between the
announcements of letters and numbers, as described in division (1)(c) of this
definition, that a predetermined and pre-announced pattern of spaces has been
covered on a bingo card or sheet being used by the participant.



      (2)   Instant bingo, punch boards, and raffles.



   BINGO GAME OPERATOR. Any person, except security personnel, who
performs work or labor at the site of bingo including but not limited to
collecting money from participants, handing out bingo cards or sheets or
objects to cover spaces on bingo cards or sheets, selecting from a receptacle
the objects that contain the combination of letters and numbers that appear
on bingo cards or sheets, calling out the combinations of letters and
numbers, distributing prizes, selling or redeeming instant bingo tickets or
cards, supervising the operation of a punch board, selling raffle tickets,
selecting raffle tickets from a receptacle and announcing the winning numbers
in a raffle, and preparing, selling, and serving food or beverages.



   BINGO SESSION. A period that includes both of the following:



      (1)   Not to exceed five continuous hours for the conduct of
one or more games described in division (1) of the definition of "bingo" in
this section, instant bingo, and seal cards;



      (2)   A period for the conduct of instant bingo and seal cards
for not more than two hours before and not more than two hours after the
period described in division (1) of this definition.



   BINGO SUPPLIES. Bingo cards or sheets; instant bingo tickets or cards;
electronic bingo aids; raffle tickets; punch boards; seal cards; instant
bingo ticket dispensers; and devices for selecting or displaying the
combination of bingo letters and numbers or raffle tickets. Items that are
"bingo supplies" are not gambling devices if sold or otherwise provided, and
used, in accordance with this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915. For purposes of
this chapter, "bingo supplies" are not to be considered equipment used to
conduct a bingo game.



   BOOKMAKING. The business of receiving or paying off bets.



   CHAMBER OF COMMERCE. Any organization of individuals, professionals,
and businesses that has the purpose to advance the commercial, financial,
industrial, and civic interests of the community and that is, and has
received from the Internal Revenue Service a determination letter that
currently is in effect stating that the organization is, exempt from federal
income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(6).



   CHARITABLE BINGO GAME. Any bingo game described in divisions (1) or (2)
of the definition of “bingo” in this section that is conducted by a
charitable organization that has obtained a license pursuant to R.C. §
2915.08 and the proceeds of which are used for a charitable purpose.



   CHARITABLE INSTANT BINGO ORGANIZATION. An organization that is exempt
from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC §
501(c)(3) and is a charitable organization as defined in this section. The
term does not include a charitable organization that is exempt from federal
income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3) and
that is created by a veteran’s organization, a fraternal organization, or a
sporting organization in regards to bingo conducted or assisted by a
veteran’s organization, a fraternal organization, or a sporting
organization pursuant to R.C. § 2915.13, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.



   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION.



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter,
“charitable organization” means either of the following:



         (a)   An organization that is and has received from the
Internal Revenue Service a determination letter that is currently in effect,
stating that the organization is exempt from federal income taxation under
IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3);



         (b)   A volunteer rescue service organization, volunteer
firefighter’s organization, veteran’s organization, fraternal
organization, or sporting organization that is exempt from federal income
taxation under IRC §§ 501(c)(4), 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10) or
501(c)(19).



      (2)   To qualify as a charitable organization, an organization
shall have been in continuous existence as such in this state for a period of
two years immediately preceding either the making of an application for a
bingo license under R.C. § 2915.08 or the conducting of any game of chance
as provided in R.C. § 2915.02(D), or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.



   CHARITABLE PURPOSE. Means that the net profit of bingo, other than
instant bingo, is used by, or is given, donated, or otherwise transferred to,
any of the following:



      (1)   Any organization that is described in IRC §§
509(a)(1), 509(a)(2), or 509(a)(3) and is either a governmental unit or an
organization that is tax exempt under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC §
501(c)(3);



      (2)   A veteran’s organization that is a post, chapter, or
organization of veterans, or an auxiliary unit or society of, or a trust or
foundation for, any such post, chapter, or organization organized in the
United States or any of its possessions, at least 75% of the members of which
are veterans and substantially all of the other members of which are
individuals who are spouses, widows, or widowers of veterans, or such
individuals, provided that no part of the net earnings of such post, chapter,
or organization inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or
individual, and further provided that the net profit is used by the post,
chapter, or organization for the charitable purposes set forth in R.C. §
5739.02(B)(12), is used for awarding scholarships to or for attendance at an
institution mentioned in that division of the Ohio Revised Code, is donated
to a governmental agency, or is used for nonprofit youth activities, the
purchase of United States or Ohio flags that are donated to schools, youth
groups, or other bona fide nonprofit organizations, promotion of patriotism,
or disaster relief;



      (3)   A fraternal organization that has been in continuous
existence in this state for 15 years and that uses the net profit exclusively
for religious, charitable, scientific, literary, or educational purposes, or
for the prevention of cruelty to children or animals, if contributions for
such use would qualify as a deductible charitable contribution under IRC §
170;



      (4)   A volunteer firefighter’s organization that uses the
net profit for the purposes set forth in the definition of “volunteer
firefighter’s organization” in this section.



   COMMUNITY ACTION AGENCY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 122.66.



   CONDUCT. To back, promote, organize, manage, carry on, sponsor, or
prepare for the operation of bingo or a game of chance, a scheme of chance,
or a sweepstakes.



   DEAL OF INSTANT BINGO TICKETS. A single game of instant bingo tickets
all with the same serial number.



   DISTRIBUTOR. Any person who purchases or obtains bingo supplies and who
does either of the following:



      (1)   Sells, offers for sale, or otherwise provides or offers
to provide the bingo supplies to another person for use in this state;



      (2)   Modifies, converts, adds to, or removes parts from the
bingo supplies to further their promotion or sale for use in this state.



   ELECTRONIC BINGO AID.



      (1)   An electronic device used by a participant to monitor
bingo cards or sheets purchased at the time and place of a bingo session and
that does all of the following:



         (a)   It provides a means for a participant to input
numbers and letters announced by a bingo caller.



         (b)   It compares the numbers and letters entered by the
participant to the bingo faces previously stored in the memory of the device.



         (c)   It identifies a winning bingo pattern.



      (2)   The term does not include any device into which a coin,
currency, token, or an equivalent is inserted to activate play.



   EXPENSES. The reasonable amount of gross profit actually expended for
all of the following:



      (1)   The purchase or lease of bingo supplies;



      (2)   The annual license fee required under R.C. § 2915.08;



      (3)   Bank fees and service charges for a bingo session or
game account described in R.C. § 2915.10;



      (4)   Audits and accounting services;



      (5)   Safes;



      (6)   Cash registers;



      (7)   Hiring security personnel;



      (8)   Advertising bingo;



      (9)   Renting premises in which to conduct a bingo session;



      (10)   Tables and chairs;



      (11)   Expenses for maintaining and operating a charitable
organization’s facilities, including but not limited to a post home, club
house, lounge, tavern, or canteen and any grounds attached to the post home,
club house, lounge, tavern, or canteen;



      (12)   Payment of real property taxes and assessments that are
levied on a premises on which bingo is conducted;



      (13)   Any other product or service directly related to the
conduct of bingo that is authorized in rules adopted by the Attorney General
under R.C. § 2915.08(B)(1).



   FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION. Any society, order, state headquarters, or
association within this state, except a college or high school fraternity,
that is not organized for profit, that is a branch, lodge, or chapter of a
national or state organization, that exists exclusively for the common
business or sodality of its members.



   GAMBLING DEVICE. Any of the following:



      (1)   A book, totalizer, or other equipment used for recording
bets;



      (2)   A ticket, token, or other device representing a chance,
share, or interest in a scheme of chance or evidencing a bet;



      (3)   A deck of cards, dice, gaming table, roulette wheel,
slot machine, or other apparatus designed for use in connection with a game
of chance;



      (4)   Any equipment, device, apparatus, or paraphernalia
specially designed for gambling purposes;



      (5)   Bingo supplies sold or otherwise provided, or used, in
violation of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915.



   GAMBLING OFFENSE. Any of the following:



      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2915.02, 2915.03, 2915.04,
2915.05, 2915.06, 2915.07, 2915.08, 2915.081, 2915.082, 2915.09, 2915.091,
2915.092, 2915.10, or 2915.11;



      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance
or law of this or any other state or of the United States substantially
equivalent to any section listed in division (1) of this definition or a
violation of R.C. § 2915.06 as it existed prior to July 1, 1996;



      (3)   An offense under an existing or former municipal
ordinance or law of this or any other state or of the United States, of which
gambling is an element;



      (4)   A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing, any offense under division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.



   GAME FLARE. The board or placard that accompanies each deal of instant
bingo tickets and that has printed on or affixed to it the following
information for the game:



      (1)   The name of the game;



      (2)   The manufacturer’s name or distinctive logo;



      (3)   The form number;



      (4)   The ticket count;



      (5)   The prize structure, including the number of winning
instant bingo tickets by denomination and the respective winning symbol or
number combinations for the winning instant bingo tickets;



      (6)   The cost per play;



      (7)   The serial number of the game.



   GAME OF CHANCE. Poker, craps, roulette, or other game in which a player
gives anything of value in the hope of gain, the outcome of which is
determined largely by chance, but does not include bingo.



   GAME OF CHANCE CONDUCTED FOR PROFIT. Any game of chance designed to
produce income for the person who conducts or operates the game of chance,
but does not include bingo.



   GROSS ANNUAL REVENUES. The annual gross receipts derived from the
conduct of bingo described in division (1) of the definition of “bingo”
in this section plus the annual net profit derived from the conduct of bingo
described in division (2) of the definition of “bingo” in this section.



   GROSS PROFIT. Gross receipts minus the amount actually expended for the
payment of prize awards.



   GROSS RECEIPTS. All money or assets, including admission fees, that a
person receives from bingo without the deduction of any amounts for prizes
paid out or for the expenses of conducting bingo. The term does not include
any money directly taken in from the sale of food or beverages by a
charitable organization conducting bingo, or by a bona fide auxiliary unit or
society of a charitable organization conducting bingo, provided all of the
following apply:



      (1)   The auxiliary unit or society has been in existence as a
bona fide auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization for at
least two years prior to conducting bingo.



      (2)   The person who purchases the food or beverage receives
nothing of value except the food or beverage and items customarily received
with the purchase of that food or beverage.



      (3)   The food and beverages are sold at customary and
reasonable prices.



   HISTORIC RAILROAD . All or a portion of the tracks and right-of-way of
a railroad that was owned and operated by a for profit common carrier in this
state at any time prior to January 1, 1950.



   INSTANT BINGO.   A form of bingo that shall use folded or banded
tickets or paper cards with perforated break-open tabs, a face of which is
covered or otherwise hidden from view to conceal a number, letter, or symbol,
or set of numbers, letters, or symbols, some of which have been designated in
advance as prize winners, and may also include games in which some winners
are determined by the random selection of one or more bingo numbers by the
use of a seal card or bingo blower. In all “instant bingo” the prize
amount and structure shall be predetermined. The term does not include any
device that is activated by the insertion of a coin, currency, token, or an
equivalent, and that contains as one of its components a video display
monitor that is capable of displaying numbers, letters, symbols, or
characters in winning or losing combinations.



   INSTANT BINGO TICKET DISPENSER. A mechanical device that dispenses an
instant bingo ticket or card as the sole item of value dispensed and that has
the following characteristics:



      (1)   It is activated upon the insertion of United States
currency.



      (2)   It performs no gaming functions.



      (3)   It does not contain a video display monitor or generate
noise.



      (4)   It is not capable of displaying any numbers, letters,
symbols, or characters in winning or losing combinations.



      (5)   It does not simulate or display rolling or spinning
reels.



      (6)   It is incapable of determining whether a dispensed bingo
ticket or card is a winning or non-winning ticket or card and requires a
winning ticket or card to be paid by a bingo game operator.



      (7)   It may provide accounting and security features to aid
in accounting for the instant bingo tickets or cards it dispenses.



      (8)   It is not part of an electronic network and is not
interactive.



   INTERNAL REVENUE CODE (IRC). The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, 100
Stat. 2085, 26 U.S.C. §§ 1 et seq., as now or hereafter amended.



   MANUFACTURER. Any person who assembles completed bingo supplies from
raw materials, other items, or subparts or who modifies, converts, adds to,
or removes parts from bingo supplies to further their promotion or sale.



   MERCHANDISE PRIZE. Any item of value, but shall not include any of the
following:



      (1)   Cash, gift cards, or any equivalent thereof;



      (2)   Plays on games of chance, state lottery tickets, bingo,
or instant bingo;



      (3)   Firearms, tobacco, or alcoholic beverages; or



      (4)   A redeemable voucher that is redeemable for any of the
items listed in division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.



   NET PROFIT. Gross profit minus expenses.



   NET PROFIT FROM THE PROCEEDS OF THE SALE OF INSTANT BINGO. Gross profit
minus the ordinary, necessary, and reasonable expense expended for the
purchase of instant bingo supplies, and, in the case of instant bingo
conducted by a veteran’s, fraternal, or sporting organization, minus the
payment by that organization of real property taxes and assessments levied on
a premises on which instant bingo is conducted.



   PARTICIPANT. Any person who plays bingo.



   PERSON. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1.59 and includes any firm
or any other legal entity, however organized.



   POOL NOT CONDUCTED FOR PROFIT. A scheme in which a participant gives a
valuable consideration for a chance to win a prize and the total amount of
consideration wagered is distributed to a participant or participants.



   PUNCH BOARD. A board containing a number of holes or receptacles of
uniform size in which are placed, mechanically and randomly, serially
numbered slips of paper that may be punched or drawn from the hole or
receptacle when used in conjunction with instant bingo. A player may punch or
draw the numbered slips of paper from the holes or receptacles and obtain the
prize established for the game if the number drawn corresponds to a winning
number or, if the punch board includes the use of a seal card, a potential
winning number.



   RAFFLE. A form of bingo in which the one or more prizes are won by one
or more persons who have purchased a raffle ticket. The one or more winners
of the raffle are determined by drawing a ticket stub or other detachable
section from a receptacle containing ticket stubs or detachable sections
corresponding to all tickets sold for the raffle.  The term does not include
the drawing of a ticket stub or other detachable section of a ticket
purchased to attend a professional sporting event if both of the following
apply:



      (1)   The ticket stub or other detachable section is used to
select the winner of a free prize given away at the professional sporting
event; and



      (2)   The cost of the ticket is the same as the cost of a
ticket to the professional sporting event on days when no free prize is given
away.



   REDEEMABLE VOUCHER. Any ticket, token, coupon, receipt, or other
noncash representation of value.



   RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION. Any church, body of communicants, or group that
is not organized or operated for profit and that gathers in common membership
for regular worship and religious observances.



   REVOKE. To void permanently all rights and privileges of the holder of
a license issued under R.C. § 2915.08, 2915.081, or 2915.082 or a charitable
gaming license issued by another jurisdiction.



   SCHEME OF CHANCE.



      (1)   A slot machine unless authorized under R.C. Chapter
3772, lottery unless authorized under R.C. Chapter 3770, numbers game, pool
conducted for profit, or other scheme in which a participant gives a valuable
consideration for a chance to win a prize, but does not include bingo, a
skill-based amusement machine, or a pool not conducted for profit. “Scheme
of chance” includes the use of an electronic device to reveal the results
of a game entry if valuable consideration is paid, directly or indirectly,
for a chance to win a prize. Valuable consideration is deemed to be paid for
a chance to win a prize in the following instances:



         (a)   Less than 50% of the goods or services sold by a
scheme of chance operator in exchange for game entries are used or redeemed
by participants at any one location;



         (b)   Less than 50% of participants who purchase goods
or services at any one location do not accept, use, or redeem the goods or
services sold or purportedly sold;



         (c)   More than 50% of prizes at any one location are
revealed to participants through an electronic device simulating a game of
chance or a “casino game” as defined in R.C. § 3772.01;



         (d)   The good or service sold by a scheme of chance
operator in exchange for a game entry cannot be used or redeemed in the
manner advertised;



         (e)   A participant pays more than fair market value for
goods or services offered by a scheme of chance operator in order to receive
one or more game entries;



         (f)   A participant may use the electronic device to
purchase additional game entries;



         (g)   A participant may purchase additional game entries
by using points or credits won as prizes while using the electronic device;



         (h)   A scheme of chance operator pays out in prize
money more than 20% of the gross revenue received at one location; or



         (i)   A participant makes a purchase or exchange in
order to obtain any good or service that may be used to facilitate play on
the electronic device.



      (2)   As used in this division, “electronic device” means
a mechanical, video, digital, or electronic machine or device that is capable
of displaying information on a screen or other mechanism and that is owned,
leased, or otherwise possessed by any person conducting a scheme of chance,
or by that person’s partners, affiliates, subsidiaries, or contractors.



   SEAL CARD. A form of instant bingo that uses instant bingo tickets in
conjunction with a board or placard that contains one or more seals that,
when removed or opened, reveal predesignated winning numbers, letters, or
symbols.



   SECURITY PERSONNEL. Includes any person who either is a Sheriff, deputy
sheriff, Marshal, deputy marshal, township constable, or member of an
organized police department of a municipal corporation or has successfully
completed a peace officer’s training course pursuant to R.C. §§ 109.71
through 109.79 and who is hired to provide security for the premises on which
bingo is conducted.



   SKILL-BASED AMUSEMENT MACHINE.



      (1)   (a)   A mechanical, video, digital, or electronic
device that rewards the player or players, if at all, only with merchandise
prizes or with redeemable vouchers redeemable only for merchandise prizes,
provided that with respect to rewards for playing the game all of the
following apply:



            1.   The wholesale value of a merchandise prize
awarded as a result of the single play of a machine does not exceed $10;



            2.   Redeemable vouchers awarded for any single
play of a machine are not redeemable for a merchandise prize with a wholesale
value of more than $10;



            3.   Redeemable vouchers are not redeemable for a
merchandise prize that has a wholesale value of more than $10 times the
fewest number of single plays necessary to accrue the redeemable vouchers
required to obtain that prize; and



            4.   Any redeemable vouchers or merchandise prizes
are distributed at the site of the skill-based amusement machine at the time
of play.



         (b)   A card for the purchase of gasoline is a
redeemable voucher for purposes of division (1) of this definition even if
the skill-based amusement machine for the play of which the card is awarded
is located at a place where gasoline may not be legally distributed to the
public or the card is not redeemable at the location of, or at the time of
playing, the skill-based amusement machine.



      (2)   A device shall not be considered a skill-based amusement
machine and shall be considered a slot machine if it pays cash or one or more
of the following apply:



         (a)   The ability of a player to succeed at the game is
impacted by the number or ratio of prior wins to prior losses of players
playing the game;



         (b)   Any reward of redeemable vouchers is not based
solely on the player achieving the object of the game or the player’s score;



         (c)   The outcome of the game, or the value of the
redeemable voucher or merchandise prize awarded for winning the game, can be
controlled by a source other than any player playing the game;



         (d)   The success of any player is or may be determined
by a chance event that cannot be altered by player actions;



         (e)   The ability of any player to succeed at the game
is determined by game features not visible or known to the player;



         (f)   The ability of the player to succeed at the game
is impacted by the exercise of a skill that no reasonable player could
exercise.



      (3)   All of the following apply to any machine that is
operated as described in division (1) of this definition:



         (a)   As used in this definition of SKILL-BASED
AMUSEMENT MACHINE,GAME and PLAY mean one event from the initial activation of
the machine until the results of play are determined without payment of
additional consideration. An individual utilizing a machine that involves a
single game, play, contest, competition, or tournament may be awarded
redeemable vouchers or merchandise prizes based on the results of play.



         (b)   Advance play for a single game, play, contest,
competition, or tournament participation may be purchased. The cost of the
contest, competition, or tournament participation may be greater than a
single non-contest, competition, or tournament play.



         (c)   To the extent that the machine is used in a
contest, competition, or tournament, that contest, competition, or tournament
has a defined starting and ending date and is open to participants in
competition for scoring and ranking results toward the awarding of redeemable
vouchers or merchandise prizes that are stated prior to the start of the
contest, competition, or tournament.



      (4)   For purposes of division (1) of this definition, the
mere presence of a device, such as a pin-setting, ball-releasing, or scoring
mechanism, that does not contribute to or affect the outcome of the play of
the game does not make the device a skill-based amusement machine.



   SLOT MACHINE.



      (1)   Either of the following:



         (a)   Any mechanical, electronic, video, or digital
device that is capable of accepting anything of value, directly or
indirectly, from or on behalf of a player who gives the thing of value in the
hope of gain;



         (b)   Any mechanical, electronic, video, or digital
device that is capable of accepting anything of value, directly or
indirectly, from or on behalf of a player to conduct bingo or a scheme or
game of chance.



      (2)   The term does not include a skill-based amusement
machine or an instant bingo ticket dispenser.



   SPORTING ORGANIZATION. A hunting, fishing, or trapping organization,
other than a college or high school fraternity or sorority, that is not
organized for profit, that is affiliated with a state or national sporting
organization, including but not limited to the League of Ohio Sportsmen, and
that has been in continuous existence in this state for a period of three
years.



   SUSPEND. To interrupt temporarily all rights and privileges of the
holder of a license issued under R.C. § 2915.08, 2915.081, or 2915.082 or a
charitable gaming license issued by another jurisdiction.



   SWEEPSTAKES. Any game, contest, advertising scheme or plan, or other
promotion where consideration is not required for a person to enter to win or
become eligible to receive any prize, the determination of which is based
upon chance. “Sweepstakes” does not include bingo as authorized under
R.C. Chapter 2915, pari-mutuel wagering as authorized by R.C. Chapter 3769,
lotteries conducted by the State Lottery Commission as authorized by R.C.
Chapter 3770, and casino gaming as authorized by R.C. Chapter 3772.



   SWEEPSTAKES TERMINAL DEVICE.



      (1)   A mechanical, video, digital, or electronic machine or
device that is owned, leased, or otherwise possessed by any person conducting
a sweepstakes, or by that person’s partners, affiliates, subsidiaries, or
contractors, that is intended to be used by a sweepstakes participant, and
that is capable of displaying information on a screen or other mechanism. A
device is a sweepstakes terminal device if any of the following apply:



         (a)   The device uses a simulated game terminal as a
representation of the prizes associated with the results of the sweepstakes
entries.



         (b)   The device utilizes software such that the
simulated game influences or determines the winning of or value of the prize.



         (c)   The device selects prizes from a predetermined
finite pool of entries.



         (d)   The device utilizes a mechanism that reveals the
content of a predetermined sweepstakes entry.



         (e)   The device predetermines the prize results and
stores those results for delivery at the time the sweepstakes entry results
are revealed.



         (f)   The device utilizes software to create a game
result.



         (g)   The device reveals the prize incrementally, even
though the device does not influence the awarding of the prize or the value
of any prize awarded.



         (h)   The device determines and associates the prize
with an entry or entries at the time the sweepstakes is entered.



      (2)   As used in this definition and in § 134.02:



         ENTER. The act by which a person becomes eligible to
receive any prize offered in a sweepstakes.



         ENTRY. One event from the initial activation of the
sweepstakes terminal device until all the sweepstakes prize results from that
activation are revealed.



         PRIZE. Any gift, award, gratuity, good, service, credit,
reward, or any other thing of value that may be transferred to a person,
whether possession of the prize is actually transferred, or placed on an
account or other record as evidence of the intent to transfer the prize.



         SWEEPSTAKES TERMINAL DEVICE FACILITY. Any location in this
state where a sweepstakes terminal device is provided to a sweepstakes
participant, except as provided in § 134.02(G) and R.C. § 2915.02(G).



   VETERAN’S ORGANIZATION. Any individual post or state headquarters of
a national veteran’s association or an auxiliary unit of any individual
post of a national veteran’s association, which post, state headquarters,
or auxiliary unit is incorporated as a nonprofit corporation and either has
received a letter from the state headquarters of the national veteran’s
association indicating that the individual post or auxiliary unit is in good
standing with the national veteran’s association or has received a letter
from the national veteran’s association indicating that the state
headquarters is in good standing with the national veteran’s association.
As used in this definition, NATIONAL VETERAN’S ASSOCIATION means any
veteran’s association that has been in continuous existence as such for a
period of at least five years and either is incorporated by an act of the
United States Congress or has a national dues-paying membership of at least
5,000 persons.



   VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTER’S ORGANIZATION. Any organization of volunteer
firefighters, as defined in R.C. § 146.01, that is organized and operated
exclusively to provide financial support for a volunteer fire department or a
volunteer fire company and that is recognized or ratified by a county,
municipal corporation, or township.



   VOLUNTEER RESCUE SERVICE ORGANIZATION. Any organization of volunteers
organized to function as an emergency medical service organization, as
defined in R.C. § 4765.01.



   YOUTH ATHLETIC ORGANIZATION. Any organization, not organized for
profit, that is organized and operated exclusively to provide financial
support to, or to operate, athletic activities for persons who are 21 years
of age or younger by means of sponsoring, organizing, operating, or
contributing to the support of an athletic team, club, league, or association.



   YOUTH ATHLETIC PARK ORGANIZATION. Any organization, not organized for
profit, that satisfies both of the following:



      (1)   It owns, operates, and maintains playing fields that
satisfy both of the following:



         (a)   The playing fields are used at least 100 days per
year for athletic activities by one or more organizations, not organized for
profit, each of which is organized and operated exclusively to provide
financial support to, or to operate, athletic activities for persons who are
18 years of age or younger by means of sponsoring, organizing, operating, or
contributing to the support of an athletic team, club, league, or association.



         (b)   The playing fields are not used for any
profit-making activity at any time during the year.



      (2)   It uses the proceeds of bingo it conducts exclusively
for the operation, maintenance, and improvement of its playing fields of the
type described in division (1) of this definition.



(R.C. § 2915.01)



§ 134.02  PROHIBITIONS AGAINST GAMBLING; EXCEPTION.



   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Engage in bookmaking, or knowingly engage in conduct
that facilitates bookmaking.



      (2)   Establish, promote, or operate or knowingly engage in
conduct that facilitates any game of chance conducted for profit or any
scheme of chance.



      (3)   Knowingly procure, transmit, exchange, or engage in
conduct that facilitates the procurement, transmission, or exchange of
information for use in establishing odds or determining winners in connection
with bookmaking or with any game of chance conducted for profit or any scheme
of chance.



      (4)   Engage in betting or in playing any scheme or game of
chance as a substantial source of income or livelihood.



      (5)   Conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a sweepstakes
with the use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes terminal
device facility and either:



         (a)   Give to another person any item described in R.C.
§ 2915.01(VV)(1), (VV)(2), (VV)(3), or (VV)(4) as a prize for playing or
participating in a sweepstakes; or



         (b)   Give to another person any merchandise prize, or a
redeemable voucher for a merchandise prize, the wholesale value of which is
in excess of $10 and which is awarded as a single entry for playing or
participating in a sweepstakes. Redeemable vouchers shall not be redeemable
for a merchandise prize that has a wholesale value of more than $10.



      (6)   Conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a sweepstakes
with the use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes terminal
device facility without first obtaining a current annual “certificate of
registration” from the Attorney General as required by R.C. § 2915.02(F).



      (7)   With purpose to violate division (A)(1), (2), (3), (4),
(5), or (6) of this section, acquire, possess, control, or operate any
gambling device.



   (B)   For purposes of division (A)(1) of this section, a person
facilitates bookmaking if the person in any way knowingly aids an illegal
bookmaking operation, including, without limitation, placing a bet with a
person engaged in or facilitating illegal bookmaking. For purposes of
division (A)(2) of this section, a person facilitates a game of chance
conducted for profit or a scheme of chance if the person in any way knowingly
aids in the conduct or operation of any such game or scheme, including,
without limitation, playing any such game or scheme.



   (C)   This section does not prohibit conduct in connection with
gambling expressly permitted by law.



   (D)   This section does not apply to any of the following:



      (1)   Games of chance, if all of the following apply:



         (a)   The games of chance are not craps for money or
roulette for money.



         (b)   The games of chance are conducted by a charitable
organization that is and has received from the Internal Revenue Service a
determination letter that is currently in effect, stating that the
organization is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and
described in IRC 501(c)(3).



         (c)   The games of chance are conducted at festivals of
the charitable organization that are conducted not more than a total of five
days a calendar year, and are conducted on premises owned by the charitable
organization for a period of no less than one year immediately preceding the
conducting of the games of chance, on premises leased from a governmental
unit, or on premises that are leased from a veteran’s or fraternal
organization and that have been owned by the lessor veteran’s or fraternal
organization for a period of no less than one year immediately preceding the
conducting of the games of chance. A charitable organization shall not lease
premises from a veteran’s or fraternal organization to conduct a festival
described in this division, if the veteran’s or fraternal organization
already has leased the premises twelve times during the preceding year to
charitable organizations for that purpose. If a charitable organization
leases premises from a veteran’s or fraternal organization to conduct a
festival described in this division, the charitable organization shall not
pay a rental rate for the premises per day of the festival that exceeds the
rental rate per bingo session that a charitable organization may pay under
R.C. § 2915.09(B)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance when
it leases premises from another charitable organization to conduct bingo
games.



         (d)   All of the money or assets received from the games
of chance after deduction only of prizes paid out during the conduct of the
games of chance are used by, given, donated or otherwise transferred to any
organization that is described in IRC 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is
either a governmental unit or an organization that is tax exempt under IRC
501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3).



         (e)   The games of chance are not conducted during or
within ten hours of a bingo game conducted for amusement purposes only
pursuant to R.C. § 2915.12 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance. No person shall receive any commission, wage, salary, reward, tip,
donation, gratuity, or other form of compensation, directly or indirectly,
for operating or assisting in the operation of any game of chance.



      (2)   Any tag fishing tournament, as defined in R.C. §
1531.01, operated under a permit issued under R.C. § 1533.92.



      (3)   Bingo conducted by a charitable organization that holds
a license issued under R.C. § 2915.08.



   (E)   Division (D) of this section shall not be construed to
authorize the sale, lease, or other temporary or permanent transfer of the
right to conduct games of chance, as granted by that division, by any
charitable organization that is granted that right.



   (F)   Any person desiring to conduct, or participate in the conduct
of, a sweepstakes with the use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a
sweepstakes terminal device facility shall first register with the Office of
the Attorney General and obtain an annual certificate of registration by
providing a filing fee of $200 and all information as required by rule
adopted under R.C. § 2915.02(H). Not later than the tenth day of each month,
each sweepstakes terminal device operator shall file a sweepstakes terminal
device monthly report with the Attorney General and provide a filing fee of
$50 and all information required by rule adopted under R.C. § 2915.02(H).
All information provided to the Attorney General under this division shall be
available to law enforcement upon request.



   (G)   (1)   A person may apply to the Attorney General, on a form
prescribed by the Attorney General, for a certificate of compliance that the
person is not operating a sweepstakes terminal device facility. The form
shall require the person to include the address of the business location
where sweepstakes terminal devices will be used and to make the following
certifications:



         (a)   That the person will not use more than two
sweepstakes terminal devices at the business location;



         (b)   That the retail value of sweepstakes prizes to be
awarded at the business location using sweepstakes terminal devices during a
reporting period will be less than 3% of the gross revenue received at the
business location during the reporting period;



         (c)   That no other form of gaming except lottery ticket
sales as authorized under R.C. Chapter 3770 will be conducted at the business
location or in an adjoining area of the business location;



         (d)   That any sweepstakes terminal device at the
business location will not allow any deposit of any money, coin, or token, or
the use of any credit card, debit card, prepaid card, or any other method of
similar payment to be used, directly or indirectly, to participate in a
sweepstakes;



         (e)   That notification of any prize will not take place
on the same day as a participant’s sweepstakes entry; and



         (f)   That the person consents to provide any other
information to the Attorney General as required by rule adopted under R.C. §
2915.02(H).



      (2)   The filing fee for a certificate of compliance is $250.
The Attorney General may charge up to an additional $250 for reasonable
expenses resulting from any investigation related to an application for a
certificate of compliance.



      (3)   A certificate of compliance is effective for one year.
The certificate holder may reapply for a certificate of compliance. A person
issued a certificate of compliance shall file semiannual reports with the
Attorney General stating the number of sweepstakes terminal devices at the
business location and that the retail value of prizes awarded at the business
location using sweepstakes terminal devices is less than 3% of the gross
revenue received at the business location.



   (H)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of gambling, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been
convicted of any gambling offense, gambling is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.  Notwithstanding this division, failing to file
a sweepstakes terminal device monthly report as required by division (F) of
this section or the semiannual report required by division (G) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 2915.02(A) - (G), (K))  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 134.03  OPERATING A GAMBLING HOUSE.



   (A)   No person, being the owner or lessee, or having custody,
control, or supervision of premises, shall:



      (1)   Use or occupy the premises for gambling in violation of
R.C. § 2915.02 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



      (2)   Recklessly permit the premises to be used or occupied
for gambling in violation of R.C. § 2915.02 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.



   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
operating a gambling house, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of a gambling offense, operating a
gambling house is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



   (C)   Premises used or occupied in violation of this section
constitute a nuisance subject to abatement under R.C. Chapter 3767.



(R.C. § 2915.03)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 134.04  PUBLIC GAMING.



   (A)   No person, while at a hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena,
hall, or other place of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort
shall make a bet or play any game of chance or scheme of chance.



   (B)   No person, being the owner or lessee, or having custody,
control, or supervision of a hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall,
or other place of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort shall
recklessly permit those premises to be used or occupied in violation of
division (A) of this section.



   (C)   Divisions (A) and (B) of this section do not prohibit conduct
in connection with gambling expressly permitted by law.



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of public gaming.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, public gaming is a minor
misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been convicted of any gambling
offense, public gaming is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



   (E)   Premises used or occupied in violation of division (B) of this
section constitute a nuisance subject to abatement under R.C. Chapter 3767.



(R.C. § 2915.04)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 134.05  CHEATING.



   (A)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person
is facilitating a fraud, shall engage in conduct designed to corrupt the
outcome of any of the following:



      (1)   The subject of a bet.



      (2)   A contest of knowledge, skill, or endurance that is not
an athletic or sporting event.



      (3)   A scheme or game of chance.



      (4)   Bingo.



   (B)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:



      (1)   Offer, give, solicit, or accept anything of value to
corrupt the outcome of an athletic or sporting event.



      (2)   Engage in conduct designed to corrupt the outcome of an
athletic or sporting event.



   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is
guilty of cheating. Except as otherwise provided in this division, cheating
is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the potential gain from the cheating
is $1,000 or more or if the offender previously has been convicted of any
gambling offense or of any theft offense as defined in R.C. § 2913.01,
cheating is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty
of corrupting sports. Corrupting sports is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2915.05)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 134.06  REGULATIONS CONCERNING OPERATION OF LICENSED BINGO GAME.



   (A)   No charitable organization that conducts bingo shall fail to
do any of the following:



      (1)   Own all of the equipment used to conduct bingo or lease
that equipment from a charitable organization that is licensed to conduct
bingo, or from the landlord of a premises where bingo is conducted, for a
rental rate that is not more than is customary and reasonable for that
equipment;



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (A)(3) of this
section, use all of the gross receipts from bingo for paying prizes, for
reimbursement of expenses for or for renting premises in which to conduct
bingo, for reimbursement of expenses for or for purchasing or leasing bingo
supplies used in conducting bingo, for reimbursement of expenses for or for
hiring security personnel, for reimbursement of expenses for or for
advertising bingo, or for reimbursement of other expenses or for other
expenses listed in the definition for "expenses" in R.C. § 2915.01, provided
that the amount of the receipts so spent is not more than is customary and
reasonable for a similar purchase, lease, hiring, advertising, or expense. If
the building in which bingo is conducted is owned by the charitable
organization conducting bingo and the bingo conducted includes a form of
bingo described in division (1) of the definition of "bingo" in R.C. §
2915.01, the charitable organization may deduct from the total amount of the
gross receipts from each session a sum equal to the lesser of $600 or 45% of
the gross receipts from the bingo described in that division as consideration
for the use of the premises;



      (3)   Use, or give, donate, or otherwise transfer, all of the
net profit derived from bingo, other than instant bingo, for a charitable
purpose listed in its license application and described in the definition for
"charitable purpose" in R.C. § 2915.01, or distribute all of the net profit
from the proceeds of the sale of instant bingo as stated in its license
application and in accordance with R.C. § 2915.101.



   (B)   No charitable organization that conducts a bingo game
described in division (1) of the definition of "bingo" in R.C. § 2915.01
shall fail to do any of the following:



      (1)   Conduct the bingo game on premises that are owned by the
charitable organization, on premises that are owned by another charitable
organization and leased from that charitable organization for a rental rate
not in excess of the lesser of $650 per bingo session or 45% of the gross
receipts of the bingo session, on premises that are leased from a person
other than a charitable organization for a rental rate that is not more than
is customary and reasonable for premises that are similar in location, size,
and quality but not in excess of $450 per bingo session, or on premises that
are owned by a person other than a charitable organization, that are leased
from that person by another charitable organization, and that are subleased
from that other charitable organization by the charitable organization for a
rental rate not in excess of $450 per bingo session.  No charitable
organization is required to pay property taxes or assessments on premises
that the charitable organization leases from another person to conduct bingo
sessions. If the charitable organization leases from a person other than a
charitable organization the premises on which it conducts bingo sessions, the
lessor of the premises shall provide only the premises to the organization
and shall not provide the organization with bingo game operators, security
personnel, concessions or concession operators, bingo supplies, or any other
type of service. A charitable organization shall not lease or sublease
premises that it owns or leases to more than three other charitable
organizations per calendar week for conducting bingo sessions on the
premises. A person that is not a charitable organization shall not lease
premises that it owns, leases, or otherwise is empowered to lease to more
than three charitable organizations per calendar week for conducting bingo
sessions on the premises. In no case shall more than nine bingo sessions be
conducted on any premises in any calendar week;



      (2)   Display its license conspicuously at the premises where
the bingo session is conducted;



      (3)   Conduct the bingo session in accordance with division
(1) of the definition of "bingo" in R.C. § 2915.01.



   (C)   No charitable organization that conducts a bingo game
described in division (1) of the definition of "bingo" in R.C. § 2915.01
shall not do any of the following:



      (1)   Pay any compensation to a bingo game operator for
operating a bingo session that is conducted by the charitable organization or
for preparing, selling, or serving food or beverages at the site of the bingo
session, permit any auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization
to pay compensation to any bingo game operator who prepares, sells, or serves
food or beverages at a bingo session conducted by the charitable
organization, or permit any auxiliary unit or society of the charitable
organization to prepare, sell, or serve food or beverages at a bingo session
conducted by the charitable organization, if the auxiliary unit or society
pays any compensation to the bingo game operators who prepare, sell, or serve
the food or beverages;



      (2)   Pay consulting fees to any person for any services
performed in relation to the bingo session;



      (3)   Pay concession fees to any person who provides
refreshments to the participants in the bingo session;



      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(4) of this
section, conduct more than three bingo sessions in any seven-day period. A
volunteer firefighter’s organization or a volunteer rescue service
organization that conducts not more than five bingo sessions in a calendar
year may conduct more than three bingo sessions in a seven-day period after
notifying the Attorney General when it will conduct the sessions;



      (5)   Pay out more than $6,000 in prizes for bingo games
described in R.C. § 2915.01(S)(1) during any bingo session that is conducted
by the charitable organization. “Prizes” does not include awards from the
conduct of instant bingo.



      (6)   Conduct a bingo session at any time during the
eight-hour period between 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m., at any time during, or
within ten hours of, a bingo game conducted for amusement only pursuant to
R.C. § 2915.12 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, at any
premises not specified on its license, or on any day of the week or during
any time period not specified on its license. This division does not prohibit
the sale of instant bingo tickets beginning at 9:00 a.m. for a bingo session
that begins at 10:00 a.m.  If circumstances make it impractical for the
charitable organization to conduct a bingo session at the premises, or on the
day of the week or at the time specified on its license or if a charitable
organization wants to conduct bingo sessions on a day of the week or at a
time other than the day or time specified on its license, the charitable
organization may apply in writing to the Attorney General for an amended
license pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08(F). A charitable organization may apply
twice in each calendar year for an amended license to conduct bingo sessions
on a day of the week or at a time other than the day or time specified on its
license. If the amended license is granted, the organization may conduct
bingo sessions at the premises, on the day of the week, and at the time
specified on its amended license;



      (7)   Permit any person whom the charitable organization
knows, or should have known, is under the age of 18 to work as a bingo game
operator;



      (8)   Permit any person whom the charitable organization
knows, or should have known, has been convicted of a felony or gambling
offense in any jurisdiction to be a bingo game operator;



      (9)   Permit the lessor of the premises on which the bingo
session is conducted, if the lessor is not a charitable organization, to
provide the charitable organization with bingo game operators, security
personnel, concessions, bingo supplies, or any other type of service;



      (10)   Purchase or lease bingo supplies from any person except
a distributor issued a license under R.C. § 2915.081;



      (11)   (a)   Use or permit the use of electronic bingo aids
except under the following circumstances:



            1.   For any single participant, not more than 90
bingo faces can be played using an electronic bingo aid or aids.



            2.   The charitable organization shall provide a
participant using an electronic bingo aid with corresponding paper bingo
cards or sheets.



            3.   The total price of bingo faces played with an
electronic bingo aid shall be equal to the total price of the same number of
bingo faces played with a paper bingo card or sheet sold at the same bingo
session but without an electronic bingo aid.



            4.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be part of an
electronic network other than a network that includes only bingo aids and
devices that are located on the premises at which the bingo is being
conducted or be interactive with any device not located on the premises at
which the bingo is being conducted.



            5.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be used to
participate in bingo that is conducted at a location other than the location
at which the bingo session is conducted and at which the electronic bingo aid
is used.



            6.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be used to
provide for the input of numbers and letters announced by a bingo caller
other than the bingo caller who physically calls the numbers and letters at
the location at which the bingo session is conducted and at which the
electronic bingo aid is used.



         (b)   The Attorney General may adopt rules in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 119 that govern the use of electronic bingo aids. The rules
may include a requirement that an electronic bingo aid be capable of being
audited by the Attorney General to verify the number of bingo cards or sheets
played during each bingo session.



      (12)   Permit any person the charitable organization knows, or
should have known, to be under 18 years of age to play bingo described in
division (1) of the definition of "bingo" in R.C. § 2915.01.



   (D)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3) of
this section, no charitable organization shall provide to a bingo game
operator, and no bingo game operator shall receive or accept, any commission,
wage, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity, or other form of compensation,
directly or indirectly, regardless of the source, for conducting bingo or
providing other work or labor at the site of bingo at the bingo session.



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3) of this
section, no charitable organization shall provide to a bingo game operator
any commission, wage, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity, or other form
of compensation, directly or indirectly regardless of the source, for
conducting instant bingo other than at a bingo session at the site of instant
bingo other than at a bingo session.



      (3)   Nothing in this division (D) of this section prohibits
an employee of a fraternal organization, veteran's organization, or sporting
organization from selling instant bingo tickets or cards to the
organization's members or invited guests, as long as no portion of the
employee's compensation is paid from any receipts of bingo.



   (E)   Notwithstanding division (B)(1) of this section, a charitable
organization that, prior to December 6, 1977, has entered into written
agreements for the lease of premises it owns to another charitable
organization or other charitable organizations for the conducting of bingo
sessions so that more than two bingo sessions are conducted per calendar week
on the premises, and a person that is not a charitable organization and that,
prior to December 6, 1977, has entered into written agreements for the lease
of premises it owns to charitable organizations for the conducting of more
than two bingo sessions per calendar week on the premises, may continue to
lease the premises to those charitable organizations, provided that no more
than four sessions are conducted per calendar week, that the lessor
organization or person has notified the Attorney General in writing of the
organizations that will conduct the sessions and the days of the week and the
times of the day on which the sessions will be conducted, that the initial
lease entered into with each organization that will conduct the sessions was
filed with the Attorney General prior to December 6, 1977, and that each
organization that will conduct the sessions was issued a license to conduct
bingo games by the Attorney General prior to December 6, 1977.



   (F)   This section does not prohibit a bingo licensed charitable
organization or a game operator from giving any person an instant bingo
ticket as a prize.



   (G)   Whoever violates division (A)(2) of this section is guilty of
illegally conducting a bingo game, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates division (A)(1), (A)(3), (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3), (C)(1) to (C)(11),
or (D) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender
previously has been convicted of a violation of division (A)(1), (A)(3),
(B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3), (C)(1) to (C)(11), or (D) of this section, a
violation of division (A)(1), (A)(3), (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3), (C)(1) to
(C)(11), or (D) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Whoever
violates division (C)(12) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of
division (C)(12) of this section, a violation of division (C)(12) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2915.09)



§ 134.07  RECORDS TO BE KEPT.



   (A)   No charitable organization that conducts bingo or a game of
chance pursuant to R.C. § 2915.02(D), or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, shall fail to maintain the following records for at
least three years from the date on which the bingo or game of chance is
conducted:



      (1)   An itemized list of the gross receipts of each bingo
session, each game of instant bingo by serial number, each raffle, each punch
board game, and each game of chance, and an itemized list of the gross
profits of each game of instant bingo by serial number;



      (2)   An itemized list of all expenses, other than prizes,
that are incurred in conducting bingo or instant bingo, the name of each
person to whom the expenses are paid, and a receipt for all of the expenses;



      (3)   A list of all prizes awarded during each bingo session,
each raffle, each punch board game, and each game of chance conducted by the
charitable organization, the total prizes awarded from each game of instant
bingo by serial number, and the name, address, and social security number of
all persons who are winners of prizes of $600 or more in value;



      (4)   An itemized list of the recipients of the net profit of
bingo or game of chance, including the name and address of each recipient to
whom the money is distributed, and if the organization uses the net profit of
bingo, or the money or assets received from a game of chance, for any
charitable or other purpose set forth in R.C. § 2915.01(V), R.C. §
2915.02(D), or R.C. § 2915.101, a list of each purpose and an itemized list
of each expenditure for each purpose;



      (5)   The number of persons who participate in any bingo
session or game of chance that is conducted by the charitable organization;



      (6)   A list of receipts from the sale of food and beverages
by the charitable organization or one of its auxiliary units or societies, if
the receipts were excluded from “gross receipts” under R.C. § 2915.01(T);



      (7)   An itemized list of all expenses incurred at each bingo
session, each raffle, each punch board game, or each game of instant bingo
conducted by the charitable organization in the sale of food and beverages by
the charitable organization or by an auxiliary unit or society of the
charitable organization, the name of each person to whom the expenses are
paid, and a receipt for all of the expenses.



   (B)   A charitable organization shall keep the records that it is
required to maintain pursuant to division (A) of this section at its
principal place of business in this state or at its headquarters in this
state and shall notify the Attorney General of the location at which those
records are kept.



   (C)   The gross profit from each bingo session or game described in
division (1) or (2) of the definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01 shall
be deposited into a checking account devoted exclusively to the bingo session
or game. Payments for allowable expenses incurred in conducting the bingo
session or game and payments to recipients of some or all of the net profit
of the bingo session or game shall be made only by checks or electronic fund
transfer drawn on the bingo session or game account.



   (D)   Each charitable organization shall conduct and record an
inventory of all of its bingo supplies as of the first day of November of
each year.



   (E)   The Attorney General may adopt rules in accordance with R.C.
Chapter 119 that establish standards of accounting, record keeping, and
reporting to ensure that gross receipts from bingo or games of chance are
properly accounted for.



   (F)   A distributor shall maintain, for a period of three years
after the date of its sale or other provision, a record of each instance of
its selling or otherwise providing to another person bingo supplies for use
in this state. The record shall include all of the following for each
instance:



      (1)   The name of the manufacturer from which the distributor
purchased the bingo supplies and the date of the purchase;



      (2)   The name and address of the charitable organization or
other distributor to which the bingo supplies were sold or otherwise provided;



      (3)   A description that clearly identifies the bingo supplies;



      (4)   Invoices that include the nonrepeating serial numbers of
all paper bingo cards and sheets and all instant bingo deals sold or
otherwise provided to each charitable organization.



   (G)   A manufacturer shall maintain, for a period of three years
after the date of its sale or other provision, a record of each instance of
its selling or otherwise providing bingo supplies for use in this state. The
record shall include all of the following for each instance:



      (1)   The name and address of the distributor to whom the
bingo supplies were sold or otherwise provided;



      (2)   A description that clearly identifies the bingo
supplies, including serial numbers;



      (3)   Invoices that include the nonrepeating serial numbers of
all paper bingo cards and sheets and all instant bingo deals sold or
otherwise provided to each distributor.



   (H)   (1)   The Attorney General or any law enforcement agency
may do all of the following:



         (a)   Investigate any charitable organization or any
officer, agent, trustee, member, or employee of the organization;



         (b)   Examine the accounts and records of the
organization;



         (c)   Conduct inspections, audits, and observations of
bingo or games of chance;



         (d)   Conduct inspections of the premises where bingo or
games of chance are conducted;



         (e)   Take any other necessary and reasonable action to
determine if a violation of any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter
2915 has occurred and to determine whether R.C. § 2915.11, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, has been complied with.



      (2)   If any law enforcement agency has reasonable grounds to
believe that a charitable organization or an officer, agent, trustee, member,
or employee of the organization has violated any provision of this chapter or
R.C. Chapter 2915, the law enforcement agency may proceed by action in the
proper court to enforce this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915, provided that the
law enforcement agency shall give written notice to the Attorney General when
commencing an action as described in this division.



   (I)   No person shall destroy, alter, conceal, withhold, or deny
access to any accounts or records of a charitable organization that have been
requested for examination, or obstruct, impede, or interfere with any
inspection, audit, or observation of bingo or a game of chance or premises
where bingo or a game of chance is conducted, or refuse to comply with any
reasonable request of, or obstruct, impede, or interfere with any other
reasonable action undertaken by, the Attorney General or a law enforcement
agency pursuant to division (H) of this section.



   (J)   Whoever violates division (A) or (I) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 2915.10)



§ 134.08  REQUIREMENTS FOR BINGO GAME OPERATORS.



   (A)   No person shall be a bingo game operator unless the person is
18 years of age or older.



   (B)   No person who has been convicted of a felony or a gambling
offense in any jurisdiction shall be a bingo game operator.



   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. Whoever violates division (B) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 2915.11)



§ 134.09  BINGO GAMES FOR AMUSEMENT ONLY.



   (A)   Sections 134.06 to 134.13 do not apply to bingo games that are
conducted for the purpose of amusement only. A bingo game is conducted for
the purpose of amusement only if it complies with all of the requirements
specified in either division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section.



      (1)   (a)   The participants do not pay any money or any
other thing of value, including an admission fee or any fee, for bingo cards
or sheets, objects to cover the spaces, or other devices used in playing
bingo, for the privilege of participating in the bingo game, or to defray any
costs of the game, or pay tips or make donations during or immediately before
or after the bingo game.



         (b)   All prizes awarded during the course of the game
are non-monetary, and in the form of merchandise, goods, or entitlement to
goods or services only, and the total value of all prizes awarded during the
game is less than $100.



         (c)   No commission, wages, salary, reward, tip,
donation, gratuity, or other form of compensation, either directly or
indirectly, and regardless of the source, is paid to any bingo game operator
for work or labor performed at the site of the bingo game.



         (d)   The bingo game is not conducted either during or
within ten hours of any of the following:



            1.   A bingo session during which a charitable
bingo game is conducted pursuant to R.C. §§ 2915.07 through 2915.11 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



            2.   A scheme or game of chance, or bingo
described in R.C. § 2915.01(O)(2).



         (e)   The number of players participating in the bingo
game does not exceed 50.



      (2)   (a)   The participants do not pay money or any other
thing of value as an admission fee, and no participant is charged more than
$0.25 to purchase a bingo card or sheet, objects to cover the spaces, or
other devices used in playing bingo.



         (b)   The total amount of money paid by all of the
participants for bingo cards or sheets, objects to cover the spaces, or other
devices used in playing bingo does not exceed $100.



         (c)   All of the money paid for bingo cards or sheets,
objects to cover spaces, or other devices used in playing bingo is used only
to pay winners monetary and nonmonetary prizes and to provide refreshments.



         (d)   The total value of all prizes awarded during the
game does not exceed $100.



         (e)   No commission, wages, salary, reward, tip,
donation, gratuity, or other form of compensation, either directly or
indirectly, and regardless of the source, is paid to any bingo game operator
for work or labor performed at the site of the bingo game.



         (f)   The bingo game is not conducted during or within
ten hours of either of the following:



            1.   A bingo session during which a charitable
bingo game is conducted pursuant to R.C. §§ 2915.07 through 2915.11 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;



            2.   A scheme of chance or a game of chance, or
bingo described in R.C. § 2915.01(O)(2).



         (g)   All of the participants reside at the premises
where the bingo game is conducted.



         (h)   The bingo games are conducted on different days of
the week and not more than twice in a calendar week.



   (B)   The Attorney General or any local law enforcement agency may
investigate the conduct of a bingo game that purportedly is conducted for
purposes of amusement only if there is reason to believe that the purported
amusement bingo game does not comply with the requirements of either division
(A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section. A local law enforcement agency may proceed
by action in the proper court to enforce this section if the local law
enforcement agency gives written notice to the Attorney General when
commencing the action.



(R.C. § 2915.12)



§ 134.10  PROHIBITIONS WHERE INSTANT BINGO GAME IS CONDUCTED.



   (A)   No charitable organization that conducts instant bingo shall
do any of the following:



      (1)   Fail to comply with the requirements of R.C. §
2915.09(A)(1), (A)(2), and (A)(3), or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance;



      (2)   Conduct instant bingo unless either of the following
applies:



         (a)   That organization is, and has received from the
Internal Revenue Service a determination letter that is currently in effect
stating that the organization is, exempt from federal income taxation under
IRC 501(a), is described in IRC 501(c)(3), is a charitable organization as
defined in R.C. § 2915.01, is in good standing in the state pursuant to R.C.
§ 2915.08, and is in compliance with R.C. Chapter 1716;



         (b)   That organization is, and has received from the
Internal Revenue Service a determination letter that is currently in effect
stating that the organization is, exempt from federal income taxation under
IRC 501(a), is described in IRC 501(c)(7), (c)(8), (c)(10), or (c)(19), or is
a veteran's organization described in IRC 501(c)(4) and conducts instant
bingo under R.C. § 2915.13.



      (3)   Conduct instant bingo on any day, at any time, or at any
premises not specified on the organization's license issued pursuant to R.C.
§ 2915.08;



      (4)   Permit any person whom the organization knows or should
have known has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any
jurisdiction to be a bingo game operator in the conduct of instant bingo;



      (5)   Purchase or lease supplies used to conduct instant bingo
or punch board games from any person except a distributor licensed under R.C.
§ 2915.081;



      (6)   Sell or provide any instant bingo ticket or card for a
price different from the price printed on it by the manufacturer on either
the instant bingo ticket or card or on the game flare;



      (7)   Sell an instant bingo ticket or card to a person under
18 years of age;



      (8)   Fail to keep unsold instant bingo tickets or cards for
less than three years;



      (9)   Pay any compensation to a bingo game operator for
conducting instant bingo that is conducted by the organization or for
preparing, selling, or serving food or beverages at the site of the instant
bingo game, permit any auxiliary unit or society of the organization to pay
compensation to any bingo game operator who prepares, sells, or serves food
or beverages at an instant bingo game conducted by the organization, or
permit any auxiliary unit or society of the organization to prepare, sell, or
serve food or beverages at an instant bingo game conducted by the
organization, if the auxiliary unit or society pays any compensation to the
bingo game operators who prepare, sell, or serve the food or beverages;



      (10)   Pay fees to any person for any services performed in
relation to an instant bingo game, except as provided in R.C. § 2915.093(D);



      (11)   Pay fees to any person who provides refreshments to the
participants in an instant bingo game;



      (12)   (a)   Allow instant bingo tickets or cards to be
sold to bingo game operators at a premises at which the organization sells
instant bingo tickets or cards or to be sold to employees of a D permit
holder who are working at a premises at which instant bingo tickets or cards
are sold;



         (b)   Division (A)(12)(a) of this section does not
prohibit a licensed charitable organization or a bingo game operator from
giving any person an instant bingo ticket as a prize in place of a cash prize
won by a participant in an instant bingo game. In no case shall an instant
bingo ticket or card be sold or provided for a price different from the price
printed on it by the manufacturer on either the instant bingo ticket or card
or on the game flare.



      (13)   Fail to display its bingo license, and the serial
numbers of the deal of instant bingo tickets or cards to be sold,
conspicuously at each premises at which it sells instant bingo tickets or
cards;



      (14)   Possess a deal of instant bingo tickets or cards that
was not purchased from a distributor licensed under R.C. § 2915.081 as
reflected on an invoice issued by the distributor that contains all of the
information required by R.C. § 2915.10(E);



      (15)   Fail, once it opens a deal of instant bingo tickets or
cards, to continue to sell the tickets or cards in that deal until the
tickets or cards with the top two highest tiers of prizes in that deal are
sold;



      (16)   Possess bingo supplies that were not obtained in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 2915.



   (B)   A charitable organization may purchase, lease, or use instant
bingo ticket dispensers to sell instant bingo tickets or cards.



   (C)   Pursuant to R.C. § 2915.091(C), the Attorney General may
adopt rules in accordance with R.C. Chapter 119 that govern the conduct of
instant bingo by charitable organizations.



   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section or a rule
adopted under division (C) of this section is guilty of illegal instant bingo
conduct. Except as otherwise provided in this division, illegal instant bingo
conduct is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a violation of division (A) of this section or of such a
rule adopted under division (C) of this section, illegal instant bingo
conduct is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2915.091)



§ 134.11  RAFFLE DRAWINGS.



   (A)   (1)   Subject to division (A)(2) of this section, a
charitable organization, a public school, a chartered nonpublic school, a
community school, or a veteran's organization, fraternal organization, or
sporting organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC
501(a) and is described in IRC 501(c)(3), 501(c)(4), 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8),
501(c)(10), or 501(c)(19) may conduct a raffle to raise money for the
organization or school and does not need a license to conduct bingo in order
to conduct a raffle drawing that is not for profit.



      (2)   If a charitable organization that is described in
division (A)(1) of this section, but that is not also described in IRC
501(c)(3), conducts a raffle, the charitable organization shall distribute at
least 50% of the net profit from the raffle to a charitable purpose described
in R.C. § 2915.01(V) or to a department or agency of the federal government,
the state, or any political subdivision.



   (B)   A chamber of commerce may conduct not more than one raffle per
year to raise money for the chamber of commerce.



   (C)   Except as provided in division (A) or (B) of this section, no
person shall conduct a raffle drawing that is for profit or a raffle drawing
that is not for profit.



   (D)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of
illegal conduct of a raffle. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
illegal conduct of a raffle is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of a violation of division (C) of this
section, illegal conduct of a raffle is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2915.092)



§ 134.12  INSTANT BINGO OTHER THAN AT BINGO SESSIONS.



   (A)   As used in this section, RETAIL INCOME FROM ALL COMMERCIAL
ACTIVITY means the income that a person receives from the provision of goods,
services, or activities that are provided at the location where instant bingo
other than at a bingo session is conducted, including the sale of instant
bingo tickets. A religious organization that is exempt from federal income
taxation under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3), at not more than
one location at which it conducts its charitable programs, may include
donations from its members and guests as retail income.



   (B)   (1)   If a charitable instant bingo organization conducts
instant bingo other than at a bingo session, the charitable instant bingo
organization shall enter into a written contract with the owner or lessor of
the location at which the instant bingo is conducted to allow the owner or
lessor to assist in the conduct of instant bingo other than at a bingo
session, identify each location where the instant bingo other than at a bingo
session is being conducted, and identify the owner or lessor of each location.



      (2)   A charitable instant bingo organization that conducts
instant bingo other than at a bingo session is not required to enter into a
written contract with the owner or lessor of the location at which the
instant bingo is conducted provided that the owner or lessor is not assisting
in the conduct of the instant bingo other than at a bingo session and
provided that the conduct of the instant bingo other than at a bingo session
at that location is not more than five days per calendar year and not more
than ten hours per day.



   (C)   Except as provided in division (F) of this section, no
charitable instant bingo organization shall conduct instant bingo other than
at a bingo session at a location where the primary source of retail income
from all commercial activity at that location is the sale of instant bingo
tickets.



   (D)   (1)   The owner or lessor of a location that enters into a
contract pursuant to division (B) of this section shall pay the full gross
profit to the charitable instant bingo organization, in return for the deal
of instant bingo tickets. The owner or lessor may retain the money that the
owner or lessor receives for selling the instant bingo tickets, provided,
however, that after the deal has been sold, the owner or lessor shall pay to
the charitable instant bingo organization the value of any unredeemed instant
bingo prizes remaining in the deal of instant bingo tickets.



      (2)   The charitable instant bingo organization shall pay 6%
of the total gross receipts of any deal of instant bingo tickets for the
purpose of reimbursing the owner or lessor for expenses described in this
division.



      (3)   As used in this division, EXPENSES means those items
provided for in R.C. § 2915.01(GG)(4), (GG)(5), (GG)(6), (GG)(7), (GG)(8),
(GG)(12), and (GG)(13) and that percentage of the owner’s or lessor’s
rent for the location where instant bingo is conducted. Expenses, in the
aggregate, shall not exceed 6% of the total gross receipts of any deal of
instant bingo tickets.



      (4)   As used in this division, FULL GROSS PROFIT means the
amount by which the total receipts of all instant bingo tickets, if the deal
has been sold in full, exceeds the amount that would be paid out if all
prizes were redeemed.



   (E)   A charitable instant bingo organization shall provide the
Attorney General with all of the following information:



      (1)   That the charitable instant bingo organization has
terminated a contract entered into pursuant to division (B) of this section
with an owner or lessor of a location;



      (2)   That the charitable instant bingo organization has
entered into a written contract pursuant to division (B) of this section with
a new owner or lessor of a location;



      (3)   That the charitable instant bingo organization is aware
of conduct by the owner or lessor of a location at which instant bingo is
conducted that is in violation of R.C. Chapter 2915.



   (F)   Division (C) of this section does not apply to a volunteer
firefighter’s organization that is exempt from federal income taxation
under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3), that conducts instant bingo
other than at a bingo session on the premises where the organization conducts
firefighter training, that has conducted instant bingo continuously for at
least five years prior to July 1, 2003, and that, during each of those five
years, had gross receipts of at least $1,500,000.



(R.C. § 2915.093)



   (G)   (1)   A veteran’s organization, a fraternal organization,
or a sporting organization authorized to conduct a bingo session pursuant to
R.C. Chapter 2915 may conduct instant bingo other than at a bingo session if
all of the following apply:



         (a)   The veteran’s organization, fraternal
organization, or sporting organization limits the sale of instant bingo to 12
hours during any day, provided that the sale does not begin earlier than
10:00 a.m. and ends not later than 2:00 a.m.



         (b)   The veteran’s organization, fraternal
organization, or sporting organization limits the sale of instant bingo to
its own premises and to its own members and invited guests.



         (c)   The veteran’s organization, fraternal
organization, or sporting organization is raising money for an organization
that is described in IRC 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is either a
governmental unit or an organization that maintains its principal place of
business in this state, that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC
501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3), and that is in good standing in this
state and executes a written contract with that organization as required in
division (G)(2) of this section.



      (2)   If a veteran’s organization, fraternal organization,
or sporting organization authorized to conduct instant bingo pursuant to
division (G)(1) of this section is raising money for another organization
that is described in IRC 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is either a
governmental unit or an organization that maintains its principal place of
business in this state, that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC
501(a) and described in IRC 501(c), and that is in good standing in this
state, the veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization shall execute a written contract with the organization that is
described in IRC 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is either a governmental
unit or an organization that maintains its principal place of business in
this state, that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and
described in IRC 501(c), and that is in good standing in this state in order
to conduct instant bingo. That contract shall include a statement of the
percentage of the net proceeds that the veteran’s, fraternal, or sporting
organization will be distributing to the organization that is described in
IRC 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is either a governmental unit or an
organization that maintains its principal place of business in this state,
that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and described in
IRC 501(c)(3), and that is in good standing in this state.



      (3)   (a)   If a veteran’s organization, fraternal
organization, or sporting organization authorized to conduct instant bingo
pursuant to division (G)(1) of this section has been issued a liquor permit
under R.C. Chapter 4303, that permit may be subject to suspension,
revocation, or cancellation if the veteran’s organization, fraternal
organization, or sporting organization violates a provision of this chapter
or R.C. Chapter 2915.



         (b)   No veteran’s organization, fraternal
organization, or sporting organization that enters into a written contract
pursuant to division (G)(2) of this section shall violate any provision of
this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915, or permit, aid, or abet any other person
in violating any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915.



      (4)   A veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or
sporting organization shall give all required proceeds earned from the
conduct of instant bingo to the organization with which the veteran’s
organization, fraternal organization, or sporting organization has entered
into a written contract.



      (5)   Whoever violates division (G) of this section is guilty
of illegal instant bingo conduct. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, illegal instant bingo conduct is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of division (G)
of this section, illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2915.13)



§ 134.13  RESTRICTIONS ON OWNER OR LESSOR OF LOCATION AT INSTANT BINGO.



   (A)   No owner or lessor of a location shall assist a charitable
instant bingo organization in the conduct of instant bingo other than at a
bingo session at that location unless the owner or lessor has entered into a
written contract, as described in R.C. § 2915.093, with the charitable
instant bingo organization to assist in the conduct of instant bingo other
than at a bingo session.



   (B)   The location of the lessor or owner shall be designated as a
location where the charitable instant bingo organization conducts instant
bingo other than at a bingo session.



   (C)   No owner or lessor of a location that enters into a written
contract as prescribed in division (A) of this section shall violate any
provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915, or permit, aid, or abet any
other person in violating any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915.



   (D)   No owner or lessor of a location that enters into a written
contract as prescribed in division (A) of this section shall violate the
terms of the contract.



   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates division (C) or (D) of this section
is guilty of illegal instant bingo conduct. Except as otherwise provided in
this division, illegal instant bingo conduct is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of
division (C) or (D) of this section, illegal instant bingo conduct is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (2)   If an owner or lessor of a location knowingly,
intentionally, or recklessly violates division (C) or (D) of this section,
any license that the owner or lessor holds for the retail sale of any goods
on the owner's or lessor's premises that is issued by the state or a
political subdivision is subject to suspension, revocation, or payment of a
monetary penalty at the request of the Attorney General.



(R.C. § 2915.094)



§ 134.14  SKILL-BASED AMUSEMENT MACHINES; PROHIBITED CONDUCT.



   (A)   No person shall give to another person any item described in
division (1), (2), (3), or (4) of the definition for "merchandise prize" in
§ 134.01 in exchange for a noncash prize, toy, or novelty received as a
reward for playing or operating a skill-based amusement machine or for a free
or reduced-price game won on a skill-based amusement machine.



   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
skill-based amusement machine prohibited conduct. A violation of division (A)
of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree for each redemption of a
prize that is involved in the violation. If the offender previously has been
convicted of a violation of division (A) of this section, a violation of that
division is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2915.06)



CHAPTER 135:  OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS



Section



   135.01   Definitions



   135.02   Negligent homicide



   135.03   Vehicular homicide; vehicular manslaughter



   135.04   Assault; negligent assault



   135.05   Injury to persons by hunters



   135.06   Menacing; aggravated menacing; menacing by stalking



   135.07   Unlawful restraint



   135.08   Criminal child enticement



   135.09   Coercion



   135.10   Bigamy



   135.11   Unlawful abortion; failure to perform viability testing



   135.12   Abortion trafficking



   135.13   Nonsupport of dependents



   135.14   Endangering children



   135.15   Interference with custody; interference with support orders



   135.16   Domestic violence



   135.17   Hazing prohibited



   135.18   Contributing to unruliness or delinquency of a child



   135.19   Failure to provide for functionally impaired person



   135.20   Patient abuse or neglect; patient endangerment; exceptions;
false statements; retaliation



   135.21   Interference with right of person to engage in housing
transactions because of race, religion, or the like



   135.22   Ethnic intimidation



   135.23   Violating a protection order, consent agreement,
anti-stalking protection order or order issued by a court of another state



   135.24   Adulteration of food



   135.25   Illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products,
or alternative nicotine products; transaction scans



   135.26   Nonsmoking areas in places of public assembly



   135.27   Spreading contagion



   135.28   Abuse of a corpse



   135.29   Unlawful collection of bodily substances



Statutory reference:



   Child care, misrepresentations by providers and failure to disclose
death or serious injuries, misdemeanors, see R.C. §§ 2919.223 et seq.



   Extortionate extension of credit, see R.C. §§ 2905.21 through 2905.24



   Failure to send child to school, see R.C. § 3321.38



   Permitting child abuse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.15



   Reckless homicide, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.041



   Rights of victims of crimes, see R.C. Chapter 2930



§ 135.01  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of §§ 135.01 through 135.06, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ANOTHER'S UNBORN or OTHER PERSON'S UNBORN.  A member of the
species Homo sapiens who is or was carried in the womb of another during a
period that begins with fertilization and that continues unless and until
live birth occurs.



      UNLAWFUL TERMINATION OF ANOTHER'S PREGNANCY.  Causing the death
of an unborn member of the species Homo sapiens who is or was carried in the
womb of another, as a result of injuries inflicted during the period that
begins with fertilization and that continues unless and until live birth
occurs.



   (B)   Notwithstanding division (A) of this section, in no case shall
the definitions of the terms ANOTHER'S UNBORN, OTHER PERSON'S UNBORN and
UNLAWFUL TERMINATION OF ANOTHER'S PREGNANCY that are set forth in division
(A) of this section be applied or construed in any of the following manners:



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(1) of this
section, in a manner so that the offense prohibits or is construed as
prohibiting any pregnant woman or her physician from performing an abortion
with the consent of the pregnant woman, with the consent of the pregnant
woman implied by law in a medical emergency, or with the approval of one
otherwise authorized by law to consent to medical treatment on behalf of the
pregnant woman.  An abortion that violates the conditions described in the
immediately preceding sentence may be punished as any violation of R.C. §§
2903.01, 2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04, 2903.05, 2903.06, 2903.08, 2903.11,
2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.14, 2903.21 or 2903.22, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, as applicable.  An abortion that does not violate the
conditions described in the second immediately preceding sentence but that
does violate R.C. §§ 2919.12, 2919.13(B), 2919.151, 2919.17 or 2919.18, or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, may be punished as a
violation of such section, as applicable.



      (2)   In a manner so that the offense is applied or is
construed as applying to a woman based on an act or omission of the woman
that occurs while she is or was pregnant and that results in any of the
following:



         (a)   Her delivery of a stillborn baby.



         (b)   Her causing, in any other manner, the death in
utero of a viable, unborn human that she is carrying.



         (c)   Her causing the death of her child who is born
alive but who dies from one or more injuries that are sustained while the
child is a viable, unborn human.



         (d)   Her causing her child who is born alive to sustain
one or more injuries while the child is a viable, unborn human.



         (e)   Her causing, threatening to cause, or attempting
to cause, in any other manner, an injury, illness, or other psychological
illness or condition, regardless of its duration or gravity, to a viable,
unborn human that she is carrying.



(R.C. § 2903.09)



§ 135.02  NEGLIGENT HOMICIDE.



   (A)   No person shall negligently cause the death of another or the
unlawful termination of another's pregnancy by means of a deadly weapon or
dangerous ordnance, as defined in R.C. § 2923.11.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of negligent homicide,
a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 2903.05)



Statutory reference:



   Reckless homicide, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.041



§ 135.03  VEHICULAR HOMICIDE; VEHICULAR MANSLAUGHTER.



   (A)   No person, while operating or participating in the operation
of a motor vehicle, motorcycle, snowmobile, locomotive, watercraft, or
aircraft, shall cause the death of another or the unlawful termination of
another's pregnancy in any of the following ways:



      (1)   (a)   As the proximate result of committing a
violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or of a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance;



         (b)   As the proximate result of committing a violation
of R.C. § 1547.11(A), or of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;



         (c)   As the proximate result of committing a violation
of R.C. § 4561.15(A)(3), or of a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.



      (2)   In one of the following ways:



         (a)   Recklessly;



         (b)   As the proximate result of committing, while
operating or participating in the operation of a motor vehicle or motorcycle
in a construction zone, a reckless operation offense, provided that this
division applies only if the person whose death is caused or whose pregnancy
is unlawfully terminated is in the construction zone at the time of the
offender's commission of the reckless operation offense in the construction
zone and does not apply as described in division (D) of this section.



      (3)   In one of the following ways:



         (a)   Negligently;



         (b)   As the proximate result of committing, while
operating or participating in the operation of a motor vehicle or motorcycle
in a construction zone, a speeding offense, provided that this division
applies only if the person whose death is caused or whose pregnancy is
unlawfully terminated is in the construction zone at the time of the
offender's commission of the speeding offense in the construction zone and
does not apply as described in division (D) of this section.



      (4)   As the proximate result of committing a violation of any
provision of any section contained in R.C. Title 45 that is a minor
misdemeanor or of a municipal ordinance that, regardless of the penalty set
by ordinance for the violation, is substantially equivalent to any provision
of any section contained in R.C. Title 45 that is a minor misdemeanor.



   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this
section is guilty of aggravated vehicular homicide, a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.



      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates division (A)(3) of this
section is guilty of vehicular homicide. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, vehicular homicide is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



Vehicular homicide committed in violation of division (A)(3) of this section
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law if, at the time of
the offense, the offender was driving under a suspension or cancellation
imposed under R.C. Chapter 4510 or any other provision of the Ohio Revised
Code or was operating a motor vehicle or motorcycle, did not have a valid
driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit,
probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege, and was not
eligible for renewal of the offender's driver's license or commercial
driver's license without examination under R.C. § 4507.10 or if the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this
section or any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault offense.
The court shall impose a mandatory jail term on the offender when required by
division (C) of this section.



         (b)   In addition to any other sanctions imposed
pursuant to this division, the court shall impose upon the offender a class
four suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4) or, if
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
violation of this section or any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or
assault offense, a class three suspension of the offender's driver's license,
commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C.
§ 4510.02(A)(3), or, if the offender previously had been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a traffic-related murder, felonious assault, or attempted
murder offense, a class two suspension of the offender's driver's license,
commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license, or nonresident operating privilege as specified in R.C. §
4510.02(A)(2).



      (3)   (a)   Whoever violates division (A)(4) of this
section is guilty of vehicular manslaughter. Except as otherwise provided in
this division, vehicular manslaughter is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
Vehicular manslaughter is a misdemeanor of the first degree if, at the time
of the offense, the offender was driving under a suspension or cancellation
imposed under R.C. Chapter 4510 or any other provision of the Ohio Revised
Code or was operating a motor vehicle or motorcycle, did not have a valid
driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit,
probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege, and was not
eligible for renewal of the offender's driver's license or commercial
driver's license without examination under R.C. § 4507.10 or if the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this
section or any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault offense.



         (b)   In addition to any other sanctions imposed
pursuant to this division, the court shall impose upon the offender a class
six suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(6) or, if
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
violation of this section, any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or
assault offense, or a traffic-related murder, felonious assault, or attempted
murder offense, a class four suspension of the offender's driver's license,
commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C.
§ 4510.02(A)(4).



   (C)   The court shall impose a mandatory prison term on an offender
who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a felony violation of this section,
as provided in R.C. § 2903.06(E). The court shall impose a mandatory jail
term of at least 15 days on an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty
to a misdemeanor violation of division (A)(3)(b) of this section and may
impose upon the offender a longer jail term as authorized pursuant to R.C. §
2929.24.



   (D)   Divisions (A)(2)(b) and (A)(3)(b) of this section do not apply
in a particular construction zone unless signs of the type described in R.C.
§ 2903.081 are erected in that construction zone in accordance with the
guidelines and design specifications established by the Director of
Transportation under R.C. § 5501.27. The failure to erect signs of the type
described in R.C. § 2903.081 in a particular construction zone in accordance
with those guidelines and design specifications does not limit or affect the
application of division (A)(1), (A)(2)(a), (A)(3)(a), or (A)(4) of this
section in that construction zone or the prosecution of any person who
violates any of those divisions in that construction zone.



   (E)   (1)   As used in this section:



         CONSTRUCTION ZONE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5501.27.



         MANDATORY JAIL TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2929.01.



         MANDATORY PRISON TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2929.01.



         MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.



         RECKLESS OPERATION OFFENSE. Means a violation of R.C. §
4511.20 or a municipal ordinance substantially equivalent to R.C. § 4511.20.



         SPEEDING OFFENSE. Means a violation of R.C. § 4511.21 or a
municipal ordinance pertaining to speed.



         TRAFFIC-RELATED HOMICIDE, MANSLAUGHTER, OR ASSAULT OFFENSE.
Means a violation of R.C. § 2903.04 in circumstances in which division (D)
of that section applies, a violation of R.C. § 2903.06 or 2903.08, or a
violation of R.C. § 2903.06, 2903.07, or 2903.08 as they existed prior to
March 23, 2000.



         TRAFFIC-RELATED MURDER, FELONIOUS ASSAULT, OR ATTEMPTED
MURDER OFFENSE. Means a violation of R.C. § 2903.01 or R.C. § 2903.02 in
circumstances in which the offender used a motor vehicle as the means to
commit the violation, a violation of R.C. § 2903.11(A)(2) in circumstances
in which the deadly weapon used in the commission of the violation is a motor
vehicle, or an attempt to commit aggravated murder or murder in violation of
R.C. § 2923.02 in circumstances in which the offender used a motor vehicle
as the means to attempt to commit the aggravated murder or murder.



      (2)   For the purposes of this section, when a penalty or
suspension is enhanced because of a prior or current violation of a specified
law or a prior or current specified offense, the reference to the violation
of the specified law or the specified offense includes any violation of any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, former law of this state, or
current or former law of this or another state or the United States.



(R.C. § 2903.06)



Statutory reference:



   Aggravated vehicular assault, felony, see R.C. § 2903.08



   Trial court to suspend driver's license, see R.C. § 4510.05



§ 135.04  ASSAULT; NEGLIGENT ASSAULT.



   (A)   Assault.



      (1)   No person shall knowingly cause or attempt to cause
physical harm to another or to another's unborn.



      (2)   No person shall recklessly cause serious physical harm
to another or to another's unborn.



      (3)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this
section is guilty of assault. Except as provided in R.C. § 2903.13(C),
assault is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (4)   If an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to
assault when it is a misdemeanor also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
specification as described in R.C. § 2941.1423 (victim of the offense was a
woman whom the defendant knew was pregnant at the time of the offense) that
was included in the indictment, count in the indictment, or information
charging the offense, the court shall sentence the offender to a mandatory
jail term as provided in R.C. § 2929.24(G).



(R.C. § 2903.13)



   (B)   Negligent assault.



      (1)   No person shall negligently, by means of a deadly weapon
or dangerous ordnance as defined in R.C. § 2923.11, cause physical harm to
another or to another's unborn.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (B)(1) of this section is
guilty of negligent assault, a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 2903.14)



Statutory reference:



   Aggravated and felonious assault, see R.C. §§ 2903.11 and 2903.12



   Aggravated vehicular assault, felony, see R.C. § 2903.08



   Felony offenses: assaulting functionally impaired person, peace
officer, firefighter, person performing emergency medical service, officer or
employee of a public children services agency or private child placing
agency; assault at a correctional institution; assault on school officials
and school bus drivers; health care professional, worker or security guard at
a hospital under certain circumstances; judge, magistrate, prosecutor or
court official or employee under certain circumstances, see R.C. § 2903.13(C)



   Permitting child abuse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.15



   Persons who may seek relief under anti-stalking protection order; ex
parte orders, see R.C. § 2903.214



   Protection order as pretrial condition of release,  see R.C. §
2903.213



§ 135.05  INJURY TO PERSONS BY HUNTERS.



   (A)   No person in the act of hunting, pursuing, taking, or killing
a wild animal shall act in a negligent, careless, or reckless manner so as to
injure persons.



(R.C. § 1533.171(A))



   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
of the first degree.



(R.C. § 1533.99(C))



Statutory Reference:



   Violation, license revocation, see R.C. § 1533.171(B) – (E)



§ 135.06  MENACING; AGGRAVATED MENACING; MENACING BY STALKING.



   (A)   Menacing.



      (1)   No person shall knowingly cause another to believe that
the offender will cause physical harm to the person or property of the other
person, the other person’s unborn, or a member of the other person’s
immediate family.  In addition to any other basis for the other person’s
belief that the offender will cause physical harm to the person or property
of the other person, the other person’s unborn, or a member of the other
person’s immediate family, the other person’s belief may be based on
words or conduct of the offender that are directed at or identify a
corporation, association, or other organization that employs the other person
or to which the other person belongs.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) of this section is
guilty of menacing. Except as otherwise provided in this division (A)(2),
menacing is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the victim of the offense
is an officer or employee of a public children services agency or a private
child placing agency and the offense relates to the officer’s or
employee’s performance or anticipated performance of official
responsibilities or duties, menacing is a misdemeanor of the first degree or,
if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to an
offense of violence, the victim of that prior offense was an officer or
employee of a public children services agency or private child placing
agency, and that prior offense related to the officer’s or employee’s
performance or anticipated performance of official responsibilities or
duties, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (3)   As used in this division (A), ORGANIZATION includes an
entity that is a governmental employer.



(R.C. § 2903.22)



   (B)   Aggravated menacing.



      (1)   No person shall knowingly cause another to believe that
the offender will cause serious physical harm to the person or property of
the other person, such other person’s unborn, or a member of such other
person’s immediate family.  In addition to any other basis for the other
person’s belief that the offender will cause serious physical harm to the
person or property of the other person, the other person’s unborn, or a
member of the other person’s immediate family, the other person’s belief
may be based on words or conduct of the offender that are directed at or
identify a corporation, association, or other organization that employs the
other person or to which the other person belongs.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (B)(1) of this section is
guilty of aggravated menacing. Except as otherwise provided in this division
(B)(2), aggravated menacing is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
victim of the offense is an officer or employee of a public children services
agency or a private child placing agency and the offense relates to the
officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated performance of
official responsibilities or duties, aggravated menacing is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law or, if the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to an offense of violence, the victim of
that prior offense was an officer or employee of a public children services
agency or private child placing agency, and that prior offense related to the
officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated performance of
official responsibilities or duties, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



      (3)   As used in this division (B), ORGANIZATION includes an
entity that is a governmental employer.



(R.C. § 2903.21)



   (C)   Menacing by stalking.



      (1)   (a)   No person by engaging in a pattern of conduct
shall knowingly cause another person to believe that the offender will cause
physical harm to the other person or a family or household member of the
other person or cause mental distress to the other person or a family or
household member of the other person. In addition to any other basis for the
other person’s belief that the offender will cause physical harm to the
other person or the other person’s family or household member or mental
distress to the other person or the other person’s family or household
member, the other person’s belief or mental distress may be based on words
or conduct of the offender that are directed at or identify a corporation,
association, or other organization that employs the other person or to which
the other person belongs.



         (b)   No person, through the use of any form of written
communication or any electronic method of remotely transferring information,
including but not limited to any computer, computer network, computer
program, computer system, or telecommunication device, shall post a message
or use any intentionally written or verbal graphic gesture with purpose to
urge do either of the following:



            1.   Violate division (A)(1)(a) of this section;



            2.   Urge or incite another to commit a violation
of division (A)(1)(a) of this section.



         (c)   No person, with a sexual motivation, shall violate
division (C)(1)(a) or (C)(1)(b) of this section.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (C)(1) of this section is
guilty of menacing by stalking.



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(2)(b)
of this section, menacing by stalking is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



         (b)   Menacing by stalking is a felony, to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law, if any of the following applies:



            1.   The offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to a violation of R.C. § 2903.211 or a violation of R.C.
§ 2911.211, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to either of
these offenses.



            2.   In committing the offense under division
(C)(1)(a), (C)(1)(b) or (C)(1)(c) of this section, the offender made a threat
of physical harm to or against the victim, or as a result of an offense
committed under division (C)(1)(b) or (C)(1)(c) of this section, a third
person induced by the offender’s posted message made a threat of physical
harm to or against the victim.



            3.   In committing the offense under division
(C)(1)(a), (C)(1)(b) or (C)(1)(c) of this section, the offender trespassed on
the land or premises where the victim lives, is employed, or attends school,
or as a result of an offense committed under division (C)(1)(b) or (C)(1)(c)
of this section, a third person induced by the offender’s posted message
trespassed on the land or premises where the victim lives, is employed, or
attends school.



            4.   The victim of the offense is a minor.



            5.   The offender has a history of violence
towards the victim or any other person or a history of other violent acts
towards the victim or any other person.



            6.   While committing the offense under division
(C)(1)(a) of this section or a violation of division (C)(1)(c) of this
section based on conduct in violation of division (C)(1)(a) of this section,
the offender had a deadly weapon on or about the offender’s person or under
the offender’s control. Division (C)(2)(b)6. of this section does not apply
in determining the penalty for a violation of division (C)(1)(b) of this
section or a violation of division (C)(1)(c) of this section based on conduct
in violation of division (C)(1)(b) of this section.



            7.   At the time of the commission of the offense,
the offender was the subject of a protection order issued under R.C. §
2903.213 or R.C. § 2903.214, regardless of whether or not the person to be
protected under the order is the victim of the offense or another person.



            8.   In committing the offense under division
(C)(1)(a), (C)(1)(b) or (C)(1)(c) of this section, the offender caused
serious physical harm to the premises at which the victim resides, to the
real property on which that premises is located, or to any personal property
located on that premises, or as a result of an offense committed under
division (C)(1)(b) of this section or an offense committed under division
(C)(1)(c) of this section based on a violation of division (C)(1)(b) of this
section, a third person induced by the offender’s posted message caused
serious physical harm to that premises, that real property, or any personal
property on that premises.



            9.   Prior to committing the offense, the offender
had been determined to represent a substantial risk of physical harm to
others as manifested by evidence of then- recent homicidal or other violent
behavior, evidence of then-recent threats that placed another in reasonable
fear of violent behavior and serious harm, or other evidence of then-present
dangerousness.



            10.   The victim of the offense is an officer or
employee of a public children services agency or a private child placing
agency and the offense relates to the officer’s or employee’s performance
or anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties.



            11.   The offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to an offense of violence, the victim of that prior
offense was an officer or employee of a public children services agency or
private child placing agency, and that prior offense related to the
officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated performance of
official responsibilities or duties.



      (3)   R.C. § 2919.271 applies in relation to a defendant
charged with a violation of this section.



      (4)   As used in division (C) of this section:



         COMPUTER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.



         COMPUTER NETWORK. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2913.01.



         COMPUTER PROGRAM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2913.01.



         COMPUTER SYSTEM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.



         EMERGENCY FACILITY PERSON. Is the singular of “emergency
facility personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2909.04.



         EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSON. Is the singular of
“emergency medical services personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2133.21.



         FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER.  Means any of the following:



            1.   Any of the following who is residing or has
resided with the person against whom the act prohibited in division (A)(1) of
this section is committed:



               a.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse,
or a former spouse of the person;



               b.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child
of the person, or another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the
person;



               c.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person
living as a spouse, or former spouse of the person, or another person related
by consanguinity or affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or
former spouse of the person.



            2.   The natural parent of any child of whom the
person against whom the act prohibited in division (A)(1) of this section is
committed is the other natural parent or is the putative other natural parent.



         MENTAL DISTRESS. Means any of the following:



            1.   Any mental illness or condition that involves
some temporary substantial incapacity;



            2.   Any mental illness or condition that would
normally require psychiatric treatment, psychological treatment, or other
mental health services, whether or not any person requested or received
psychiatric treatment, psychological treatment, or other mental health
services.



         ORGANIZATION. Includes an entity that is a governmental
employer.



         PATTERN OF CONDUCT. Means two or more actions or incidents
closely related in time, whether or not there has been a prior conviction
based on any of those actions or incidents, or two or more actions or
incidents closely related in time, whether or not there has been a prior
conviction based on any of those actions or incidents, directed at one or
more persons employed by or belonging to the same corporation, association,
or other organization. Actions or incidents that prevent, obstruct, or delay
the performance by a public official, firefighter, rescuer, emergency medical
services person, or emergency facility person of any authorized act within
the public official’s, firefighter’s, rescuer’s, emergency medical
services person’s, or emergency facility person’s official capacity, or
the posting of messages, use of intentionally written or verbal graphic
gestures, or receipt of information or data through the use of any form of
written communication or an electronic method of remotely transferring
information, including but not limited to a computer, computer network,
computer program, computer system, or telecommunications device, may
constitute a “pattern of conduct.”



         PERSON LIVING AS A SPOUSE.  A person who is living or has
lived with the person against whom the act prohibited in division (A)(1) of
this section is committed in a common law marital relationship, who otherwise
is cohabiting with that person, or who otherwise has cohabited with the
person within five years prior to the date of the alleged commission of the
act in question.



         POST A MESSAGE. Means transferring, sending, posting,
publishing, disseminating, or otherwise communicating, or attempting to
transfer, send, post, publish, disseminate, or otherwise communicate, any
message or information, whether truthful or untruthful, about an individual,
and whether done under one’s own name, under the name of another, or while
impersonating another.



         PUBLIC OFFICIAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.01.



         SEXUAL MOTIVATION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2971.01.



         TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 2913.01.



         THIRD PERSON. Means, in relation to conduct as described in
division (C)(1)(b) of this section, an individual who is neither the offender
nor the victim of the conduct.



      (5)   The prosecution does not need to prove in a prosecution
under division (C) of this section that a person requested or received
psychiatric treatment, psychological treatment, or other mental health
services in order to show that the person was caused mental distress as
described in division (2) of the definition for “mental distress” in this
section.



      (6)   (a)   Division (C) of this section does not apply to
a person solely because the person provided access or connection to or from
an electronic method of remotely transferring information not under that
person’s control, including having provided capabilities that are
incidental to providing access or connection to or from the electronic method
of remotely transferring the information, and that do not include the
creation of the content of the material that is the subject of the access or
connection. In addition, any person providing access or connection to or from
an electronic method of remotely transferring information not under that
person’s control shall not be liable for any action voluntarily taken in
good faith to block the receipt or transmission through its service of any
information that it believes is or will be sent in violation of division (C)
of this section.



         (b)   Division (C)(6)(a) of this section does not create
an affirmative duty for any person providing access or connection to or from
an electronic method of remotely transferring information not under that
person’s control to block the receipt or transmission through its service
of any information that it believes is or will be sent in violation of
division (C) of this section except as otherwise provided by law.



         (c)   Division (C)(6)(a) of this section does not apply
to a person who conspires with a person actively involved in the creation or
knowing distribution of material in violation of division (C) of this section
or who knowingly advertises the availability of material of that nature.



(R.C. § 2903.211)



Cross-reference:



   Violation of protection orders, see § 135.23



Statutory reference:



   Authority of corporations to seek protection orders in certain
circumstances, see R.C. § 2903.215



   Conditions of bail for violators, see R.C. § 2903.212



   Persons who may seek relief under anti-stalking protection order; ex
parte orders, see R.C. § 2903.214



   Protection order as pretrial condition of release, see R.C. § 2903.213



§ 135.07  UNLAWFUL RESTRAINT.



   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly
restrain another of the other person's liberty.



   (B)   No person, without privilege to do so and with a sexual
motivation, shall knowingly restrain another of the other person's liberty.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful restraint,
a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (D)   As used in this section, SEXUAL MOTIVATION has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 2971.01.



(R.C. § 2905.03)



§ 135.08  CRIMINAL CHILD ENTICEMENT.



   (A)   No person, by any means and without privilege to do so, shall
knowingly solicit, coax, entice, or lure any child under 14 years of age to
accompany the person in any manner, including entering into any vehicle or
onto any vessel, whether or not the offender knows the age of the child, if
both of the following apply:



      (1)   The actor does not have the express or implied
permission of the parent, guardian, or other legal custodian of the child in
undertaking the activity.



      (2)   The actor is not a law enforcement officer, medic,
firefighter, or other person who regularly provides emergency services, and
is not an employee or agent of, or a volunteer acting under the direction of,
any board of education, or the actor is any such person, but at the time the
actor undertakes the activity, the actor is not acting within the scope of
the actor’s lawful duties in that capacity.



   (B)   No person, with a sexual motivation, shall violate division
(A) of this section.



   (C)   No person, for any unlawful purpose other than, or in addition
to, that proscribed by division (A) of this section, shall engage in any
activity described in division (A) of this section.



   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A) of
this section that the actor undertook the activity in response to a bona fide
emergency situation or that the actor undertook the activity in a reasonable
belief that it was necessary to preserve the health, safety, or welfare of
the child.



   (E)   Whoever violates division (A), (B) or (C) of this section is
guilty of criminal child enticement, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If
the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this section, a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, R.C. § 2907.02 or
2907.03 or former R.C. § 2907.12, or R.C.§ 2905.01 or 2907.05 when the
victim of that prior offense was under 17 years of age at the time of the
offense, criminal child enticement is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



   (F)   As used in this section:



      SEXUAL MOTIVATION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2971.01.



      VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.



      VESSEL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1547.01.



(R.C. § 2905.05)



§ 135.09  COERCION.



   (A)   No person, with purpose to coerce another into taking or
refraining from action concerning which he or she has a legal freedom of
choice, shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Threaten to commit any offense.



      (2)   Utter or threaten any slander against any person.



      (3)   Expose or threaten to expose any matter tending to
subject any person to hatred, contempt, or ridicule, or to damage his or her
personal or business repute, or to impair his or her credit.



      (4)   Institute or threaten criminal proceedings against any
person.



      (5)   Take or withhold, or threaten to take or withhold
official action, or cause or threaten to cause official action to be taken or
withheld.



   (B)   Divisions (A)(4) and (5) of this section shall not be
construed to prohibit a prosecutor or court from doing any of the following
in good faith and in the interests of justice:



      (1)   Offering or agreeing to grant, or granting immunity from
prosecution pursuant to R.C. § 2945.44.



      (2)   In return for a plea of guilty to one or more offenses
charged or to one or more other or lesser offenses, or in return for the
testimony of the accused in a case to which he or she is not a party,
offering or agreeing to dismiss, or dismissing one or more charges pending
against an accused, or offering or agreeing to impose, or imposing a certain
sentence or modification of sentence.



      (3)   Imposing probation on certain conditions, including
without limitation requiring the offender to make restitution or redress to
the victim of his or her offense.



   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division
(A)(3), (4), or (5) of this section that the actor's conduct was a reasonable
response to the circumstances which occasioned it, and that his or her
purpose was limited to:



      (1)   Compelling another to refrain from misconduct or to
desist from further misconduct.



      (2)   Preventing or redressing a wrong or injustice.



      (3)   Preventing another from taking action for which the
actor reasonably believed the other person to be disqualified.



      (4)   Compelling another to take action which the actor
reasonably believed the other person to be under a duty to take.



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of coercion, a
misdemeanor of the second degree.



   (E)   As used in this section, THREAT includes a direct threat and a
threat by innuendo.



(R.C. § 2905.12)



§ 135.10  BIGAMY.



   (A)   No married person shall marry another or continue to cohabit
with such other person in this municipality.



   (B)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section
that the actor's spouse was continuously absent for five years immediately
preceding the purported subsequent marriage, and was not known by the actor
to be alive within that time.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of bigamy, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 2919.01)



§ 135.11  UNLAWFUL ABORTION; FAILURE TO PERFORM VIABILITY TESTING.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      ABORTION.  The purposeful termination of a human pregnancy by
any person, including the pregnant woman herself, with an intention other
than to produce a live birth or to remove a dead fetus or embryo.



(R.C. § 2919.11)



      EMANCIPATED.  A minor shall be considered emancipated if the
minor has married, entered the armed services of the United States, become
employed and self-subsisting, or has otherwise become independent from the
care and control of her parent, guardian or custodian.



      UNEMANCIPATED.  A woman who is unmarried and under 18 years of
age who has not entered the armed services of the United States, has not
become employed and self-subsisting, or has not otherwise become independent
from the care and control of her parent, guardian, or custodian.



   (B)   No person shall perform or induce an abortion without the
informed consent of the pregnant woman.



   (C)   No person shall knowingly perform or induce an abortion upon a
pregnant minor unless one of the following is the case:



      (1)   The attending physician has secured the informed written
consent of the minor and one parent, guardian or custodian;



      (2)   The minor is emancipated and the attending physician has
received her informed written consent;



      (3)   The minor has been authorized to consent to the abortion
by a court order issued pursuant to R.C. § 2919.121(C) and the attending
physician has received her informed written consent; or



      (4)    The court has given its consent in accordance with R.C.
§ 2919.121(C) and the minor is having the abortion willingly.



   (D)   No person shall knowingly perform or induce an abortion upon a
woman who is pregnant, unmarried, under 18 years of age, and unemancipated
unless at least one of the circumstances enumerated in R.C. § 2919.12(B)
applies.



   (E)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under
division (D) of this section that the pregnant woman provided the person who
performed or induced the abortion with false, misleading, or incorrect
information about her age, marital status, or emancipation, about the age of
the brother or sister to whom she requested notice to be given as a specified
relative instead of one of her parents, her guardian, or her custodian, or
about the last known address of either of her parents, her guardian, her
custodian, or a specified brother, sister, stepparent, or grandparent to whom
she requested notice be given and the person who performed or induced the
abortion did not otherwise have reasonable cause to believe the pregnant
woman was under 18 years of age, unmarried, or unemancipated, to believe that
the age of the brother or sister to whom she requested notice be given as a
specified relative instead of one of her parents, her guardian, or her
custodian was not 21 years of age, or to believe that the last known address
of either of her parents, her guardian, her custodian, or a specified
brother, sister, stepparent, or grandparent to whom she requested notice be
given was incorrect.



      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this
section that compliance with the requirements of this section was not
possible because an immediate threat of serious risk to the life or physical
health of the pregnant woman or pregnant minor from the continuation of her
pregnancy created an emergency necessitating the immediate performance or
inducement of an abortion.



   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful
abortion.  A violation of division (B), (C) or (D) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree on the first offense and a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.



   (G)   Whoever violates this section is liable to the pregnant woman
or pregnant minor, and her parents, guardian, or custodian for civil,
compensatory and exemplary damages.



(R.C. §§ 2919.12, 2919.121)



   (H)   (1)   Division (C) of this section applies in lieu of
division (D) of this section whenever its operation is not enjoined.  If
division (C) of this section is enjoined, division (D) of this section
applies.



      (2)   If a person complies with the requirements of division
(D) of this section under the good faith belief that the application or
enforcement of division (C) of this section is subject to a restraining order
or injunction, good faith compliance shall constitute a complete defense to
any civil, criminal or professional disciplinary action brought under
division (C) of this section or R.C. § 2919.121.



      (3)   If a person complies with the requirements of division
(C) of this section under the good faith belief that it is not subject to a
restraining order or injunction, good faith compliance shall constitute a
complete defense to any civil, criminal or professional disciplinary action
for failure to comply with the requirements of division (D) of this section.



(R.C. § 2919.122)



   (I)   Failure to perform viability testing.



      (1)   Except in a medical emergency that prevents compliance
with this division, no physician shall perform or induce or attempt to
perform or induce an abortion on a pregnant woman after the beginning of the
twentieth week of gestation unless, prior to the performance or inducement of
the abortion or the attempt to perform or induce the abortion, the physician
determines, in the physician’s good faith medical judgment, that the unborn
child is not viable, and the physician makes that determination after
performing a medical examination of the pregnant woman and after performing
or causing to be performed those tests for assessing gestational age, weight,
lung maturity, or other tests that the physician, in that physician’s good
faith medical judgment, believes are necessary to determine whether an unborn
child is viable.



      (2)   Except in a medical emergency that prevents compliance
with this division, no physician shall perform or induce or attempt to
perform or induce an abortion on a pregnant woman after the beginning of the
twentieth week of gestation without first entering the determination made in
division (I)(1) of this section and the associated findings of the medical
examination and tests in the medical record of the pregnant woman.



      (3)   Whoever violates this division (I) is guilty of failure
to perform viability testing, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



      (4)   The State Medical Board shall suspend a physician’s
license to practice medicine in this state for a period of not less than six
months if the physician violates this section.



(R.C. § 2919.18)



Statutory reference:



   Judicial bypass, see R.C. § 2151.85



   Judicial consent and the right of a minor to consent, see R.C. §
2919.121(C)



   Notice or consent requirements for unmarried minors, see R.C. §
2919.12(B)



§ 135.12  ABORTION TRAFFICKING.



   (A)   No person shall experiment upon or sell the product of human
conception which is aborted.  Experiment does not include autopsies pursuant
to R.C. §§ 313.13 and 2108.50.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of abortion
trafficking, a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 2919.14)



§ 135.13  NONSUPPORT OF DEPENDENTS.



   (A)   No person shall abandon, or fail to provide adequate support
to:



      (1)   His or her spouse, as required by law;



      (2)   His or her legitimate or illegitimate child who is under
age 18, or mentally or physically disabled child who is under age 21;



      (3)   His or her aged or infirm parent or adoptive parent, who
from lack of ability and means is unable to provide adequately for his or her
own support.



   (B)   No person shall abandon or fail to provide support as
established by court order to another person whom, by court order or decree,
the person is legally obligated to support.



   (C)   No person shall aid, abet, induce, cause, encourage, or
contribute to a child or a ward of the juvenile court becoming a dependent
child, as defined in R.C. § 2151.04, or a neglected child, as defined in
R.C. § 2151.03.



   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of failure to provide
adequate support under division (A) of this section or a charge of failure to
provide support established by a court order under division (B) of this
section that the accused was unable to provide adequate support or the
established support, but did provide the support that was within his or her
ability and means.



   (E)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(3)
of this section that the parent abandoned the accused, or failed to support
the accused as required by law, while the accused was under age 18, or was
mentally or physically disabled and under age 21.



   (F)   It is not a defense to a charge under division (B) of this
section that the person whom a court has ordered the accused to support is
being adequately supported by someone other than the accused.



   (G)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division,
whoever violates division (A) or (B) of this section is guilty of nonsupport
of dependents, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division
(A)(2) or (B) of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, or if the offender has failed to provide support under
division (A)(2) or (B) of this section for a total accumulated period of 26
weeks out of 104 consecutive weeks, whether or not the 26 weeks were
consecutive, then a violation of division (A)(2) or (B) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.  If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a felony violation of
this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
a violation of division (A)(2) or (B) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (2)   If the offender is guilty of nonsupport of dependents by
reason of failing to provide support to his or her child as required by a
child support order issued on or after April 15, 1985, pursuant to R.C. §§
2151.23, 2151.231, 2151.232, 2151.33, 3105.21, 3109.05, 3111.13, 3113.04,
3113.31, 3115.401, or former R.C. § 3115.31, the court, in addition to any
other sentence imposed, shall assess all court costs arising out of the
charge against the person and require the person to pay any reasonable
attorney’s fees of any adverse party other than the state, as determined by
the court, that arose in relation to the charge.



      (3)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty
of contributing to the nonsupport of dependents, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.  Each day of a violation of division (C) of this section is a
separate offense.



(R.C. § 2919.21)



§ 135.14  ENDANGERING CHILDREN.



   (A)   No person, who is the parent, guardian, custodian, person
having custody or control, or person in loco parentis of a child under 18
years of age or a mentally or physically disabled child under 21 years of
age, shall create a substantial risk to the health or safety of the child by
violating a duty of care, protection, or support.  It is not a violation of
a duty of care, protection, or support under this division when the parent,
guardian, custodian, or person having custody or control of a child treats
the physical or mental illness or disability of the child by spiritual means
through prayer alone, in accordance with the tenets of a recognized religious
body.



   (B)   No person shall do any of the following to a child under 18
years of age or a mentally or physically disabled child under 21 years of age:



      (1)   Abuse the child.



      (2)   Torture or cruelly abuse the child.



      (3)   Administer corporal punishment or other physical
disciplinary measure, or physically restrain the child in a cruel manner or
for a prolonged period, which punishment, discipline or restraint is
excessive under the circumstances and creates a substantial risk of serious
physical harm to the child.



      (4)   Repeatedly administer unwarranted disciplinary measures
to a child when there is a substantial risk that such conduct, if continued,
will seriously impair or retard the child's mental health or development.



      (5)   Entice, coerce, permit, encourage, compel, hire, employ,
use, or allow the child to act, model, or in any other way participate in, or
be photographed for, the production, presentation, dissemination, or
advertisement of any material or performance that the offender knows or
reasonably should know is obscene, is sexually oriented matter, or is
nudity-oriented matter;



      (6)   Allow the child to be on the same parcel of real
property and within 100 feet of, or, in the case of more than one housing
unit on the same parcel of real property, in the same housing unit and within
100 feet of, any act in violation of R.C. § 2925.04 or 2925.041 when the
person knows that the act is occurring, whether or not any person is
prosecuted for or convicted of the violation of R.C. § 2925.04 or 2925.041
that is the basis of the violation of this division.



   (C)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle, as defined by R.C.
§ 4511.01, within the municipality and in violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A),
or a substantially  equivalent municipal ordinance, when one or more
children under 18 years of age are in the vehicle.  Notwithstanding any
other provision of law, a person may be convicted at the same trial or
proceeding of a violation of this division and a violation of R.C. §
4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that
constitutes the basis of the charge of the violation of this division.  For
purposes of R.C. §§ 4511.191 to 4511.197 and all related provisions of law,
a person arrested for a violation of this division shall be considered to be
under arrest for operating a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a
drug of abuse, or a combination of them or for operating a vehicle with a
prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite
of a controlled substance in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath,
or urine.



      (2)   As used in division (C)(1) of this section:



         CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE has the same meaning as in R.C. §
3719.01.



         VEHICLE has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4511.01.



   (D)   (1)   Division (B)(5) of this section does not apply to any
material or performance that is produced, presented, or disseminated for a
bona fide medical, scientific, educational, religious, governmental,
judicial, or other proper purpose, by or to a physician, psychologist,
sociologist, scientist, teacher, person pursuing bona fide studies for
research, librarian, member of the clergy, prosecutor, judge, or other person
having a proper interest in the material or performance.



      (2)   Mistake of age is not a defense to a charge under
division (B)(5) of this section.



      (3)   In a prosecution under division (B)(5) of this section,
the trier of fact may infer that an actor, model, or participant in the
material or performance involved is a juvenile if the material or
performance, through its title, text, visual representation, or otherwise,
represents or depicts the actor, model, or participant as a juvenile.



      (4)   As used in this division and division (B)(5) of this
section:



         MATERIAL, PERFORMANCE, OBSCENE, and SEXUAL ACTIVITY have
the same meanings as in R.C. § 2907.01.



         NUDITY-ORIENTED MATTER means any material or performance
that shows a minor in a state of nudity and that, taken as a whole by the
average person applying contemporary community standards, appeals to the
prurient interest.



         SEXUALLY ORIENTED MATTER means any material or performance
that shows a minor participating or engaging in sexual activity,
masturbation, or bestiality.



   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of endangering
children.



      (1)   If the offender violates division (A) or (B)(1) of this
section, endangering children is one of the following:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division
(E)(1)(b), (c), or (d), a misdemeanor of the first degree.



         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of
an offense under this section or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, or of any offense involving neglect, abandonment, or
contributing to the delinquency of or physical abuse of a child, except as
otherwise provided in division (E)(1)(c) or (d) of this section, endangering
children is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



         (c)   If the violation is a violation of division (A) of
this section and results in serious physical harm to the child involved,
endangering children is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



         (d)   If the violation is a violation of division (B)(1)
of this section and results in serious physical harm to the child involved,
endangering children is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (2)   If the offender violates division (B)(2), (3), (4), (5)
or (6) of this section, endangering children is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.



      (3)   If the offender violates division (C) of this section,
the offender shall be punished as follows:



         (a)   Except as provided in (E)(3)(b) or (c),
endangering children in violation of division (C) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.



         (b)   If the violation results in serious physical harm
to the child or if the offender previously has been convicted of a violation
of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, or of any offense involving neglect, abandonment, or contributing
to the delinquency of or physical abuse of a child, except as otherwise
provided in division (E)(3)(c) of this section, endangering children in
violation of division (C) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



         (c)   If the violation results in serious physical harm
to the child and if the offender previously has been convicted of a violation
of this section, R.C. §§ 2903.06, 2903.08, 2919.22(C) or former R.C. §
2903.07 as it existed prior to the effective date of this amendment (March
23, 2000), or R.C. § 2903.04, in a case in which the offender was subject to
the sanctions described in division (D) of that section, endangering children
in violation of division (C) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.



         (d)   In addition to any term of imprisonment, fine, or
other sentence, penalty or sanction it imposes upon the offender pursuant to
divisions (E)(3)(a), (b) or (c) of this section or pursuant to any other
provision of law, and in addition to any suspension of the offender's
driver's license or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident
operating privilege under R.C. Chapter 4506, 4509, 4510, or 4511, or any
other provision of law, the court also may impose upon the offender a class
seven suspension of the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. §
4510.02(A)(7).



         (e)   In addition to any term of imprisonment, fine, or
other sentence, penalty or sanction imposed upon the offender pursuant to
division (E)(3)(a), (b), (c) or (d) of this section or pursuant to any other
provision of law for the violation of division (C) of this section, if as a
part of the same trial or proceeding the offender also is convicted of or
pleads guilty to a separate charge charging the violation of R.C. §
4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the
basis of the charge of the violation of division (C) of this section, the
offender also shall be sentenced in accordance with R.C. § 4511.19, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, for that violation of R.C. §
4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



   (F)   (1)   If a person violates division (C) of this section and
if, at the time of the violation, there were two or more children under 18
years of age in the motor vehicle involved in the violation, the offender may
be convicted of a violation of division (C) of this section for each of the
children, but the court may sentence the offender for only one of the
violations.



      (2)   (a)   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to
a violation of division (C) of this section but the person is not also
convicted of and does not also plead guilty to a separate charge of violating
R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that
was the basis of the charge of the violation of division (C) of this section,
both the following apply:



            1.   For purposes of the provisions of R.C. §
4511.19, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that set forth
the penalties and sanctions for a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the conviction of or plea of
guilty to the violation of division (C) of this section shall not constitute
a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.



            2.   For purposes of the provisions of law that
refers to a conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of R.C. §
4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and that is
not described in division (E)(2)(a)1. of this section, the conviction of or
plea of guilty to the violation of division (C) of this section shall
constitute a conviction or plea of guilty to a violation of R.C. §
4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



         (b)   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of division (C) of this section and the person also is convicted of
or pleads guilty to a separate charge of violating R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the basis of the
charge of the violation of division (C) of this section, the conviction of or
plea of guilty to the violation of division (C) of this section shall not
constitute, for the purposes of any provision of law that refers to a
conviction of or a plea of guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, a conviction of or a plea of
guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.



(R.C. § 2919.22(A) - (E), (H))



Statutory reference:



   Community service, requirements, see R.C. § 2919.22(F)



   License suspension, requirements, see R.C. § 2919.22(G)



   Permitting child abuse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.15



§ 135.15  INTERFERENCE WITH CUSTODY; INTERFERENCE WITH SUPPORT ORDERS.



   (A)   Interference with custody.



      (1)   No person, knowing that he or she is without privilege
to do so or being reckless in that regard, shall entice, take, keep, or
harbor a person identified in division (A)(1)(a), (b) or (c) of this section
from the parent, guardian, or custodian of the person identified in division
(A)(1)(a), (b) or (c) of this section:



         (a)   A child under the age of 18, or a mentally or
physically disabled child under the age of 21;



         (b)   A person committed by law to an institution for
delinquent, unruly, neglected, abused, or dependent children;



         (c)   A person committed by law to an institution for
the mentally ill or mentally disabled.



      (2)   No person shall aid, abet, induce, cause, or encourage a
child or a ward of the juvenile court who has been committed to the custody
of any person, department, or public or private institution to leave the
custody of that person, department, or institution without legal consent.



      (3)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of enticing or
taking under division (A)(1)(a) of this section that the actor reasonably
believed that his or her conduct was necessary to preserve the child's health
or safety.  It is an affirmative defense to a charge of keeping or harboring
under division (A)(1) of this section that the actor in good faith gave
notice to law enforcement or judicial authorities within a reasonable time
after the child or committed person came under his or her shelter,
protection, or influence.



      (4)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interference
with custody.



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this subdivision,
a violation of division (A)(1)(a) above is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.  If the child who is the subject of a violation of division
(A)(1)(a) is removed from the state or if the offender previously has been
convicted of an offense under this section or a substantially equivalent
state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of division (A)(1)(a) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.  If the
child who is the subject of a violation of division (A)(1)(a) suffers
physical harm as a result of the violation, a violation of division (A)(1)(a)
of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



         (b)   A violation of division (A)(1)(b) or (c) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the third degree.



         (c)   A violation of division (A)(2) of this section is
a misdemeanor of the first degree.  Each day of a violation of division
(A)(2) is a separate offense.



(R.C. § 2919.23)



   (B)   Interference with support orders.



      (1)   No person, by using physical harassment or threats of
violence against another person, shall interfere with the other person's
initiation or continuance of, or attempt to prevent the other person from
initiating or continuing, an action to issue or modify a support order under
R.C. Chapter 3115, or under R.C. § 2151.23, 2151.231, 2151.232, 2151.33,
2151.36, 2151.361, 2151.49, 3105.18, 3105.21, 3109.05, 3109.19, 3111.13,
3113.04, 3113.07, or 3113.31.



      (2)   Whoever violates this division (B) is guilty of
interfering with an action to issue or modify a support order, a misdemeanor
of the first degree.  If the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a violation of this division (B) or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or R.C. § 3111.19, interfering
with an action to issue or modify a support order is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2919.231)



§ 135.16  DOMESTIC VIOLENCE.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly cause or attempt to cause physical
harm to a family or household member.



   (B)   No person shall recklessly cause serious physical harm to a
family or household member.



   (C)   No person, by threat of force, shall knowingly cause a family
or household member to believe that the offender will cause imminent physical
harm to the family or household member.



   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of domestic
violence, and the court shall sentence the offender as provided in divisions
(D)(2) to (D)(5) of this section.



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3), (D)(4)
or (D)(5) of this section, a violation of division (C) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree and a violation of division (A) or (B) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(4) of this
section, if the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted
of domestic violence, a violation of an existing or former municipal
ordinance or law of this or any other state or the United States that is
substantially equivalent to domestic violence, a violation of R.C. §
2903.14, 2909.06, 2909.07, 2911.12, 2911.211, or 2919.22 if the victim of the
violation was a family or household member at the time of the violation, a
violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of this or any
other state or the United States that is substantially equivalent to any of
those sections if the victim of the violation was a family or household
member at the time of the commission of the violation, or any offense of
violence if the victim of the offense was a family or household member at the
time of the commission of the offense, a violation of division (A) or (B) is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law, and a violation of
division (C) is a misdemeanor of the second degree.



      (4)   If the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been
convicted of two or more offenses of domestic violence or two or more
violations or offenses of the type described in division (D)(3) of this
section involving a person who was a family or household member at the time
of the violations or offenses, a violation of division (A) or (B) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law, and a
violation of division (C) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.



      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3) or
(D)(4) of this section, if the offender knew that the victim of the violation
was pregnant at the time of the violation, a violation of division (A) or (B)
of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law, and
a violation of division (C) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third
degree.



   (E)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no court
or unit of state or local government shall charge any fee, cost, deposit, or
money in connection with the filing of charges against a person alleging that
the person violated this section or a municipal ordinance substantially
equivalent to this section or in connection with the prosecution of any
charges so filed.



   (F)   As used in this section:



      FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Means any of the following:



         (a)   Any of the following who is residing or has
resided with the offender:



            1.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse as
defined below, or a former spouse of the offender;



            2.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the
offender, or another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the
offender;



            3.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person
living as a spouse, or former spouse of the offender, or another person
related by consanguinity or affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse,
or former spouse of the offender.



         (b)   The natural parent of any child of whom the
offender is the other natural parent or is the putative other natural parent.



      PERSON LIVING AS A SPOUSE. Means a person who is living or has
lived with the offender in a common law marital relationship, who otherwise
is cohabiting with the offender, or who otherwise has cohabited with the
offender within five years prior to the date of the alleged commission of the
act in question.



(R.C. § 2919.25)



Cross-reference:



   Violation of protection orders, see § 135.23



Statutory reference:



   Temporary protection orders, see R.C. § 2919.26



   Violation of protection order or consent agreement, factors to
consider, bail, see R.C. § 2919.251



§ 135.17  HAZING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   As used in this section, HAZING means doing any act or
coercing another, including the victim, to do any act of initiation into any
student or other organization that causes or creates a substantial risk of
causing mental or physical harm to any person.



   (B)   (1)   No person shall recklessly participate in the hazing
of another.



      (2)   No administrator, employee, or faculty member of any
primary, secondary, or post-secondary school or of any other educational
institution, public or private, shall recklessly permit the hazing of any
person.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of hazing, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 2903.31)



Statutory reference:



   Civil liability for hazing, see R.C. § 2307.44



§ 135.18  CONTRIBUTING TO UNRULINESS OR DELINQUENCY OF A CHILD.



   (A)   No person, including a parent, guardian, or other custodian of
a child, shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Aid, abet, induce, cause, encourage, or contribute to a
child or a ward of the juvenile court becoming an unruly child, as defined in
R.C. § 2151.022, or a delinquent child, as defined in R.C. § 2152.02;



      (2)   Act in a way tending to cause a child or a ward of the
juvenile court to become an unruly child, as defined in R.C. § 2151.022, or
a delinquent child, as defined in R.C. § 2152.02.



      (3)   If the person is the parent, guardian, or custodian of a
child who has the duties under R.C. Chapters 2152 and 2950 to register,
register a new residence address, and periodically verify a residence
address, and, if applicable, to send a notice of intent to reside, and if the
child is not emancipated, as defined in R.C. § 2919.121, fail to ensure that
the child complies with those duties under R.C. Chapters 2152 and 2950.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of contributing to the
unruliness or delinquency of a child, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
Each day of a violation of this section is a separate offense.



(R.C. § 2919.24)



Statutory reference:



   DNA testing of delinquent children, see R.C. § 2152.74



   Failure to send child to school, see R.C. § 3321.38



§ 135.19  FAILURE TO PROVIDE FOR FUNCTIONALLY IMPAIRED PERSON.



   (A)   No caretaker shall knowingly fail to provide a functionally
impaired person under his or her care with any treatment, care, goods, or
service that is necessary to maintain the health of safety of the
functionally impaired person when this failure results in physical harm or
serious physical harm to the functionally impaired person.



   (B)   No caretaker shall recklessly fail to provide a functionally
impaired person under his or her care with any treatment, care, goods, or
service that is necessary to maintain the health of safety of the
functionally impaired person when this failure results in serious physical
harm to the functionally impaired person.



   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is
guilty of knowingly failing to provide for a functionally impaired person, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the functionally impaired person under
the offender's care suffers serious physical harm as a result of the
violation of this section, a violation of division (A) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty
of recklessly failing to provide for a functionally impaired person, a
misdemeanor of the second degree.  If the functionally impaired person under
the offender's care suffers serious physical harm as a result of the
violation of this section, a violation of division (B) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2903.16)



   (D)   As used in this section:



      CARETAKER means a person who assumes the duty to provide for the
care and protection of a functionally impaired person on a voluntary basis,
by contract, through receipt of payment for care and protection, as a result
of a family relationship, or by order of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
CARETAKER does not include a person who owns, operates, or administers, or
who is an agent or employee of, a care facility, as defined in R.C. §
2903.33.



      FUNCTIONALLY IMPAIRED PERSON means any person who has a physical
or mental impairment that prevents the person from providing for his or her
own care or protection or whose infirmities caused by aging prevent the
person from providing for his or her own care or protection.



(R.C. § 2903.10)



§ 135.20  PATIENT ABUSE OR NEGLECT; PATIENT ENDANGERMENT; EXCEPTIONS; FALSE
STATEMENTS; RETALIATION.



   (A)   Definitions. As used in this section:



      ABUSE. Means knowingly causing physical harm or recklessly
causing serious physical harm to a person by physical contact with the person
or by the inappropriate use of a physical or chemical restraint, medication
or isolation on the person.



      CARE FACILITY. Means any of the following:



         (a)   Any “home” as defined in R.C. § 3721.10.



         (b)   Any “residential facility” as defined in R.C.
§ 5119.34 or 5123.19.



         (c)   Any institution or facility operated or provided
by the Department of Mental Health and Addiction Services or by the
Department of Developmental Disabilities pursuant to R.C. §§ 5119.14 and
5123.03.



         (d)   Any unit of any hospital, as defined in R.C. §
3701.01, that provided the same services as a nursing home, as defined in
R.C. § 3721.01.



         (e)   Any institution, residence or facility that
provides, for a period of more than 24 hours, whether for consideration or
not, accommodations to one individual or two unrelated individuals who are
dependent upon the services of others.



      GROSS NEGLECT. Means knowingly failing to provide a person with
any treatment, care, goods or service that is necessary to maintain the
health or safety of the person when the failure results in serious physical
harm to the person.



      INAPPROPRIATE USE OF A PHYSICAL OR CHEMICAL RESTRAINT, MEDICATION
OR ISOLATION. Means the use of physical or chemical restraint, medication or
isolation as punishment, for staff convenience, excessively, as a substitute
for treatment, or in quantities that preclude habilitation and treatment.



      NEGLECT. Means recklessly failing to provide a person with any
treatment, care, goods or service that is necessary to maintain the health or
safety of the person when the failure results in serious physical harm to the
person.



(R.C. § 2903.33)



   (B)   Patient abuse or neglect; spiritual treatment; defense.



      (1)   No person who owns, operates, or administers, or who is
an agent or employee of a care facility shall do any of the following:



         (a)   Commit abuse against a resident or patient of the
facility.



         (b)   Commit gross neglect against a resident or patient
of the facility.



         (c)   Commit neglect against a resident or patient of
the facility.



      (2)   (a)   A person who relies upon treatment by spiritual
means through prayer alone, in accordance with the tenets of a recognized
religious denomination, shall not be considered neglectful under division
(B)(1)(c) of this section for that reason alone.



         (b)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of gross
neglect or neglect under this section that the actor’s conduct was
committed in good faith solely because the actor was ordered to commit the
conduct by a person with supervisory authority over the actor.



      (3)   (a)   Whoever violates division (B)(1)(a) is guilty
of patient abuse, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



         (b)   Whoever violates division (B)(1)(b) is guilty of
gross patient neglect, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted of, or pleaded guilty to, any violation of this
section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, gross
patient neglect is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



         (c)   Whoever violates division (B)(1)(c) is guilty of
patient neglect, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted of, or pleaded guilty to, any violation of this
section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, gross
patient neglect is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2903.34)



   (C)   Patient endangerment; spiritual treatment; defense.



      (1)   As used in division (C) of this section:



         DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED PERSON. Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 5123.01.



         MENTALLY RETARDED PERSON. Has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 5123.01.



         MR/DD CARETAKER. Means any MR/DD employee or any person who
assumes the duty to provide for the care and protection of a mentally
retarded person or a developmentally disabled person on a voluntary basis, by
contract, through receipt of payment for care and protection, as a result of
a family relationship, or by order of a court of competent jurisdiction. The
term includes a person who is an employee of a care facility and a person who
is an employee of an entity under contract with a provider. The term does not
include a person who owns, operates, or administers a care facility or who is
an agent of a care facility unless that person also personally provides care
to persons with mental retardation or a developmental disability.



         MR/DD EMPLOYEE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5123.50.



      (2)   No MR/DD caretaker shall create a substantial risk to
the health or safety of a mentally retarded person or a developmentally
disabled person. An MR/DD caretaker does not create a substantial risk to the
health or safety of a mentally retarded person or a developmentally disabled
person under this division when the MR/DD caretaker treats a physical or
mental illness or defect of the mentally retarded person or developmentally
disabled person by spiritual means through prayer alone, in accordance with
the tenets of a recognized religious body.



      (3)   No person who owns, operates, or administers a care
facility or who is an agent of a care facility shall condone, or knowingly
permit, any conduct by an MR/DD caretaker who is employed by or under the
control of the owner, operator, administrator, or agent that is in violation
of division (C)(2) of this section and that involves a mentally retarded
person or a developmentally disabled person who is under the care of the
owner, operator, administrator, or agent. A person who relies upon treatment
by spiritual means through prayer alone, in accordance with the tenets of a
recognized religious denomination, shall not be considered endangered under
this division for that reason alone.



      (4)   (a)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of a
violation of division (C)(2) or (C)(3) of this section that the actor’s
conduct was committed in good faith solely because the actor was ordered to
commit the conduct by a person to whom one of the following applies:



            1.   The person has supervisory authority over the
actor.



            2.   The person has authority over the actor’s
conduct pursuant to a contract for the provision of services.



         (b)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of a
violation of division (C)(3) of this section that the person who owns,
operates, or administers a care facility or who is an agent of a care
facility and who is charged with the violation is following the individual
service plan for the involved mentally retarded person or a developmentally
disabled person or that the admission, discharge, and transfer rule set forth
in the Ohio Administrative Code is being followed.



         (c)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of a
violation of division (C)(3) of this section that the actor did not have
readily available a means to prevent either the harm to the person with
mental retardation or a developmental disability or the death of such a
person and the actor took reasonable steps to summon aid.



      (5)   (a)   Except as provided in division (C)(5)(b) or
(C)(5)(c) of this section, whoever violates division (C)(2) or (C)(3) of this
section is guilty of patient endangerment, a misdemeanor of the first degree.



         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of,
or pleaded guilty to, a violation of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, patient endangerment is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



         (c)   If the violation results in serious physical harm
to the person with mental retardation or a developmental disability, patient
endangerment is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2903.341)



   (D)   False statements.



      (1)   No person shall knowingly make a false statement, or
knowingly swear or affirm the truth of a false statement previously made,
alleging a violation of division (B) of this section when the statement is
made with purpose to incriminate another.



      (2)   Whoever violates this division (D) is guilty of filing a
false patient abuse or neglect complaint, a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 2903.35)



   (E)   Retaliation against person reporting patient abuse or neglect.
No care facility shall discharge or in any manner discriminate or retaliate
against any person solely because such person, in good faith, filed a
complaint, affidavit, or other document alleging a violation of division (B)
of this section or a violation of R.C. § 2903.34.



(R.C. § 2903.36)



Statutory reference:



   License revocation for felony violations, see R.C. § 2903.37



§ 135.21  INTERFERENCE WITH RIGHT OF PERSON TO ENGAGE IN HOUSING
TRANSACTIONS BECAUSE OF RACE, RELIGION, OR THE LIKE.



   (A)   No person, whether or not acting under color of law, shall by
force or threat of force willfully injure, intimidate, or interfere with, or
attempt to injure, intimidate, or interfere with any of the following:



      (1)   Any person because of race, color, religion, sex,
familial status, as defined in R.C. § 4112.01, national origin, military
status as defined in that section, disability as defined in that section, or
ancestry and because that person is or has been selling, purchasing, renting,
financing, occupying, contracting, or negotiating for the sale, purchase,
rental, financing, or occupation of any housing accommodations, or applying
for or participating in any service, organization, or facility relating to
the business of selling or renting housing accommodations.



      (2)   Any person because that person is or has been doing, or
in order to intimidate that person or any other person or any class of
persons from doing either of the following:



         (a)   Participating, without discrimination on account
of race, color, religion, sex, familial status, as defined in R.C. §
4112.01, national origin, military status as defined in that section,
disability as defined in that section, or ancestry, in any of the activities,
services, organizations, or facilities described in division (A)(1) of this
section;



         (b)   Affording another person or class of persons
opportunity or protection so to participate.



      (3)   Any person because that person is or has been, or in
order to discourage that person or any other person from, lawfully aiding or
encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination on account
of race, color, religion, sex, familial status as defined in R.C. § 4112.01,
national origin, military status as defined in that section, disability as
defined in that section, or ancestry, in any of the activities, services,
organizations, or facilities described in division (A)(1) of this section, or
participating lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly opposing any denial of
the opportunity to so participate.



   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 2927.03)



§ 135.22  ETHNIC INTIMIDATION.



   (A)   No person shall violate R.C. §§ 2903.21, 2903.22, 2909.06,
or 2909.07, or R.C. § 2917.21(A)(3), (4), or (5), by reason of the race,
color, religion, or national origin of another person or group of persons.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of ethnic
intimidation.  Ethnic intimidation is an offense of the next higher degree
than the offense the commission of which is a necessary element of ethnic
intimidation.  In the case of an offense that is a misdemeanor of the first
degree, ethnic intimidation is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.



(R.C. § 2927.12)



§ 135.23  VIOLATING A PROTECTION ORDER, CONSENT AGREEMENT, ANTI-STALKING
PROTECTION ORDER OR ORDER ISSUED BY A COURT OF ANOTHER STATE.



   (A)   No person shall recklessly violate the terms of any of the
following:



      (1)   A protection order issued or consent agreement approved
pursuant to R.C. § 2919.26 or R.C. § 3113.31;



      (2)   A protection order issued pursuant to R.C. § 2151.34,
2903.213 or 2903.214;



      (3)   A protection order issued by a court of another state.



   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of violating
a protection order.



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(3) or
(B)(4) of this section, violating a protection order is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.



      (3)   If the offender previously has been convicted of,
pleaded guilty to, or been adjudicated a delinquent child for a violation of
a protection order issued pursuant to R.C. § 2151.34, 2903.213 or 2903.214,
two or more violations of R.C. § 2903.21, 2903.211, 2903.22, or 2911.211, or
a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, that involved
the same person who is the subject of the protection order or consent
agreement, or one or more violations of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, violating a protection order is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (4)   If the offender violates a protection order or consent
agreement while committing a felony offense, violating a protection order is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (5)   If the protection order violated by the offender was an
order issued pursuant to R.C. § 2151.34 or 2903.214 that required electronic
monitoring of the offender pursuant to that section, the court may require in
addition to any other sentence imposed upon the offender that the offender be
electronically monitored for a period not exceeding five years by a law
enforcement agency designated by the court. If the court requires under this
division that the offender be electronically monitored, unless the court
determines that the offender is indigent, the court shall order that the
offender pay the costs of the installation of the electronic monitoring
device and the cost of monitoring the electronic monitoring device. If the
court determines that the offender is indigent and subsequent to the maximum
amount allowable and the rules promulgated by the Attorney General under R.C.
§ 2903.214, the costs of the installation of the electronic monitoring
device and the cost of monitoring the electronic monitoring device may be
paid out of funds from the Reparations Fund created pursuant to R.C. §
2743.191.  The total amount paid from the Reparations Fund created pursuant
to R.C. § 2743.191 for electronic monitoring under R.C. §§ 2151.34,
2903.214 and 2919.27 shall not exceed $300,000 per year.



   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(3)
of this section that the protection order issued by a court of another state
does not comply with the requirements specified in 18 U.S.C. § 2265(b) for a
protection order that must be accorded full faith and credit by a court of
this state or that it is not entitled to full faith and credit under 18
U.S.C. § 2265(c).



   (D)   As used in this section, PROTECTION ORDER ISSUED BY A COURT OF
ANOTHER STATE means an injunction or another order issued by a criminal court
of another state for the purpose of preventing violent or threatening acts or
harassment against, contact or communication with, or physical proximity to
another person including a temporary order, and means an injunction or order
of that nature issued by a civil court of another state, including a
temporary order and a final order issued in an independent action or as a
pendente lite order in a proceeding for other relief, if the court issued it
in response to a complaint, petition or motion filed by or on behalf of a
person seeking protection. The term does not include an order for support or
for custody of a child issued pursuant to the divorce and child custody laws
of another state, except to the extent that the order for support or for
custody of a child is entitled to full faith and credit under the laws of the
United States.



(R.C. § 2919.27)



§ 135.24  ADULTERATION OF FOOD.



   (A)   No person shall do either of the following, knowing or having
reasonable cause to believe that any person may suffer physical harm or be
seriously inconvenienced or annoyed thereby:



      (1)   Place a pin, razor blade, glass, laxative, drug of
abuse, or other harmful or hazardous object or substance in any food or
confection.



      (2)   Furnish to any person any food or confection which has
been adulterated in violation of division (A)(1) of this section.



(R.C. § 3716.11)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.



(R.C. § 3716.99(C))



Statutory reference:



   Adulteration of food generally, see R.C. § 3715.59



§ 135.25  ILLEGAL DISTRIBUTION OF CIGARETTES, OTHER TOBACCO PRODUCTS, OR
ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS; TRANSACTION SCANS.



   (A)   Illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products.



      (1)   As used in this section:



         AGE VERIFICATION. A service provided by an independent
third party (other than a manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or
retailer of cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or papers used to roll cigarettes) that compares information
available from a commercially available database, or aggregate of



 



2016 S-7




138   Montgomery - General Offenses



databases, that regularly are used by government and businesses for the
purpose of age and identity verification to personal information provided
during an internet sale or other remote method of sale to establish that the
purchaser is 18 years of age or older.



         ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT.



            1.   Subject to division 2. of this definition, an
electronic cigarette or any other product or device that consists of or
contains nicotine that can be ingested into the body by any means, including,
but not limited to, chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, or inhaling.



            2.   The phrase does not include any of the
following:



               a.   Any cigarette or other tobacco product;



               b.   Any product that is a “drug” as
that term is defined in 21 U.S.C. § 321(g)(1);



               c.   Any product that is a “device” as
that term is defined in 21 U.S.C. § 321(h);



               d.   Any product that is a “combination
product” as described in 21 U.S.C. § 353(g).



         CHILD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2151.011.



         CIGARETTE. Includes clove cigarettes and hand-rolled
cigarettes.



         DISTRIBUTE.  Means to furnish, give, or provide
cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers
used to roll cigarettes to the ultimate consumer of the cigarettes, other
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes.



         ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE.



            1.   Subject to division 2. of this definition,
any electronic product or device that produces a vapor that delivers nicotine
or any other substance to the person inhaling from the device to simulate
smoking and that is likely to be offered to or purchased by consumers as an
electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, or electronic
pipe.



            2.   The phrase does not include any item,
product, or device described in division 2. of the definition for
“alternative nicotine product” in this section.



         PROOF OF AGE. Means a driver’s license, a commercial
driver’s license, a military identification card, a passport, or an
identification card issued under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to 4507.52 that shows that
a person is 18 years of age or older.



         TOBACCO PRODUCT. Means any product that is made from
tobacco, including, but not limited to, a cigarette, a cigar, pipe tobacco,
chewing tobacco, or snuff.



         VENDING MACHINE. Has the same meaning as “coin machine”
in R.C. § 2913.01.



      (2)   No manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or
retailer of cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or papers used to roll cigarettes, no agent, employee, or
representative of a manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or
retailer of cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or papers used to roll cigarettes, and no other person shall do any
of the following:



         (a)   Give, sell, or otherwise distribute cigarettes,
other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes to any child;



         (b)   Give away, sell, or distribute cigarettes, other
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes in any place



 



2016 S-7




   Offenses Against Persons   139



that does not have posted in a conspicuous place a sign stating that giving,
selling, or otherwise distributing cigarettes, other tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes to a person
under 18 years of age is prohibited by law;



         (c)   Knowingly furnish any false information regarding
the name, age, or other identification of any child with purpose to obtain
cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers
used to roll cigarettes for that child;



         (d)   Manufacture, sell, or distribute in this state any
pack or other container of cigarettes containing fewer than 20 cigarettes or
any package of roll-your-own tobacco containing less than six-tenths of one
ounce of tobacco;



         (e)   Sell cigarettes or alternative nicotine products
in a smaller quantity than that placed in the pack or other container by the
manufacturer;



         (f)   Give, sell, or otherwise distribute alternative
nicotine products, papers used to roll cigarettes, or tobacco products other
than cigarettes over the internet or through another remote method without
age verification.



      (3)   No person shall sell or offer to sell cigarettes, other
tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products by or from a vending
machine, except in the following locations:



         (a)   An area within a factory, business, office, or
other place not open to the general public;



         (b)   An area to which children are not generally
permitted access;



         (c)   Any other place not identified in division
(A)(3)(a) or (A)(3)(b) of this section, upon all of the following conditions:



            1.   The vending machine is located within the
immediate vicinity, plain view, and



control of the person who owns or operates the place, or an employee of that
person, so that all cigarettes, other tobacco product, and alternative
nicotine product purchases from the vending machine will be readily observed
by the person who owns or operates the place or an employee of that person.
For the purpose of this section, a vending machine located in any unmonitored
area, including an unmonitored coatroom, restroom, hallway, or outer waiting
area, shall not be considered located within the immediate vicinity, plain
view, and control of the person who owns or operates the place, or an
employee of that person.



            2.   The vending machine is inaccessible to the
public when the place is closed.



      (4)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under
division (A)(2)(a) of this section:



         (a)   The child was accompanied by a parent, spouse who
is 18 years of age or older, or legal guardian of the child.



         (b)   The person who gave, sold, or distributed
cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers
used to roll cigarettes to a child under division (A)(2)(a) of this section
is a parent, spouse who is 18 years of age or older, or legal guardian of the
child.



      (5)   It is not a violation of division (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(b)
of this section for a person to give or otherwise distribute to a child
cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers
used to roll cigarettes while the child is participating in a research
protocol if all of the following apply:



         (a)   The parent, guardian, or legal custodian of the
child has consented in writing to the child participating in the research
protocol.



         (b)   An institutional human subjects protection review
board, or an equivalent entity, has approved the research protocol.



 



2016 S-7




140   Montgomery - General Offenses



         (c)   The child is participating in the research
protocol at the facility or location specified in the research protocol.



      (6)   (a)   Whoever violates division (A)(2)(a), (A)(2)(b),
(A)(2)(d), (A)(2)(e), or (A)(2)(f) or (A)(3) of this section is guilty of
illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative
nicotine products. Except as otherwise provided in this division, illegal
distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the offender previously
has been convicted of a violation of division (A)(2)(a), (A)(2)(b),
(A)(2)(d), (A)(2)(e), or (A)(2)(f) or (A)(3) of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, illegal
distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products is a misdemeanor of the third degree.



         (b)   Whoever violates division (A)(2)(c) of this
section is guilty of permitting children to use cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products. Except as otherwise provided in
this division, permitting children to use cigarettes, other tobacco products,
or alternative nicotine products is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If
the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of division
(A)(2)(c) of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, permitting children to use cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products is a misdemeanor of the third
degree.



      (7)   Any cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative
nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes that are given, sold, or
otherwise distributed to a child in violation of this section and that are
used, possessed, purchased, or received by a child in violation of R.C. §
2151.87 are subject to seizure and forfeiture as contraband under R.C.
Chapter 2981.



(R.C. § 2927.02)



   (B)   Transaction scan.



      (1)   As used in this division and division (C) of this
section:



         CARD HOLDER. Means any person who presents a driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or an identification card to a seller, or an
agent or employee of a seller, to purchase or receive cigarettes, other
tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products from a seller, agent, or
employee.



         IDENTIFICATION CARD. Means an identification card issued
under R.C. §§ 4507.50 through 4507.52.



         SELLER. Means a seller of cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products and includes any person whose gift
of or other distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products is subject to the prohibitions of division (A)
of this section.



         TRANSACTION SCAN. Means the process by which a seller or an
agent or employee of a seller checks, by means of a transaction scan device,
the validity of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an
identification card that is presented as a condition for purchasing or
receiving cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products.



         TRANSACTION SCAN DEVICE. Means any commercial device or
combination of devices used at a point of sale that is capable of deciphering
in an electronically readable format the information encoded on the magnetic
strip or bar code of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an
identification card.



      (2)   (a)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller
may perform a transaction scan by means of a transaction scan device to check
the validity of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
identification card presented by a card holder as a condition for selling,
giving away, or otherwise distributing to the card holder cigarettes, other
tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products.



         (b)   If the information deciphered by the transaction
scan performed under division (B)(2)(a) of this section fails to match the
information printed on the driver’s or commercial driver’s license



 



2016 S-7




   Offenses Against Persons   141



or identification card presented by the card holder, or if the transaction
scan indicates that the information so printed is false or fraudulent,
neither the seller nor any agent or employee of the seller shall sell, give
away, or otherwise distribute any cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products to the card holder.



         (c)   Division (B)(2)(a) of this section does not
preclude a seller or an agent or employee of a seller from using a
transaction scan device to check the validity of a document other than a
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card, if the
document includes a bar code or magnetic strip that may be scanned by the
device, as a condition for selling, giving away, or otherwise distributing
cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products to the
person presenting the document.



      (3)   Rules adopted by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles under
R.C. § 4301.61(C) apply to the use of transaction scan devices for purposes
of this division (B) and division (C) of this section.



      (4)   (a)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller
shall electronically or mechanically record or maintain any information
derived from a transaction scan, except for the following:



            1.   The name and date of birth of the person
listed on the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification
card presented by the card holder;



            2.   The expiration date and identification number
of the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card
presented by the card holder.



         (b)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall
use the information that is derived from a transaction scan or that is
permitted to be recorded and maintained under division (B)(4)(a) of this
section, except for purposes of division (C) of this section.



         (c)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall
use a transaction scan device for a purpose other than the purpose specified
in division (C)(2)(a) of this section.



         (d)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall
sell or otherwise disseminate the information derived from a transaction scan
to any third party, including but not limited to selling or otherwise
disseminating that information for any marketing, advertising, or promotional
activities, but a seller or agent or employee of a seller may release that
information pursuant to a court order or as specifically authorized by
division (C) of this section or another section of this code or the Ohio
Revised Code.



      (5)   Nothing in this division (B) or division (C) of this
section relieves a seller or an agent or employee of a seller of any
responsibility to comply with any other applicable local, state or federal
laws or rules governing the sale, giving away, or other distribution of
cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products.



      (6)   Whoever violates division (B)(2)(b) or (B)(4) of this
section is guilty of engaging in an illegal tobacco product or alternative
nicotine product transaction scan, and the court may impose upon the offender
a civil penalty of up to $1,000 for each violation. The Clerk of the Court
shall pay each collected civil penalty to the County Treasurer for deposit
into the County Treasury.



(R.C. § 2927.021)



   (C)   Affirmative defenses.



      (1)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may not be
found guilty of a charge of a violation of division (A) of this section in
which the age of the purchaser or other recipient of cigarettes, other
tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is an element of the
alleged violation, if the seller, agent, or employee raises and proves as an
affirmative defense that all of the following occurred:



 



2016 S-7




142   Montgomery - General Offenses



         (a)   A card holder attempting to purchase or receive
cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products
presented a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification
card.



         (b)   A transaction scan of the driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or identification card that the card holder presented
indicated that the license or card was valid.



         (c)   The cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products were sold, given away, or otherwise distributed
to the card holder in reasonable reliance upon the identification presented
and the completed transaction scan.



      (2)   In determining whether a seller or an agent or employee
of a seller has proven the affirmative defense provided by division (C)(1) of
this section, the trier of fact in the action for the alleged violation of
division (A) of this section shall consider any written policy that the
seller has adopted and implemented and that is intended to prevent violations
of division (A) of this section. For purposes of division (C)(1)(c) of this
section, the trier of fact shall consider that reasonable reliance upon the
identification presented and the completed transaction scan may require a
seller or an agent or employee of a seller to exercise reasonable diligence
to determine, and that the use of a transaction scan device does not excuse a
seller or an agent or employee of a seller from exercising reasonable
diligence to determine, the following:



         (a)   Whether a person to whom the seller or agent or
employee of a seller sells, gives away, or otherwise distributes cigarettes,
other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is 18 years of age
or older;



         (b)   Whether the description and picture appearing on
the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card
presented by a card holder is that of the card holder.



      (3)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense
provided by division (C)(1) of this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles or a deputy registrar who issued an identification card under R.C.
§§ 4507.50 through 4507.52 shall be permitted to submit certified copies of
the records of that issuance in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of or
contractors with the Bureau of Motor Vehicles in the action.



(R.C. § 2927.022)



   (D)   Shipment of tobacco products.



      (1)   As used in this division (D):



         AUTHORIZED RECIPIENT OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS means a person who
is:



            1.   Licensed as a cigarette wholesale dealer
under R.C. § 5743.15;



            2.   Licensed as a retail dealer as long as the
person purchases cigarettes with the appropriate tax stamp affixed;



            3.   An export warehouse proprietor as defined in
Section 5702 of the Internal Revenue Code;



            4.   An operator of a customs bonded warehouse
under 19 U.S.C. § 1311 or 19 U.S.C. § 1555;



            5.   An officer, employee, or agent of the federal
government or of this state acting in the person’s official capacity;



            6.   A department, agency, instrumentality, or
political subdivision of the federal government or of this state;



            7.   A person having a consent for consumer
shipment issued by the Tax Commissioner under R.C. § 5743.71.



         MOTOR CARRIER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4923.01.



      (2)   The purpose of this division (D) is to prevent the sale
of cigarettes to minors and to ensure compliance with the Master Settlement
Agreement, as defined in R.C. § 1346.01.



      (3)   (a)   No person shall cause to be shipped any
cigarettes to any person in this municipality other than an authorized
recipient of tobacco products.



         (b)   No motor carrier, or other person shall knowingly
transport cigarettes to any person in this municipality that the carrier or
other person reasonably believes is not an authorized recipient of tobacco
products. If cigarettes are transported to a home or residence, it shall be
presumed that the motor carrier, or other person knew that the person to whom
the cigarettes were delivered was not an authorized recipient of tobacco
products.



      (4)   No person engaged in the business of selling cigarettes
who ships or causes to be shipped cigarettes to any person in this
municipality in any container or wrapping other than the original container
or wrapping of the cigarettes shall fail to plainly and visibly mark the
exterior of the container or wrapping in which the cigarettes are shipped
with the words “cigarettes”.



      (5)   A court shall impose a fine of up to $1,000 for each
violation of division (D)(3)(a), (D)(3)(b) or (D)(4) of this section.



(R.C. § 2927.023)



§ 135.26  NONSMOKING AREAS IN PLACES OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY.



   (A)   As used in this section, PLACE OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY means:



      (1)   Enclosed theaters, except the lobby; opera houses;
auditoriums; classrooms; elevators; rooms in which persons are confined as a
matter of health care, including but not limited to a hospital room and a
room in a residential care facility serving as the residence of a person
living in such residential care facility;



      (2)   All buildings and other enclosed structures owned by the
state, its agencies, or political subdivisions, including but not limited to
hospitals and state institutions for the mentally disabled and the mentally
ill; university and college buildings, except rooms within those buildings
used primarily as the residences of students or other persons affiliated with
the university or college; office buildings; libraries; museums; and vehicles
used in public transportation.



That portion of a building or other enclosed structure that is owned by the
state, a state agency, or a political subdivision, and that is used primarily
as a food service establishment, is not a place of public assembly.



      (3)   Each portion of a building or enclosed structure that is
not included in division (A)(1) or (2) of this section is a place of public
assembly if it has a seating capacity of 50 or more persons and is available
to the public.  Restaurants, food service establishments, dining rooms,
cafes, cafeterias, or other rooms used primarily for the service of food, as
well as bowling alleys and places licensed by the Ohio Division of Liquor
Control to sell intoxicating beverages for consumption on the premises, are
not places of public assembly.



   (B)   For the purpose of separating persons who smoke from persons
who do not smoke for the comfort and health of persons not smoking, in every
place of public assembly there shall be an area where smoking is not
permitted, which shall be designated a no smoking area, provided that not
more than one-half of the rooms in any health care facility in which persons
are confined as a matter of health care may be designated as smoking areas in
their entirety.  The designation shall be made before the place of public
assembly is made available to the public. In places included in division
(A)(1) of this section, the local fire authority having jurisdiction shall
designate the no smoking area.  In places included in division (A)(2) of
this section that are owned by the state or its agencies, the Ohio Director
of Administrative Services shall designate the area, and if the place is
owned by a political subdivision, its legislative authority shall designate
an officer who shall designate the area.  In places included in division
(A)(3) of this section, the person having control of the operations of the
place of public assembly shall designate the no smoking area.  In places
included in division (A)(2) of this section which are also included in
division (A)(1) of this section, the officer who has authority to designate
the area in places in division (A)(2) of this section shall designate the no
smoking area.  A no smoking area may include the entire place of public
assembly.  Designations shall be made by the placement of signs that are
clearly visible and that state "no smoking."  No person shall remove signs
from areas designated as no smoking areas.



   (C)   This section does not affect or modify the prohibition
contained in R.C. § 3313.751(B).



   (D)   No person shall smoke in any area designated as a no smoking
area in accordance with division (B) of this section.



   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 3791.031)



§ 135.27  SPREADING CONTAGION.



   (A)   No person, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that
he or she is suffering from a dangerous, contagious disease, shall knowingly
fail to take reasonable measures to prevent exposing himself or herself to
other persons, except when seeking medical aid.



   (B)   No person, having charge or care of a person whom he or she
knows or has reasonable cause to believe is suffering from a dangerous,
contagious disease, shall recklessly fail to take reasonable measures to
protect others from exposure to the contagion, and to inform health
authorities of the existence of the contagion.



   (C)   No person, having charge of a public conveyance or place of
public accommodation, amusement, resort, or trade, and knowing or having
reasonable cause to believe that persons using such conveyance or place have
been or are being exposed to a dangerous, contagious disease, shall
negligently fail to take reasonable measures to protect the public from
exposure to the contagion, and to inform health authorities of the existence
of the contagion.



(R.C. § 3701.81)



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the second degree.



(R.C. § 3701.99(C)



Statutory reference:



   Contagion and quarantine, see R.C. §§ 3707.04 et seq.



   Power to prevent contagious diseases, see R.C. § 715.37



§ 135.28  ABUSE OF A CORPSE.



   (A)   No person, except as authorized by law, shall treat a human
corpse in a way that he or she knows would outrage reasonable family
sensibilities.



   (B)   No person, except as authorized by law, shall treat a human
corpse in a way that would outrage reasonable community sensibilities.



   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
abuse of a corpse, a misdemeanor of the second degree.  Whoever violates
division (B) of this section is guilty of gross abuse of a corpse, a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2927.01)



§ 135.29  UNLAWFUL COLLECTION OF BODILY SUBSTANCES.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly collect any blood, urine, tissue, or
other bodily substance of another person without privilege or consent to do
so.



   (B)   (1)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any of
the following:



         (a)   The collection of any bodily substance of a person
by a law enforcement officer, or by another person pursuant to the direction
or advice of a law enforcement officer, for purposes of a chemical test or
tests of the substance under R.C. § 1547.111(A)(1) or R.C. § 4511.191(A)(2)
to determine the alcohol, drug, controlled substance, metabolite of a
controlled substance, or combination content of the bodily substance;



         (b)   The collection of any bodily substance of a person
by a peace officer, or by another person pursuant to the direction or advice
of a peace officer, for purposes of a test or tests of the substance as
provided in R.C. § 4506.17(A) to determine the person’s alcohol
concentration or the presence of any controlled substance or metabolite of a
controlled substance.



      (2)   Division (B)(1) of this section shall not be construed
as implying that the persons identified in divisions (B)(1)(a) and (b) of
this section do not have privilege to collect the bodily substance of another
person as described in those divisions or as limiting the definition of
“privilege” set forth in R.C. § 2901.01.



   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
unlawful collection of a bodily substance. Except as otherwise provided in
this division, unlawful collection of a bodily substance is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (A) of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, unlawful collection of a bodily
substance is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2927.15)



CHAPTER 136:  OFFENSES AGAINST JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION



Section



   136.01   Definitions



   136.02   Falsification



   136.03   Compounding a crime



   136.04   Failure to report a crime



   136.05   Failure to aid a law enforcement officer



   136.06   Obstructing official business



   136.07   Obstructing justice



   136.08   Resisting arrest



   136.09   Having an unlawful interest in a public contract



   136.10   Soliciting or receiving improper compensation



   136.11   Dereliction of duty



   136.12   Interfering with civil rights



   136.13   Illegal conveyance of prohibited items onto grounds of a
detention facility or mental health or other specified governmental facility



   136.14   False report of child abuse or neglect



   136.15   Assaulting police dog or horse, or assistance dog



   136.16   Disclosure of confidential peace officer information



   136.17   Intimidation of crime victim or witness



   136.18   Using sham legal process



   136.19   Acts in contempt of court



   136.20   Failure to answer summons



   136.21   Misuse of 9-1-1 system



   136.22   Failure to disclose personal information



   136.23   Making false allegation of peace officer misconduct



Cross-reference:



   Failure to comply with order or signal of a police officer, see § 70.02



Statutory reference:



   Escape from detention, see R.C. § 2921.34



   Harassment by inmates by causing or attempting to cause contact with
blood, semen, urine, feces or other bodily substance; knowledge of AIDS,
hepatitis or tuberculosis infection; felony offenses, see R.C. § 2921.38



§ 136.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CAMPAIGN COMMITTEE, CONTRIBUTION, LEGISLATIVE CAMPAIGN FUND, POLITICAL
ACTION COMMITTEE, POLITICAL CONTRIBUTING ENTITY, and POLITICAL PARTY.  Have
the same meanings as in R.C. § 3517.01.



   DETENTION.  Arrest; confinement in any vehicle subsequent to an
arrest; confinement in any public or private facility for custody of persons
charged with or convicted of crime in this state or another state or under
the laws of the United States or alleged or found to be a delinquent child or
unruly child in this state or another state or under the laws of the United
States; hospitalization, institutionalization, or confinement in any public
or private facility that is ordered pursuant to or under the authority of
R.C. § 2945.37, 2945.371, 2945.38, 2945.39, 2945.40, 2945.401 or 2945.402;
confinement in any vehicle for transportation to or from any facility of any
of those natures; detention for extradition or deportation; except as
provided in this division, supervision by any employee of any facility of any
of those natures that is incidental to hospitalization, institutionalization,
or confinement in the facility but that occurs outside the facility; or
supervision by an employee of the Department of Rehabilitation and Correction
of a person on any type of release from a state correctional institution; or
confinement in any vehicle, airplane, or place while being returned from
outside of this state into this state by a private person or entity pursuant
to a contract entered into under R.C. § 311.29(E) or R.C. § 5149.03(B). 
For a person confined in a county jail who participates in a county jail
industry program pursuant to R.C. § 5147.30, DETENTION includes time spent
at an assigned work site and going to and from the work site.



   DETENTION FACILITY.  Any public or private place used for the
confinement of a person charged with or convicted of any crime in this state
or another state or under the laws of the United States or alleged or found
to be a delinquent child or an unruly child in this state or another state or
under the laws of the United States.



   OFFICIAL PROCEEDING.  Any proceeding before a legislative, judicial,
administrative, or other governmental agency or official authorized to take
evidence under oath, and includes any proceeding before a referee, hearing
examiner, commissioner, notary, or other person taking testimony or a
deposition in connection with an official proceeding.



   PARTY OFFICIAL.  Any person who holds an elective or appointive post
in a political party in the United States or this state, by virtue of which
he or she directs, conducts, or participates in directing or conducting party
affairs at any level of responsibility.



   PROVIDER AGREEMENT and MEDICAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM.   Have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 5164.01.



   PUBLIC OFFICIAL.   Any elected or appointed officer, employee, or
agent of the state or any political subdivision thereof, whether in a
temporary or permanent capacity, and includes but is not limited to
legislators, judges, and law enforcement officers.  The term does not
include an employee, officer, or governor-appointed member of the board of
directors of the nonprofit corporation formed under R.C. § 187.01.



   PUBLIC SERVANT.



      (1)   Any of the following:



         (a)   Any public official.



         (b)   Any person performing ad hoc a governmental
function, including but not limited to a juror, member of a temporary
commission, master, arbitrator, advisor, or consultant.



         (c)   A person who is a candidate for public office,
whether or not he or she is elected or appointed to the office for which he
or she is a candidate.  A person is a candidate for purposes of this
division if he or she has been nominated according to law for election or
appointment to public office, or if he or she has filed a petition or
petitions as required by law to have his or her name placed on the ballot in
a primary, general, or special election, or if he or she campaigns as a
write-in candidate in any primary, general, or special election.



      (2)   The term does not include an employee, officer, or
governor-appointed member of the board of directors of the nonprofit
corporation formed under R.C. § 187.01.



   VALUABLE THING or VALUABLE BENEFIT.   Includes, but is not limited to,
a contribution.  This inclusion does not indicate or imply that a
contribution was not included in those terms before September 17, 1986.



(R.C. § 2921.01)



§ 136.02  FALSIFICATION.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly make a false statement, or knowingly
swear or affirm the truth of a false statement previously made, when any of
the following applies:



      (1)   The statement is made in any official proceeding.



      (2)   The statement is made with purpose to incriminate
another.



      (3)   The statement is made with purpose to mislead a public
official in performing his or her official function.



      (4)   The statement is made with purpose to secure the payment
of unemployment compensation; Ohio Works First; prevention, retention and
contingency benefits and services; disability financial assistance;
retirement benefits or health care coverage from a state retirement system;
economic development assistance as defined in R.C. § 9.66; or other benefits
administered by a governmental agency or paid out of a public treasury.



      (5)   The statement is made with purpose to secure the
issuance by a governmental agency of a license, permit, authorization,
certificate, registration, release, or provider agreement.



      (6)   The statement is sworn or affirmed before a notary
public or another person empowered to administer oaths.



      (7)   The statement is in writing on or in connection with a
report or return that is required or authorized by law.



      (8)   The statement is in writing, and is made with purpose to
induce another to extend credit to or employ the offender, or to confer any
degree, diploma, certificate of attainment, award of excellence, or honor on
the offender, or to extend to or bestow upon the offender any other valuable
benefit or distinction, when the person to whom the statement is directed
relies upon it to his or her detriment.



      (9)   The statement is made with purpose to commit or
facilitate the commission of a theft offense.



      (10)   The statement is knowingly made to a probate court in
connection with any action, proceeding, or other matter within its
jurisdiction, either orally or in a written document, including but not
limited to an application, petition, complaint, or other pleading, or an
inventory, account, or report.



      (11)   The statement is made on an account, form, record,
stamp, label or other writing that is required by law.



      (12)   The statement is made in connection with the purchase
of a firearm, as defined in R.C. § 2923.11, and in conjunction with the
furnishing to the seller of the firearm of a fictitious or altered driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or permit, a fictitious or altered
identification card, or any other document that contains false information
about the purchaser’s identity.



      (13)   The statement is made in a document or instrument of
writing that purports to be a judgment, lien, or claim of indebtedness and is
filed or recorded with the Secretary of State, a county recorder, or the
clerk of a court of record.



      (14)   The statement is made in an application filed with a
county sheriff pursuant to R.C. § 2923.125 in order to obtain or renew a
concealed handgun license or is made in an affidavit submitted to a county
sheriff to obtain a concealed handgun license on a temporary emergency basis
under R.C. § 2923.1213.



      (15)   The statement is required under R.C. § 5743.71 in
connection with the person’s purchase of cigarettes or tobacco products in
a delivery sale.



   (B)   No person, in connection with the purchase of a firearm as
defined in R.C. § 2923.11, shall knowingly furnish to the seller of the
firearm a fictitious or altered driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or permit, a fictitious or altered identification card, or any other document
that contains false information about the purchaser’s identity.



   (C)   No person, in an attempt to obtain a concealed handgun license
under R.C. § 2923.125, shall knowingly present to a sheriff a fictitious or
altered document that purports to be certification of the person’s
competence in handling a handgun as described in division (B)(3) of that
section.



   (D)   It is no defense to a charge under division (A)(6) of this
section that the oath or affirmation was administered or taken in an
irregular manner.



   (E)   If contradictory statements relating to the same fact are made
by the offender within the period of the statute of limitations for
falsification, it is not necessary for the prosecution to prove which
statement was false, but only that one or the other was false.



   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3),
(A)(4), (A)(5), (A)(6), (A)(7), (A)(8), (A)(10), (A)(11), (A)(13) or (A)(15)
of this section is guilty of falsification. Except as otherwise provided in
this division, falsification is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(9) of this section is
guilty of falsification in a theft offense. Except as otherwise provided in
this division, falsification in a theft offense is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the value of the property or services stolen is $1,000 or more,
falsification in a theft offense is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



      (3)   Whoever violates division (A)(12) or (B) of this section
is guilty of falsification to purchase a firearm, a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.



      (4)   Whoever violates division (A)(14) or (C) of this section
is guilty of falsification to obtain a concealed handgun license, a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (5)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section in removal
proceedings under R.C. § 319.26, 321.37, 507.13 or 733.78 is guilty of
falsification regarding a removal proceeding, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2921.13)



   (G)   (1)   No person who has knowingly failed to maintain proof
of financial responsibility in accordance with R.C. § 4509.101 shall produce
any document or present to a peace officer an electronic wireless
communications device that is displaying any text or images with the purpose
to mislead a peace officer upon the request of a peace officer for proof of
financial responsibility made in accordance with R.C. § 4509.101(D)(2).



      (2)   Whoever violates this division (G) is guilty of
falsification, a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 4509.102)



Statutory reference:



   Civil liability for violations of this section, see R.C. § 2921.13(G)



§ 136.03  COMPOUNDING A CRIME.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly demand, accept, or agree to accept
anything of value in consideration of abandoning or agreeing to abandon a
pending criminal prosecution.



   (B)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section
when both of the following apply:



      (1)   The pending prosecution involved is for a violation of
R.C. §§ 2913.02, 2913.11, 2913.21(B)(2), or 2913.47, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, of which the actor under this section was the
victim.



      (2)   The thing of value demanded, accepted, or agreed to be
accepted, in consideration of abandoning or agreeing to abandon the
prosecution, did not exceed an amount that the actor reasonably believed due
him or her as restitution for the loss caused him or her by the offense.



   (C)   When a prosecuting witness abandons or agrees to abandon a
prosecution under division (B) of this section, the abandonment or agreement
in no way binds the state to abandoning the prosecution.



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of compounding a
crime, a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 2921.21)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 136.04  FAILURE TO REPORT A CRIME.



   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in division (A)(2) of this
section, no person, knowing that a felony has been or is being committed,
shall knowingly fail to report the information to law enforcement authorities.



      (2)   No person, knowing that a violation of R.C. §
2913.04(B) has been or is being committed or that the person has received
information derived from such a violation, shall knowingly fail to report the
violation to law enforcement authorities.



   (B)   Except for conditions that are within the scope of division
(E) of this section, no person who is a physician, limited practitioner,
nurse, or other person giving aid to a sick or injured person shall
negligently fail to report to law enforcement authorities any gunshot or stab
wound that the person treated or observed, or any serious physical harm to
other persons that the person knows or has reasonable cause to believe
resulted from an offense of violence.



   (C)   No person who discovers a body or acquires the first knowledge
of the death of a person shall fail to report the death immediately to a
physician whom the person knows to be treating the deceased for a condition
from which death at that time would not be unexpected, or to a law
enforcement officer, ambulance service, emergency squad, or the coroner in a
political subdivision in which the body is discovered, the death is believed
to have occurred, or knowledge concerning the death is obtained.



   (D)   No person shall fail to provide upon request of the person to
whom a report required by division (C) of this section was made, or to any
law enforcement officer who has reasonable cause to assert the authority to
investigate the circumstances surrounding the death, any facts within his or
her knowledge that may have a bearing on the investigation of the death.



   (E)   (1)   As used in this section, BURN INJURY means any of the
following:



         (a)   Second or third degree burns;



         (b)   Any burns to the upper respiratory tract or
laryngeal edema due to the inhalation of super-heated air;



         (c)   Any burn injury or wound that may result in death.



      (2)   No physician, nurse, or limited practitioner who,
outside a hospital, sanitarium, or other medical facility, attends or treats
a person who has sustained a burn injury inflicted by an explosion or other
incendiary device, or that shows evidence of having been inflicted in a
violent, malicious, or criminal manner, shall fail to report the burn injury
immediately to the local arson bureau, if there is such a bureau in the
jurisdiction in which the person is attended or treated, or otherwise to
local law enforcement authorities.



      (3)   No manager, superintendent, or other person in charge of
a hospital, sanitarium, or other medical facility in which a person is
attended or treated for any burn injury inflicted by an explosion or other
incendiary device, or that shows evidence of having been inflicted in a
violent, malicious, or criminal manner, shall fail to report the burn injury
immediately to the local arson bureau, if there is such a bureau in the
jurisdiction in which the person is attended or treated, or otherwise to
local law enforcement authorities.



      (4)   No person who is required to report any burn injury
under division (E)(2) or (E)(3) of this section shall fail to file, within
three working days after attending or treating the victim, a written report
of the burn injury with the office of the State Fire Marshal. The report
shall be made on a form provided by the State Fire Marshal.



      (5)   Anyone participating in the making of reports under
division (E) of this section or anyone participating in a judicial proceeding
resulting from the reports is immune from any civil or criminal liability
that otherwise might be incurred or imposed as a result of such actions.
Notwithstanding R.C. § 4731.22, the physician-patient relationship is not a
ground for excluding evidence regarding a person’s burn injury or the cause
of the burn injury in any judicial proceeding resulting from a report
submitted pursuant to division (E) of this section.



   (F)   (1)   Any doctor of medicine or osteopathic medicine,
hospital intern or resident, registered or licensed practical nurse,
psychologist, social worker, independent social worker, social work
assistant, licensed professional clinical counselor, licensed professional
counselor, independent marriage and family therapist, or marriage and family
therapist who knows or has reasonable cause to believe that a patient or
client has been the victim of domestic violence as defined in R.C. § 3113.31
shall note that knowledge or belief and the basis for it in the patient’s
or client’s records.



      (2)   Notwithstanding R.C. § 4731.22, the physician-patient
privilege shall not be a ground for excluding any information regarding the
report containing the knowledge or belief noted pursuant to division (F)(1),
and the information may be admitted as evidence in accordance with the Rules
of Evidence.



   (G)   Division (A) or (D) of this section does not require
disclosure of information, when any of the following applies:



      (1)   The information is privileged by reason of the
relationship between attorney and client; doctor and patient; licensed
psychologist or licensed school psychologist and client; licensed
professional clinical counselor, licensed professional counselor, independent
social worker, social worker, independent marriage and family therapist, or
marriage and family therapist and client; member of the clergy or rabbi or
minister or priest and any person communicating information confidentially to
the member of the clergy, rabbi, minister or priest for a religious
counseling purpose in the professional character of the member of the clergy,
rabbi, minister or priest; husband and wife; or a communications assistant
and those who are a party to a telecommunications relay service call.



      (2)   The information would tend to incriminate a member of
the actor's immediate family.



      (3)   Disclosure of the information would amount to revealing
a news source, privileged under R.C. § 2739.04 or 2739.12.



      (4)   Disclosure of the information would amount to disclosure
by a member of the ordained clergy of an organized religious body of a
confidential communication made to him or her in his or her capacity as such
by a person seeking his or her aid or counsel.



      (5)   Disclosure would amount to revealing information
acquired by the actor in the course of his or her duties in connection with a
bona fide program of treatment or services for drug dependent persons or
persons in danger of drug dependence, which program is maintained or
conducted by a hospital, clinic, person, agency, or organization certified
pursuant to R.C. § 3793.06.



      (6)   Disclosure would amount to revealing information
acquired by the actor in the course of his or her duties in connection with a
bona fide program for providing counseling services to victims of crimes that
are violations of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.05, or to victims of felonious
sexual penetration in violation of former R.C. § 2907.12. As used in this
division, COUNSELING SERVICES include services provided in an informal
setting by a person who, by education or experience, is competent to provide
such services.



   (H)   No disclosure of information pursuant to this section gives
rise to any liability or recrimination for a breach of privilege or
confidence.



   (I)   Whoever violates division (A) or (B) of this section is guilty
of failure to report a crime. Violation of division (A)(1) of this section is
a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Violation of division (A)(2) or (B) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the second degree.



   (J)   Whoever violates division (C) or (D) of this section is guilty
of failure to report knowledge of a death, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



   (K)   (1)   Whoever negligently violates division (E) of this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



      (2)   Whoever knowingly violates division (E) of this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.



(R.C. § 2921.22)



§ 136.05  FAILURE TO AID A LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.



   (A)   No person shall negligently fail or refuse to aid a law
enforcement officer, when called upon for assistance in preventing or halting
the commission of an offense, or in apprehending or detaining an offender,
when the aid can be given without a substantial risk of physical harm to the
person giving it.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to aid a
law enforcement officer, a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 2921.23)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 136.06  OBSTRUCTING OFFICIAL BUSINESS.



   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so and with purpose to
prevent, obstruct, or delay the performance by a public official of any
authorized act within the public official's official capacity, shall do any
act that hampers or impedes a public official in the performance of the
public official's lawful duties.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of obstructing
official business.  Except as otherwise provided in this division,
obstructing official business is a misdemeanor of the second degree.  If a
violation of this section creates a risk of physical harm to any person,
obstructing official business is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.



(R.C. § 2921.31)



§ 136.07  OBSTRUCTING JUSTICE.



   (A)   No person, with purpose to hinder the discovery, apprehension,
prosecution, conviction, or punishment of another for crime, or to assist
another to benefit from the commission of a crime, and no person, with
purpose to hinder the discovery, apprehension, prosecution, adjudication as a
delinquent child, or disposition of a child for an act that if committed by
an adult would be a crime or to assist a child to benefit from the commission
of an act that if committed by an adult would be a crime, shall do any of the
following:



      (1)   Harbor or conceal the other person or child.



      (2)   Provide the other person or child with money,
transportation, a weapon, a disguise, or other means of avoiding discovery or
apprehension.



      (3)   Warn the other person or child of impending discovery or
apprehension.



      (4)   Destroy or conceal physical evidence of the crime or
act, or induce any person to withhold testimony or information or to elude
legal process summoning him or her to testify or supply evidence.



      (5)   Communicate false information to any person.



      (6)   Prevent or obstruct any person, by means of force,
intimidation, or deception, from performing any act to aid in the discovery,
apprehension, or prosecution of the other person or child.



   (B)   A person may be prosecuted for, and may be convicted of or
adjudicated a delinquent child for committing, a violation of division (A) of
this section regardless of whether the person or child aided ultimately is
apprehended for, is charged with, is convicted of, pleads guilty to, or is
adjudicated a delinquent child for committing the crime or act the person or
child aided committed. The crime or act the person or child aided committed
shall be used under division (C) of this section in determining the penalty
for violation of division (A) of this section, regardless of whether the
person or child aided ultimately is apprehended for, is charge with, is
convicted of, pleads guilty to, or is adjudicated a delinquent child for
committing the crime or act the person or child aided committed.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of obstructing justice.



      (1)   If the crime committed by the person aided is a
misdemeanor or if the act committed by the child aided would be a misdemeanor
if committed by an adult, obstructing justice is a misdemeanor of the same
degree as the crime committed by the person aided or a misdemeanor of the
same degree that the act committed by the child aided would be if committed
by an adult.



      (2)   If the crime committed by the person aided is a felony
or if the act committed by the child aided would be a felony if committed by
an adult, committed by the person or child aided is an act of terrorism,
obstructing justice is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



   (D)   As used in this section:



      ACT OF TERRORISM has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.21.



      ADULT and CHILD have the same meaning as in R.C. § 2151.011.



      DELINQUENT CHILD has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2152.02.



(R.C. § 2921.32)



§ 136.08  RESISTING ARREST.



   (A)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere
with a lawful arrest of himself, herself or another.



   (B)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere
with a lawful arrest of the person or another person and, during the course
of or as a result of the resistance or interference, cause physical harm to a
law enforcement officer.



   (C)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere
with a lawful arrest of the person or another person if either of the
following applies:



      (1)   The offender, during the course of or as a result of the
resistance or interference, recklessly causes physical harm to a law
enforcement officer by means of a deadly weapon; or



      (2)   The offender, during the course of the resistance or
interference, brandishes a deadly weapon.



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of resisting arrest. 
A violation of division (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree.  A violation of division (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.  A violation of division (C) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.



   (E)   As used in this section, DEADLY WEAPON has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 2923.11.



(R.C. § 2921.33)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Unlawful taking of deadly weapon from a law enforcement officer, felony
offense, see R.C. § 2911.01



§ 136.09  HAVING AN UNLAWFUL INTEREST IN A PUBLIC CONTRACT.



   (A)   No public official shall knowingly do any of the following:



      (1)   Authorize or employ the authority of the public
official's office to secure authorization of any public contract in which the
public official, a member of the public official's family, or any of the
public official's business associates has an interest.



      (2)   Authorize or employ the authority or influence of the
public official's office to secure the investment of public funds in any
share, bond, mortgage, or other security with respect to which the public
official, a member of the public official's family, or any of the public
official's business associates either has an interest, is an underwriter, or
receives any brokerage, origination, or servicing fees.



      (3)   During the public official's term of office or within
one year thereafter, occupy any position of profit in the prosecution of a
public contract authorized by the public official or by a legislative body,
commission, or board of which the public official was a member at the time of
authorization, unless the contract was let by competitive bidding to the
lowest and best bidder.



      (4)   Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public
contract entered into by or for the use of the political subdivision or
governmental agency or instrumentality with which the public official is
connected.



      (5)   Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public
contract that is not let by competitive bidding when required by law, and
that involves more than $150.



   (B)   In the absence of bribery or a purpose to defraud, a public
official, member of a public official's family, or any of a public official's
business associates shall not be considered as having an interest in a public
contract or the investment of public funds, if all of the following apply:



      (1)   The interest of that person is limited to owning or
controlling shares of the corporation, or being a creditor of the corporation
or other organization, that is the contractor on the public contract
involved, or that is the issuer of the security in which public funds are
invested.



      (2)   The shares owned or controlled by that person do not
exceed 5% of the outstanding shares of the corporation, and the amount due
that person as creditor does not exceed 5% of the total indebtedness of the
corporation or other organization.



      (3)   That person, prior to the time the public contract is
entered into, files with the political subdivision or governmental agency or
instrumentality involved, an affidavit giving that person's exact status in
connection with the corporation or other organization.



   (C)   This section does not apply to a public contract in which a
public official, member of a public official's family, or one of a public
official's business associates has an interest, when all of the following
apply:



      (1)   The subject of the public contract is necessary supplies
or services for the political subdivision or governmental agency or
instrumentality involved.



      (2)   The supplies or services are unobtainable elsewhere for
the same or lower cost, or are being furnished to the political subdivision
or governmental agency or instrumentality as part of a continuing course of
dealing established prior to the public official's becoming associated with
the political subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality involved.



      (3)   The treatment accorded the political subdivision or
governmental agency or instrumentality is either preferential to or the same
as that accorded other customers or clients in similar transactions.



      (4)   The entire transaction is conducted at arm's length,
with full knowledge by the political subdivision or governmental agency or
instrumentality involved, of the interest of the public official, member of
the public official's family, or business associate, and the public official
takes no part in the deliberations or decision of the political subdivision
or governmental agency or instrumentality with respect to the public contract.



   (D)   Division (A)(4) of this section does not prohibit
participation by a public employee in any housing program funded by public
monies if the public employee otherwise qualifies for the program and does
not use the authority or influence of the public employee's office or
employment to secure benefits from the program and if the monies are to be
used on the primary residence of the public employee. Such participation does
not constitute an unlawful interest in a public contract in violation of this
section.



   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of having an unlawful
interest in a public contract. Violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. Violation
of division (A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.



   (F)   It is not a violation of this section for a prosecuting
attorney to appoint assistants and employees in accordance with R.C. §§
309.06 and 2921.421, or for a chief legal officer of a municipality or an
official designated as prosecutor in a municipality to appoint assistants and
employees in accordance with R.C. §§ 733.621 and 2921.421, or for a
township law director appointed under R.C. § 504.15 to appoint assistants
and employees in accordance with R.C. §§ 504.151 and 2921.421.



   (G)   Any public contract in which a public official, a member of
the public official's family, or any of the public official's business
associates has an interest in violation of this section is void and
unenforceable. Any contract securing the investment of public funds in which
a public official, a member of the public official's family, or any of the
public official's business associates has an interest, is an underwriter, or
receives any brokerage, origination or servicing fees and that was entered
into in violation of this section is void and unenforceable.



   (H)   As used in this section:



      CHIEF LEGAL OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 733.621.



      PUBLIC CONTRACT. Means any of the following:



         (a)   The purchase or acquisition, or a contract for the
purchase or acquisition, of property or services by or for the use of the
state or any of its political subdivisions, or any agency or instrumentality
of either, including the employment of an individual by the state, any of its
political subdivisions, or any agency or instrumentality of either.



         (b)   A contract for the design, construction,
alteration, repair, or maintenance of any public property.



(R.C. § 2921.42)



Statutory reference:



   Assistants and employees of Prosecutors, Law Directors, and Solicitors,
see R.C. § 2921.421



§ 136.10  SOLICITING OR RECEIVING IMPROPER COMPENSATION.



   (A)   No public servant shall knowingly solicit or accept and no
person shall knowingly promise or give to a public servant either of the
following:



      (1)   Any compensation, other than as allowed by R.C. §
102.03(G), (H), (I), or other provisions of law, to perform the public
servant's official duties, to perform any other act or service in the public
servant's public capacity, for the general performance of the duties of the
public servant's public office or public employment, or as a supplement to
the public servant's public compensation.



      (2)   Additional or greater fees or costs than are allowed by
law to perform the public servant's official duties.



   (B)   No public servant for the public servant's own personal or
business use and no person for the person's own personal or business use or
for the personal or business use of a public servant or party official, shall
solicit or accept anything of value in consideration of either of the
following:



      (1)   Appointing or securing, maintaining, or renewing the
appointment of any person to any public office, employment, or agency.



      (2)   Preferring, or maintaining the status of, any public
employee with respect to compensation, duties, placement, location,
promotion, or other material aspects of employment.



   (C)   No person for the benefit of a political party, campaign
committee, legislative campaign fund, political action committee or political
contributing entity shall coerce any contribution in consideration of either
of the following:



      (1)   Appointing or securing, maintaining, or renewing the
appointment of any person to any public office, employment, or agency.



      (2)   Preferring, or maintaining the status of, any public
employee with respect to compensation, duties, placement, location,
promotion, or other material aspects of employment.



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of soliciting improper
compensation, a misdemeanor of the first degree.



   (E)   A public servant who is convicted of a violation of this
section is disqualified from holding any public office, employment, or
position of trust in this state for a period of seven years from the date of
conviction.



   (F)   Divisions (A), (B), and (C) of this section do not prohibit
any person from making voluntary contributions to a political party, campaign
committee, legislative campaign fund, political action committee or political
contributing entity or prohibit a political party, campaign committee,
legislative campaign fund, political action committee or political
contributing entity from accepting voluntary contributions.



(R.C. § 2921.43)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 136.11  DERELICTION OF DUTY.



   (A)   No law enforcement officer shall negligently do any of the
following:



      (1)   Fail to serve a lawful warrant without delay.



      (2)   Fail to prevent or halt the commission of an offense or
to apprehend an offender, when it is in the law enforcement officer's power
to do so alone or with available assistance.



   (B)   No law enforcement, ministerial, or judicial officer shall
negligently fail to perform a lawful duty in a criminal case or proceeding.



   (C)   No officer, having charge of a detention facility, shall
negligently do any of the following:



      (1)   Allow the detention facility to become littered or
unsanitary.



      (2)   Fail to provide persons confined in the detention
facility with adequate food, clothing, bedding, shelter, and medical
attention.



      (3)   Fail to control an unruly prisoner, or to prevent
intimidation of or physical harm to a prisoner by another.



      (4)   Allow a prisoner to escape.



      (5)   Fail to observe any lawful and reasonable regulation for
the management of the detention facility.



   (D)   No public official shall recklessly create a deficiency, incur
a liability, or expend a greater sum than is appropriated by the Legislative
Authority for the use in any one year of the department, agency, or
institution with which the public official is connected.



   (E)   No public servant shall recklessly fail to perform a duty
expressly imposed by law with respect to the public servant's office, or
recklessly do any act expressly forbidden by law with respect to the public
servant's office.



   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of dereliction of
duty, a misdemeanor of the second degree.



   (G)   Except as otherwise provided by law, a public servant who is a
county treasurer; county auditor; township fiscal officer; city auditor; city
treasurer; village fiscal officer; village clerk- treasurer; village clerk;
in the case of a municipal corporation having a charter that designates an
officer who, by virtue of the charter, has duties and functions similar to
those of the city or village officers referred to in this section, the
officer so designated by the charter; school district treasurer; fiscal
officer of a community school established under R.C. Chapter 3314; treasurer
of a science, technology, engineering, and mathematics school established
under R.C. Chapter 3326; or fiscal officer of a college-preparatory boarding
school established under R.C. Chapter 3328 and is convicted of or pleads
guilty to dereliction of duty is disqualified from holding any public office,
employment, or position of trust in this state for four years following the
date of conviction or of entry of the plea, and is not entitled to hold any
public office until any repayment or restitution required by the court is
satisfied.



   (H)   As used in this section, PUBLIC SERVANT includes the following:



      (1)   An officer or employee of a contractor as defined in
R.C. § 9.08;



      (2)   A fiscal officer employed by the operator of a community
school established under R.C. Chapter 3314 or by the operator of a
college-preparatory boarding school established under R.C. Chapter 3328.



(R.C. § 2921.44)



§ 136.12  INTERFERING WITH CIVIL RIGHTS.



   (A)   No public servant, under color of his or her office,
employment, or authority, shall knowingly deprive, conspire or attempt to
deprive any person of a constitutional or statutory right.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interfering with
civil rights, a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 2921.45)



§ 136.13  ILLEGAL CONVEYANCE OF  PROHIBITED ITEMS ONTO GROUNDS OF A
DETENTION FACILITY OR OTHER SPECIFIED GOVERNMENTAL FACILITY .



   (A)   No person shall knowingly convey, or attempt to convey, onto
the grounds of a detention facility or of an institution, office building, or
other place that is under the control of the Department of Mental Health and
Addiction Services, the Department of Developmental Disabilities, the
Department of Youth Services, or the Department of Rehabilitation and
Correction, any of the following items:



      (1)   Any deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance, as defined in
R.C. § 2923.11, or any part of or ammunition for use in such deadly weapon
or dangerous ordnance.



      (2)   Any drug of abuse, as defined in R.C. § 3719.011.



      (3)   Any intoxicating liquor, as defined in R.C. § 4301.01.



   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any person who
conveys or attempts to convey an item onto the grounds of a detention
facility or of an institution, office building, or other place under the
control of the Department of Mental Health and Addiction Services, the
Department of Developmental Disabilities, the Department of Youth Services,
or the Department of Rehabilitation and Correction, with written
authorization of the person in charge of the detention facility or the
institution, office building, or other place and in accordance with the
written rules of the detention facility or the institution, office building,
or other place.



   (C)   No person shall knowingly deliver, or attempt to deliver, to
any person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in a
youth services facility, to a prisoner who is temporarily released from
confinement for a work assignment, or to any patient in an institution under
the control of the Department of Mental Health and Addiction Services or the
Department of Developmental Disabilities, any item listed in division (A).



   (D)   No person shall knowingly deliver or attempt to deliver cash
to any person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in
a youth services facility, or to a prisoner who is temporarily released from
confinement for a work assignment.



   (E)   No person shall knowingly deliver, or attempt to deliver, to
any person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in a
youth services facility, or to a prisoner who is temporarily released from
confinement for a work assignment a cellular telephone, two-way radio, or
other electronic communications device.



   (F)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under
division (A)(1) of this section that the weapon or dangerous ordnance in
question was being transported in a motor vehicle for any lawful purpose,
that it was not on the actor’s person, and if the weapon or dangerous
ordnance was a firearm, that it was unloaded and was being carried in a
closed package, box or case or in a compartment that can be reached only by
leaving the vehicle.



      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division
(C) of this section that the actor was not otherwise prohibited by law from
delivering the item to the confined person, the child, the prisoner, or the
patient and that either of the following applies:



         (a)   The actor was permitted by the written rules of
the detention facility or the institution, office building, or other place to
deliver the item to the confined person or the patient.



         (b)   The actor was given written authorization by the
person in charge of the detention facility or the institution, office
building, or other place to deliver the item to the confined person or the
patient.



   (G)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) of this section or
commits a violation of division (C) of this section involving any item listed
in division (A)(1) of this section is guilty of illegal conveyance of weapons
onto the grounds of a specified governmental facility, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(2) of this section or
commits a violation of division (C) of this section involving any drug of
abuse is guilty of illegal conveyance of drugs of abuse onto the grounds of a
specified governmental facility, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.



      (3)   Whoever violates division (A)(3) of this section or
commits a violation of division (C) of this section involving any
intoxicating liquor is guilty of illegal conveyance of intoxicating liquor
onto the grounds of a specified governmental facility, a misdemeanor of the
second degree.



      (4)   Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty
of illegal conveyance of cash onto the grounds of a detention facility, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (D) of this section
or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, illegal
conveyance of cash onto the grounds of a detention facility is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (5)   Whoever violates division (E) of this section is guilty
of illegal conveyance of a communications device onto the grounds of a
specified governmental facility, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted or pleaded guilty to a violation of
division (E) of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, illegal conveyance of a communications device onto the
grounds of a detention facility is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2921.36)



   (H)   The person in charge of a detention facility shall, on the
grounds of the detention facility, have the same power as a peace officer, as
defined in R.C. § 2935.01, to arrest a person who violates this section.



(R.C. § 2921.37)



Statutory reference:



   Conveyance or possession of deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance on
school premises, felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.122



   Conveyance, possession, or control of deadly weapon or dangerous
ordinance in a courthouse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.123



   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention, felony offense, see
R.C. § 2923.131



§ 136.14  FALSE REPORT OF CHILD ABUSE OR NEGLECT.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly make or cause another person to make
a false report under R.C. § 2151.421(B) alleging that any person has
committed an act or omission that resulted in a child being an abused child
as defined in R.C. § 2151.031 or a neglected child as defined in R.C. §
2151.03.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making or causing a
false report of child abuse or child neglect, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.



(R.C. § 2921.14)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 136.15  ASSAULTING POLICE DOG OR HORSE, OR ASSISTANCE DOG.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly cause, or attempt to cause, physical
harm to a police dog or horse in either of the following circumstances:



      (1)   The police dog or horse is assisting a law enforcement
officer in the performance of the officer's official duties at the time the
physical harm is caused or attempted.



      (2)   The police dog or horse is not assisting a law
enforcement officer in the performance of the officer's official duties at
the time the physical harm is caused or attempted, but the offender has
actual knowledge that the dog or horse is a police dog or horse.



   (B)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following:



      (1)   Taunt, torment, or strike a police dog or horse;



      (2)   Throw an object or substance at a police dog or horse;



      (3)   Interfere with or obstruct a police dog or horse, or
interfere with or obstruct a law enforcement officer who is being assisted by
a police dog or horse, in a manner that does any of the following:



         (a)   Inhibits or restricts the law enforcement
officer's control of the police dog or horse;



         (b)   Deprives the law enforcement officer of control of
the police dog or horse;



         (c)   Releases the police dog or horse from its area of
control;



         (d)   Enters the area of control of the police dog or
horse without the consent of the law enforcement officer, including placing
food or any other object or substance into that area;



         (e)   Inhibits or restricts the ability of the police
dog or horse to assist a law enforcement officer;



      (4)   Engage in any conduct that is likely to cause serious
physical injury or death to a police dog or horse;



      (5)   If the person is the owner, keeper, or harborer of a
dog, fail to reasonably restrain the dog from taunting, tormenting, chasing,
approaching in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or
attempting to bite or otherwise endanger a police dog or horse that at the
time of the conduct is assisting a law enforcement officer in the performance
of the officer's duties or that the person knows is a police dog or horse.



   (C)   No person shall knowingly cause, or attempt to cause, physical
harm to an assistance dog in either of the following circumstances:



      (1)   The dog is assisting or serving a blind, deaf or hearing
impaired, or mobility impaired person at the time the physical harm is caused
or attempted.



      (2)   The dog is not assisting or serving a blind, deaf or
hearing impaired, or mobility impaired person at the time the physical harm
is caused or attempted, but the offender has actual knowledge that the dog is
an assistance dog.



   (D)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following:



      (1)   Taunt, torment, or strike an assistance dog;



      (2)   Throw an object or substance at an assistance dog;



      (3)   Interfere with or obstruct an assistance dog, or
interfere with or obstruct a blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility
impaired person who is being assisted or served by an assistance dog, in a
manner that does any of the following:



         (a)   Inhibits or restricts the assisted or served
person's control of the dog;



         (b)   Deprives the assisted or served person of control
of the dog;



         (c)   Releases the dog from its area of control;



         (d)   Enters the area of control of the dog without the
consent of the assisted or served person, including placing food or any other
object or substance into that area;



         (e)   Inhibits or restricts the ability of the dog to
assist the assisted or served person;



      (4)   Engage in any conduct that is likely to cause serious
physical injury or death to an assistance dog;



      (5)   If the person is the owner, keeper, or harborer of a
dog, fail to reasonably restrain the dog from taunting, tormenting, chasing,
approaching in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or
attempting to bite or otherwise endanger an assistance dog that at the time
of the conduct is assisting or serving a blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or
mobility impaired person or that the person knows is an assistance dog.



   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is
guilty of assaulting a police dog or horse. Except as otherwise provided in
this division, assaulting a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the
second degree. If the violation results in physical harm to the police dog or
horse other than death or serious physical harm, assaulting a police dog or
horse is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation results in
serious physical harm to the police dog or horse or results in its death,
assaulting a police dog or horse is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty
of harassing a police dog or horse. Except as otherwise provided this
division, harassing a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. If the violation results in physical harm to the police dog or horse
but does not result in its death or in serious physical harm to it, harassing
a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation
results in serious physical harm to the police dog or horse or results in its
death, harassing a police dog or horse is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



      (3)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty
of assaulting an assistance dog. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, assaulting an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
If the violation results in physical harm to the assistance dog other than
death or serious physical harm, assaulting an assistance dog is a misdemeanor
of the first degree. If the violation results in serious physical harm to the
assistance dog or results in its death, assaulting an assistance dog is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (4)   Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty
of harassing an assistance dog. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, harassing an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
If the violation results in physical harm to the assistance dog but does not
result in the death or in serious physical harm to it, harassing an
assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation results
in serious physical harm to the assistance dog or results in its death,
harassing an assistance dog is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.



      (5)   In addition to any other sanctions or penalty imposed
for the offense under this section, R.C. Chapter 2929 or any other provision
of the Revised Code or this code, whoever violates division (A), (B), (C), or
(D) of this section is responsible for the payment of all of the following:



         (a)   Any veterinary bill or bill for medication
incurred as a result of the violation by the Police Department regarding a
violation of division (A) or (B) of this section or by the blind, deaf or
hearing impaired, or mobility impaired person assisted or served by the
assistance dog regarding a violation of division (C) or (D) of this section;



         (b)   The cost of any damaged equipment that results
from the violation;



         (c)   If the violation did not result in the death of
the police dog or horse or the assistance dog that was the subject of the
violation and if, as a result of that dog or horse being the subject of the
violation, the dog or horse needs further training or retraining to be able
to continue in the capacity of a police dog or horse or an assistance dog,
the cost of any further training or retraining of that dog or horse by a law
enforcement officer or by the blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility
impaired person assisted or served by the assistance dog;



         (d)   If the violation resulted in the death of the
police dog or horse or the assistance dog that was the subject of the
violation or resulted in serious physical harm to that dog or horse to the
extent that the dog or horse needs to be replaced on either a temporary or a
permanent basis, the cost of replacing that dog or horse and of any further
training of a new police dog or horse or a new assistance dog by a law
enforcement officer or by the blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility
impaired person assisted or served by the assistance dog, which replacement
or training is required because of the death of or the serious physical harm
to the dog or horse that was the subject of the violation.



   (F)   This section does not apply to a licensed veterinarian whose
conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 4741.



   (G)   This section only applies to an offender who knows or should
know at the time of the violation that the police dog or horse or assistance
dog that is the subject of a violation under this section is a police dog or
horse or an assistance dog.



   (H)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      ASSISTANCE DOG, BLIND and MOBILITY IMPAIRED PERSON. Have the same
meaning as in R.C. § 955.011.



      PHYSICAL HARM. Any injury, illness, or other psychological
impairment, regardless of its gravity or duration.



      POLICE DOG OR HORSE. A dog or horse that has been trained and may
be used to assist law enforcement officers in the performance of their
official duties.



      SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM. Any of the following:



         (a)   Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk
of death.



         (b)   Any physical harm that causes permanent maiming or
that involves some temporary, substantial maiming.



         (c)   Any physical harm that causes acute pain of a
duration that results in substantial suffering.



(R.C. § 2921.321)



§ 136.16  DISCLOSURE OF CONFIDENTIAL PEACE OFFICER INFORMATION.



   (A)   No officer or employee of a law enforcement agency or court,
or of the clerk's office of any court, shall disclose during the pendency of
any criminal case the home address of any peace officer, parole officer,
prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, correctional employee,
or youth services employee who is a witness or arresting officer in the case.



   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not prohibit a peace
officer, parole officer, prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting
attorney, correctional employee, or youth services employee from disclosing
the peace officer's, parole officer's, prosecuting attorney's, assistant
prosecuting attorney's, correctional employee's, or youth services employee's
own home address, and does not apply to any person who discloses the home
address of a peace officer, parole officer, prosecuting attorney, assistant
prosecuting attorney, correctional employee, or youth services employee
pursuant to a court-ordered disclosure under division (C) of this section.



   (C)   The court in which any criminal case is pending may order the
disclosure of the home address of any peace officer, parole officer,
prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, correctional employee,
or youth services employee who is a witness or arresting officer in the case,
if the court determines after a written request for the disclosure that good
cause exists for disclosing the home address of the peace officer, parole
officer, prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, correctional
employee, or youth services employee.



   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
disclosure of confidential information, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 2921.24)



   (E)   No judge of a court of record, or Mayor presiding over a
Mayor's Court, shall order a peace officer, parole officer, prosecuting
attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, correctional employee, or youth
services employee who is a witness in a criminal case, to disclose the peace
officer's, parole officer's, prosecuting attorney's, assistant prosecuting
attorney's, correctional employee's, or youth services employee's home
address during the peace officer's, parole officer's, prosecuting attorney's,
assistant prosecuting attorney's, correctional employee's, or youth services
employee's examination in the case unless the judge or Mayor determines that
the defendant has a right to the disclosure.



   (F)   As used in this section:



      PEACE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01.



      CORRECTIONAL EMPLOYEE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 149.43.



      YOUTH SERVICES EMPLOYEE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
149.43.



(R.C. § 2921.25)



§ 136.17  INTIMIDATION OF CRIME VICTIM OR WITNESS.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly attempt to intimidate or hinder the
victim of a crime or delinquent act in the filing or prosecution of criminal
charges or a delinquent child action or proceeding, and no person shall
knowingly attempt to intimidate a witness to a criminal or delinquent act by
reason of the person being a witness to that act.



   (B)   No person, knowingly and by force or by unlawful threat of
harm to any person or property or by unlawful threat to commit any offense or
calumny against any person, shall attempt to influence, intimidate, or hinder
any of the following persons:



      (1)   The victim of a crime or delinquent act in the filing or
prosecution of criminal charges or a delinquent child action or proceeding;



      (2)   A witness to a criminal or delinquent act by reason of
the person being a witness to that act;



      (3)   An attorney by reason of the attorney’s involvement in
any criminal or delinquent child action or proceeding.



   (C)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any person who
is attempting to resolve a dispute pertaining to the alleged commission of a
criminal offense, either prior to or subsequent to the filing of a complaint,
indictment, or information by participating in the arbitration, mediation,
compromise, settlement or conciliation of that dispute pursuant to an
authorization for arbitration, mediation, compromise, settlement, or
conciliation of a dispute of that nature that is conferred by any of the
following:



      (1)   A section of the Revised Code.



      (2)   The Rules of Criminal Procedure, the Rules of
Superintendence for Municipal Courts and County Courts, the Rules of
Superintendence for Courts of Common Pleas, or another rule adopted by the
Ohio Supreme Court in accordance with Ohio Constitution, Article IV, Section
5.



      (3)   A local rule of court, including but not limited to a
local rule of court that relates to alternative dispute resolution or other
case management programs and that authorizes the referral of disputes
pertaining to the alleged commission of certain types of criminal offenses to
appropriate and available arbitration, mediation, compromise, settlement or
other conciliation programs.



      (4)   The order of a judge of a municipal court, county court,
or court of common pleas.



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of intimidation of an
attorney, victim or witness in a criminal case.  A violation of division (A)
of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  A violation of
division (B) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.



   (E)   As used in this section, WITNESS means any person who has or
claims to have knowledge concerning a fact or facts concerning a criminal or
delinquent act, whether or not criminal or delinquent child charges are
actually filed.



(R.C. § 2921.04)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Retaliation, felony offense, see R.C. § 2921.05



§ 136.18  USING SHAM LEGAL PROCESS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply:



      LAWFULLY ISSUED.  Adopted, issued, or rendered in accordance
with the United States Constitution, the Constitution of a state, and the
applicable statutes, rules, regulations and ordinances of the United States,
a state, and the political subdivisions of a state.



      POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS.  Municipal corporations, townships,
counties, school districts, and all other bodies corporate and politic that
are organized under state law and are responsible for governmental activities
only in geographical areas smaller than that of a state.



      SHAM LEGAL PROCESS.  An instrument that meets all of the
following conditions:



         (a)   It is not lawfully issued.



         (b)   It purports to do any of the following:



            1.   To be a summons, subpoena, judgment, or order
of a court, a law enforcement officer, or a legislative, executive or
administrative body.



            2.   To assert jurisdiction over or determine the
legal or equitable status, rights, duties, powers, or privileges of any
person or property.



            3.   To require or authorize the search, seizure,
indictment, arrest, trial, or sentencing of any person or property.



         (c)   It is designed to make another person believe that
it is lawfully issued.



      STATE.  A state of the United States, including without
limitation the state legislature, the highest court of the state that has
statewide jurisdiction, the offices of all elected state officers, and all
departments, boards, offices, commissions, agencies, institutions, and other
instrumentalities of the state.  STATE does not include the political
subdivisions of the state.



   (B)   No person shall, knowing the sham legal process to be a sham
legal process, do any of the following:



      (1)   Knowingly issue, display, deliver, distribute, or
otherwise use sham legal process.



      (2)   Knowingly use sham legal process to arrest, detain,
search or seize any person or the property of another person.



      (3)   Knowingly commit or facilitate the commission of an
offense using sham legal process.



      (4)   Knowingly commit a felony by using sham legal process.



   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (B)(1)
or (2) of this section that the use of sham legal process was for a lawful
purpose.



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of using sham legal
process.  A violation of division (B)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.  A violation of division (B)(2) or (B)(3) of this section
is a misdemeanor of the first degree, except that if the purpose of a
violation of division (B)(3) of this section is to commit or facilitate the
commission of a felony, a violation of division (B)(3) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.  A violation of
division (B)(4) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2921.52(A) - (D))  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Civil liability, see R.C. § 2921.52(E)



§ 136.19  ACTS IN CONTEMPT OF COURT.



   A person guilty of any of the following acts may be punished for
contempt:



   (A)   Disobedience of, or resistance to, a lawful writ, process,
order, rule, judgment, or command of a court or officer;



   (B)   Misbehavior of an officer of the court in the performance of
official duties, or in official transactions;



   (C)   A failure to obey a subpoena duly served, or a refusal to be
sworn or to answer as a witness, when lawfully required;



   (D)   The rescue or attempted rescue of a person or of property in
the custody of an officer by virtue of an order or process of court held by
the officer;



   (E)   A failure upon the part of a person recognized to appear as a
witness in a court to appear in compliance with the terms of the person's
recognizance;



   (F)   A failure to comply with an order issued pursuant to R.C. §
3109.19 or 3111.81;



   (G)   A failure to obey a subpoena issued by the Department of Job
and Family Services or a child support enforcement agency pursuant to R.C. §
5101.37;



   (H)   A willful failure to submit to genetic testing, or a willful
failure to submit a child to genetic testing, as required by an order for
genetic testing issued under R.C. § 3111.41.



(R.C. § 2705.02)



   (I)   Whoever violates this section may be fined not more than $500
or imprisoned not more than ten days or both.



(‘67 Code, § 135.06) (Ord. 2-1987, passed 1-7-87)



§ 136.20  FAILURE TO ANSWER SUMMONS.



   If a person summoned to appear as provided in R.C. § 2935.10(B) fails
to appear without just cause and personal service of the summons was had upon
the person, he or she may be found guilty of contempt of court, and may be
fined not to exceed $20 for such contempt.  Upon failure to appear, the
court or magistrate may forthwith issue a warrant for his or her arrest.



(R.C. § 2935.11) (‘67 Code, § 135.07)



§ 136.21  MISUSE OF 9-1-1 SYSTEM.



   (A)   As used in this section, 9-1-1 SYSTEM means a system through
which individuals can request emergency service using the telephone number
9-1-1.



(R.C. § 128.01(A))



   (B)   No person shall knowingly use the telephone number of a 9-1-1
system established under R.C. Chapter 128 to report an emergency if the
person knows that no emergency exists.



   (C)   No person shall knowingly use a 9-1-1 system for a purpose
other than obtaining emergency service.



   (D)   No person shall disclose or use any information concerning
telephone numbers, addresses, or names obtained from the database that serves
the public safety answering point of a 9-1-1 system established under R.C.
Chapter 128, except for any of the following purposes or under any of the
following circumstances:



      (1)   For the purpose of the 9-1-1 system;



      (2)   For the purpose of responding to an emergency call to an
emergency service provider;



      (3)   In the circumstance of the inadvertent disclosure of
such information due solely to technology of the wireless telephone network
portion of the 9-1-1 system not allowing access to the database to be
restricted to 9-1-1 specific answering lines at a public safety answering
point;



      (4)   In the circumstance of access to a database being given
by a telephone company that is a wireless service provider to a public
utility or municipal utility in handling customer calls in times of public
emergency or service outages. The charge, terms, and conditions for the
disclosure or use of such information for the purpose of such access to a
database shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the Steering Committee;



      (5)   In the circumstance of access to a database given by a
telephone company that is a wireline service provider to a state and local
government in warning of a public emergency, as determined by the Steering
Committee. The charge, terms and conditions for the disclosure or use of that
information for the purpose of access to a database is subject to the
jurisdiction of the Steering Committee.



(R.C. § 128.32(E) - (G))



   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (C) or (D) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.



(R.C. § 128.99(A), (B))



§ 136.22  FAILURE TO DISCLOSE PERSONAL INFORMATION.



   (A)   No person who is in a public place shall refuse to disclose
the person's name, address, or date of birth, when requested by a law
enforcement officer who reasonably suspects either of the following:



      (1)   The person is committing, has committed, or is about to
commit a criminal offense.



      (2)   The person witnessed any of the following:



         (a)   An offense of violence that would constitute a
felony under the laws of this state;



         (b)   A felony offense that causes or results in, or
creates a substantial risk of, serious physical harm to another person or
property;



         (c)   Any attempt or conspiracy to commit, or complicity
in committing, any offenses identified in division (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(b) of
this section;



         (d)   Any conduct reasonably indicating that any offense
identified in division (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(b) of this section or any attempt,
conspiracy, or complicity described in division (A)(2)(c) of this section has
been, is being, or is about to be committed.



   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
failure to disclose one's personal information, a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.



   (C)   Nothing in division (A) of this section requires a person to
answer any questions beyond that person's name, address, or date of birth.
Nothing in division (A) of this section authorizes a law enforcement officer
to arrest a person for not providing any information beyond the person's
name, address, or date of birth or for refusing to describe the offense
observed.



   (D)   It is not a violation of division (A) of this section to
refuse to answer a question that would reveal a person's age or date of birth
if age is an element of the crime that the person is suspected of committing.



(R.C. § 2921.29)



   (E)   No person entering an airport, train station, port, or other
similar critical transportation infrastructure site shall refuse to show
identification when requested by a law enforcement officer when there is a
threat to security and the law enforcement officer is requiring
identification of all persons entering the site.



   (F)   A law enforcement officer may prevent any person who refuses
to show identification when asked under the circumstances described in
division (E) of this section from entering the critical transportation
infrastructure site.



(R.C. § 2909.31)



§ 136.23  MAKING FALSE ALLEGATION OF PEACE OFFICER MISCONDUCT.



   (A)   As used in this section, PEACE OFFICER has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 2935.01.



   (B)   No person shall knowingly file a complaint against a peace
officer that alleges that the peace officer engaged in misconduct in the
performance of the officer's duties if the person knows that the allegation
is false.



   (C)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
making a false allegation of peace officer misconduct, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.



(R.C. § 2921.15)



CHAPTER 137:  WEAPONS CONTROL



Section



   137.01   Definitions



   137.02   Carrying concealed weapons



   137.03   Using weapons while intoxicated



   137.04   Improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle



   137.05   Possessing criminal tools



   137.06   Failure to secure dangerous ordnance



   137.07   Unlawful transactions in weapons



   137.08   Underage purchase of firearm or handgun



   137.09   Discharging firearms



   137.10   License or permit to possess dangerous ordnance



   137.11   Storage of explosives



   137.12   Blasting permit required



   137.13   Sale and use of fireworks



   137.14   Defaced firearms



   137.15   Possession of an object indistinguishable from a firearm in
a school safety zone



   137.16   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention



   137.17   Concealed handgun licenses: possession of a revoked or
suspended license; additional restrictions; posting of signs prohibiting
possession



Cross-reference:



   Conveyance into certain facilities, see § 136.13



   Injury to persons by hunters, see § 135.05



   Injury to property by hunters, see § 131.24



   Using weapons to endanger or damage aircraft or airport operations, see
§ 131.05



§ 137.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALIEN REGISTRATION NUMBER. The number issued by the United States
Citizenship and Immigration Services Agency that is located on the alien’s
permanent resident card and may also be commonly referred to as the “USCIS
number” or the “alien number”.



   AUTOMATIC FIREARM. Any firearm designed or specially adapted to fire a
succession of cartridges with a single function of the trigger.



   BALLISTIC KNIFE. A knife with a detachable blade that is propelled by a
spring-operated mechanism.



   CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSE or LICENSE TO CARRY A CONCEALED HANDGUN .



      (1)   Means, subject to division (2) of this definition, a
license or temporary emergency license to carry a concealed handgun issued
under R.C. § 2923.125 or R.C. § 2923.1213 or a license to carry a concealed
handgun issued by another state with which the Attorney General has entered
into a reciprocity agreement under R.C. § 109.69.



      (2)   A reference in any provision of this Code to a concealed
handgun license issued under R.C. § 2923.125 or a license to carry a
concealed handgun issued under R.C. § 2923.125 means only a license of the
type that is specified in that section. A reference in any provision of this
Code to a concealed handgun license issued under R.C. § 2923.1213, a license
to carry a concealed handgun issued under R.C. § 2923.1213, or a license to
carry a concealed handgun on a temporary emergency basis means only a license
of the type that is specified in R.C. § 2923.1213. A reference in any
provision of this Code to a concealed handgun license issued by another state
or a license to carry a concealed handgun issued by another state means only
a license issued by another state with which the Attorney General has entered
into a reciprocity agreement under R.C. § 109.69.



   DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.



      (1)   Any of the following, except as provided in division (2)
of this definition:



         (a)   Any automatic or sawed-off firearm, zip-gun, or
ballistic knife.



         (b)   Any explosive device or incendiary device.



         (c)   Nitroglycerin, nitrocellulose, nitrostarch, PETN,
cyclonite, TNT, picric acid, and other high explosives; amatol, tritonal,
tetrytol, pentolite, pecretol, cyclotol, and other high explosive
compositions; plastic explosives; dynamite, blasting gelatin, gelatin
dynamite, sensitized ammonium nitrate, liquid-oxygen blasting explosives,
blasting powder, and other blasting agents; and any other explosive substance
having sufficient brisance or power to be particularly suitable for use as a
military explosive, or for use in mining, quarrying, excavating, or
demolitions.



         (d)   Any firearm, rocket launcher, mortar, artillery
piece, grenade, mine, bomb, torpedo, or similar weapon, designed and
manufactured for military purposes, and the ammunition for that weapon.



         (e)   Any firearm muffler or suppressor.



         (f)   Any combination of parts that is intended by the
owner for use in converting any firearm or other device into a dangerous
ordnance.



      (2)   The term does not include any of the following:



         (a)   Any firearm, including a military weapon and the
ammunition for that weapon, and regardless of its actual age, that employs a
percussion cap or other obsolete ignition system, or that is designed and
safe for use only with black powder.



         (b)   Any pistol, rifle, or shotgun, designed or
suitable for sporting purposes, including a military weapon as issued or as
modified, and the ammunition for that weapon, unless the firearm is an
automatic or sawed-off firearm.



         (c)   Any cannon or other artillery piece that,
regardless of its actual age, is of a type in accepted use prior to 1887, has
no mechanical, hydraulic, pneumatic, or other system for absorbing recoil and
returning the tube into battery without displacing the carriage, and is
designed and safe for use only with black powder.



         (d)   Black powder, priming quills, and percussion caps
possessed and lawfully used to fire a cannon of a type defined in division
(2)(c) of this definition during displays, celebrations, organized matches or
shoots, and target practice, and smokeless and black powder, primers, and
percussion caps possessed and lawfully used as a propellant or ignition
device in small-arms or small-arms ammunition.



         (e)   Dangerous ordnance that is inoperable or inert and
cannot readily be rendered operable or activated, and that is kept as a
trophy, souvenir, curio, or museum piece.



         (f)   Any device that is expressly excepted from the
definition of a destructive device pursuant to the Gun Control Act of 1968,
18 U.S.C. § 921(a)(4), as amended, and regulations issued under that act.



   DEADLY WEAPON. Any instrument, device, or thing capable of inflicting
death, and designed or specially adapted for use as a weapon, or possessed,
carried, or used as a weapon.



   EXPLOSIVE. Any chemical compound, mixture, or device, the primary or
common purpose of which is to function by explosion. The term includes all
materials that have been classified as division 1.1, division 1.2, division
1.3, or division 1.4 explosives by the United States Department of
Transportation in its regulations and includes but is not limited to
dynamite, black powder, pellet powders, initiating explosives, blasting caps,
electric blasting caps, safety fuses, fuse igniters, squibs, cordeau detonant
fuses, instantaneous fuses, and igniter cords and igniters. The term does not
include "fireworks," as defined in R.C. § 3743.01, or any substance or
material otherwise meeting the definition of explosive set forth in this
section that is manufactured, sold, possessed, transported, stored, or used
in any activity described in R.C. § 3743.80, provided the activity is
conducted in accordance with all applicable laws, rules, and regulations,
including but not limited to the provisions of R.C. § 3743.80 and the rules
of the Fire Marshal adopted pursuant to R.C. § 3737.82.



   EXPLOSIVE DEVICE. Any device designed or specially adapted to cause
physical harm to persons or property by means of an explosion, and consisting
of an explosive substance or agency and a means to detonate it. The term
includes without limitation any bomb, any explosive demolition device, any
blasting cap or detonator containing an explosive charge, and any pressure
vessel that has been knowingly tampered with or arranged so as to explode.



   FIREARM.



      (1)   Any deadly weapon capable of expelling or propelling one
or more projectiles by the action of an explosive or combustible propellant.
The term includes an unloaded firearm, and any firearm that is inoperable but
that can readily be rendered operable.



      (2)   When determining whether a firearm is capable of
expelling or propelling one or more projectiles by the action of an explosive
or combustible propellant, the trier of fact may rely upon circumstantial
evidence, including but not limited to the representations and actions of the
individual exercising control over the firearm.



   HANDGUN. Any of the following:



      (1)   Any firearm that has a short stock and is designed to be
held and fired by the use of a single hand;



      (2)   Any combination of parts from which a firearm of a type
described in division (1) of this definition can be assembled.



   INCENDIARY DEVICE. Any firebomb, and any device designed or specially
adapted to cause physical harm to persons or property by means of fire, and
consisting of an incendiary substance or agent and a means to ignite it.



   MISDEMEANOR PUNISHABLE BY IMPRISONMENT FOR A TERM EXCEEDING ONE YEAR.
The phrase does not include any of the following:



      (1)   Any federal or state offense pertaining to antitrust
violations, unfair trade practices, restraints of trade, or other similar
offenses relating to the regulation of business practices;



      (2)   Any misdemeanor offense punishable by a term of
imprisonment of two years or less.



   SAWED-OFF FIREARM. A shotgun with a barrel less than 18 inches long, or
a rifle with a barrel less than 16 inches long, or a shotgun or rifle less
than 26 inches long overall.



   SEMI-AUTOMATIC FIREARM. Any firearm designed or specially adapted to
fire a single cartridge and automatically chamber a succeeding cartridge
ready to fire, with a single function of the trigger.



   VALID CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSE or VALID LICENSE TO CARRY A CONCEALED
HANDGUN. A concealed handgun license that is currently valid, that is not
under a suspension under R.C. § 2923.128(A)(1), under R.C. § 2923.1213, or
under a suspension provision of the state other than this state in which the
license was issued, and that has not been revoked under R.C. §
2923.128(B)(1), under R.C. § 2923.1213, or under a revocation provision of
the state other than this state in which the license was issued.



   ZIP-GUN. Any of the following:



      (1)   Any firearm of crude and extemporized manufacture.



      (2)   Any device, including without limitation a starter's
pistol, not designed as a firearm, but that is specially adapted for use as a
firearm.



      (3)   Any industrial tool, signaling device, or safety device,
not designed as a firearm, but that as designed is capable of use as such,
when possessed, carried, or used as a firearm.



(R.C. § 2923.11)



§ 137.02  CARRYING CONCEALED WEAPONS.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly carry or have, concealed on the
person’s person or concealed ready at hand, any of the following:



      (1)   A deadly weapon other than a handgun;



      (2)   A handgun other than a dangerous ordnance;



      (3)   A dangerous ordnance.



   (B)   No person who has been issued a concealed handgun license
shall do any of the following:



      (1)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose,
and is carrying a concealed handgun, fail to promptly inform any law
enforcement officer who approaches the person after the person has been
stopped that the person has been issued a concealed handgun license and that
the person then is carrying a concealed handgun;



      (2)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose
and is carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to keep the person’s
hands in plain sight at any time after any law enforcement officer begins
approaching the person while stopped and before the law enforcement officer
leaves, unless the failure is pursuant to and in accordance with directions
given by a law enforcement officer;



      (3)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose,
if the person is carrying a concealed handgun, and if the person is
approached by any law enforcement officer while stopped, knowingly remove or
attempt to remove the loaded handgun from the holster, pocket, or other place
in which the person is carrying it, knowingly grasp or hold the loaded
handgun, or knowingly have contact with the loaded handgun by touching it
with the person’s hands or fingers at any time after the law enforcement
officer begins approaching and before the law enforcement officer leaves,
unless the person removes, attempts to remove, grasps, holds, or has contact
with the loaded handgun pursuant to and in accordance with directions given
by the law enforcement officer;



      (4)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose
and is carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly disregard or fail to comply
with any lawful order of any law enforcement officer given while the person
is stopped, including but not limited to a specific order to the person to
keep the person’s hands in plain sight.



   (C)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:



         (a)   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any
other state or the United States, or to a law enforcement officer, who is
authorized to carry concealed weapons or dangerous ordnance or is authorized
to carry handguns and is acting within the scope of the officer’s,
agent’s, or employee’s duties;



         (b)   Any person who is employed in this state, who is
authorized to carry concealed weapons or dangerous ordnance or is authorized
to carry handguns, and who is subject to and in compliance with the
requirements of R.C. § 109.801, unless the appointing authority of the
person has expressly specified that the exemption provided in this division
(C)(1)(b) does not apply to the person;



         (c)   A person’s transportation or storage of a
firearm, other than a firearm described in R.C. § 2923.11(G) to (M), in a
motor vehicle for any lawful purpose if the firearm is not on the actor’s
person;



         (d)   A person’s storage or possession of a firearm,
other than a firearm described in R.C. § 2923.11(G) to (M), in the actor’s
own home for any lawful purpose.



      (2)   Division (A)(2) of this section does not apply to any
person who, at the time of the alleged carrying or possession of a handgun,
is carrying a valid concealed handgun license, unless the person knowingly is
in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).



   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(1)
of this section of carrying or having control of a weapon other than a
handgun and other than a dangerous ordnance, that the actor was not otherwise
prohibited by law from having the weapon, and that any of the following
applies:



      (1)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the
actor for defensive purposes, while the actor was engaged in or was going to
or from the actor’s lawful business or occupation, which business or
occupation was of a character or was necessarily carried on in a manner or at
a time or place as to render the actor particularly susceptible to criminal
attack, such as would justify a prudent person in going armed.



      (2)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the
actor for defensive purposes, while the actor was engaged in a lawful
activity and had reasonable cause to fear a criminal attack upon the actor, a
member of the actor’s family, or the actor’s home, such as would justify
a prudent person in going armed.



      (3)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the
actor for any lawful purpose and while in the actor’s own home.



   (E)   No person who is charged with a violation of this section
shall be required to obtain a concealed handgun license as a condition for
the dismissal of the charge.



   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of carrying
concealed weapons. Except as otherwise provided in this division or division
(F)(2) of this section, carrying concealed weapons in violation of division
(A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Except as otherwise
provided in this division or division (F)(2) of this section, if the offender
previously has been convicted of a violation of this section or any
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance or of any offense
of violence, if the weapon involved is a firearm that is either loaded or for
which the offender has ammunition ready at hand, or if the weapon involved is
dangerous ordnance, carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (A)
of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
Except as otherwise provided in division (F)(2) of this section, if the
offense is committed aboard an aircraft, or with purpose to carry a concealed
weapon aboard an aircraft, regardless of the weapon involved, carrying
concealed weapons in violation of division (A) of this section is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (2)   If a person being arrested for a violation of division
(A)(2) of this section promptly produces a valid concealed handgun license,
and if at the time of the violation the person was not knowingly in a place
described in R.C. § 2923.126(B), the officer shall not arrest the person for
a violation of that division. If the person is not able to promptly produce
any concealed handgun license and if the person is not in a place described
in that section, the officer may arrest the person for a violation of that
division, and the offender shall be punished as follows:



         (a)   The offender shall be guilty of a minor
misdemeanor if both of the following apply:



            1.   Within 10 days after the arrest, the offender
presents a concealed handgun license, which license was valid at the time of
the arrest to the law enforcement agency that employs the arresting officer.



            2.   At the time of the arrest, the offender was
not knowingly in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).



         (b)   The offender shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be fined $500 if all of the following apply:



            1.   The offender previously had been issued a
concealed handgun license, and that license expired within the two years
immediately preceding the arrest.



            2.   Within 45 days after the arrest, the offender
presents a concealed handgun license to the law enforcement agency that
employed the arresting officer, and the offender waives in writing the
offender’s right to a speedy trial on the charge of the violation that is
provided in R.C. § 2945.71.



            3.   At the time of the commission of the offense,
the offender was not knowingly in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).



         (c)   If neither division (F)(2)(a) nor (F)(2)(b) of
this section applies, the offender shall be punished under division (F)(1) of
this section.



      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, carrying
concealed weapons in violation of division (B)(1) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree, and, in addition to any other penalty or
sanction imposed for a violation of division (B)(1) of this section, the
offender’s concealed handgun license shall be suspended pursuant to R.C. §
2923.128(A)(2). If, at the time of the stop of the offender for a law
enforcement purpose that was the basis of the violation, any law enforcement
officer involved with the stop had actual knowledge that the offender has
been issued a concealed handgun license, carrying concealed weapons in
violation of division (B)(1) of this section is a minor misdemeanor, and the
offender’s concealed handgun license shall not be suspended pursuant to
R.C. § 2923.128(A)(2).



      (4)   Carrying concealed weapons in violation of division
(B)(2) or (B)(4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
violation of division (B)(2) or (B)(4) of this section or any substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. In addition to any other penalty or sanction imposed
for a misdemeanor violation of division (B)(2) or (B)(4) of this section, the
offender’s concealed handgun license shall be suspended pursuant to R.C. §
2923.128(A)(2).



      (5)   Carrying concealed weapons in violation of division
(B)(3) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.



   (G)   If a law enforcement officer stops a person to question the
person regarding a possible violation of this section, for a traffic stop, or
for any other law enforcement purpose, if the person surrenders a firearm to
the officer, either voluntarily or pursuant to a request or demand of the
officer, and if the officer does not charge the person with a violation of
this section or arrest the person for any offense, the person is not
otherwise prohibited by law from possessing the firearm, and the firearm is
not contraband, the officer shall return the firearm to the person at the
termination of the stop. If a court orders a law enforcement officer to
return a firearm to a person pursuant to the requirement set forth in this
division, R.C. § 2923.163(B) applies.



(R.C. § 2923.12)



Statutory reference:



   Carrying concealed handguns, licensing through county sheriff, see R.C.
§§ 2923.124 et seq.



   Conveyance or possession of deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance on
school premises, felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.122



   Conveyance, possession, or control of deadly weapon or dangerous
ordinance in a courthouse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.123



   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention, felony offense, see
R.C. § 2923.131



   Possession of firearm in liquor permit premises, felony offense, see
R.C. § 2923.121



§ 137.03  USING WEAPONS WHILE INTOXICATED.



   (A)   No person, while under the influence of alcohol or any drug of
abuse, shall carry or use any firearm or dangerous ordnance.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of using weapons while
intoxicated, a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 2923.15)



§ 137.04  IMPROPERLY HANDLING FIREARMS IN A MOTOR VEHICLE.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly discharge a firearm while in or on a
motor vehicle.



   (B)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a loaded firearm
in a motor vehicle, in such manner that the firearm is accessible to the
operator or any passenger without leaving the vehicle.



   (C)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a firearm in a
motor vehicle, unless it is unloaded, and is carried in one of the following
ways:



      (1)   In a closed package, box or case;



      (2)   In a compartment which can be reached only by leaving
the vehicle;



      (3)   In plain sight and secured in a rack or holder made for
the purpose;



      (4)   In plain sight with the action opened or the weapon
stripped, or if the firearm is of a type on which the action will not stay
open or which cannot be easily stripped, in plain sight.



   (D)   This section does not apply to officers, agents or employees
of this or any other state or the United States, or to law enforcement
officers, or others authorized to carry or have loaded or accessible firearms
in motor vehicles and acting within the scope of their duties.



   (E)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section of
carrying or having control of a weapon other than dangerous ordnance, that
the actor was not otherwise prohibited by law from having the weapon, and
that any of the following apply:



      (1)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the
actor for defensive purposes, while he was engaged in or was going to or from
his lawful business or occupation, which business or occupation was of such
character or was necessarily carried on in such manner or at such a time or
place as to render the actor particularly susceptible to criminal attack,
such as would justify a prudent man in going armed.



      (2)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the
actor for defensive purposes, while he was engaged in a lawful activity, and
had reasonable cause to fear a criminal attack upon himself or a member of
his family, or upon his home, such as would justify a prudent man in going
armed.



      (3)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the
actor for any lawful purpose and while in his own home.



      (4)   The weapon was being transported in a motor vehicle for
any lawful purpose, and was not on the actor's person, and, if the weapon was
a firearm, was carried in compliance with the applicable requirements of
division (C) of this section.



   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of improperly handling
firearms in a motor vehicle. A violation of division (A) or (B) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Violation of division (C) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



   (G)   As used in this section, UNLOADED means, with respect to a
firearm employing percussion cap, flintlock or other obsolete ignition
system, when the weapon is uncapped or when the priming charge is removed
from the pan.



(Ord. 17-1993, passed 4-7-93)



§ 137.05  POSSESSING CRIMINAL TOOLS.



   (A)   No person shall possess or have under his or her control any
substance, device, instrument, or article, with purpose to use it criminally.



   (B)   Each of the following constitutes prima facie evidence of
criminal purpose:



      (1)   Possession or control of any dangerous ordnance, or the
materials or parts for making a dangerous ordnance, in the absence of
circumstances indicating the dangerous ordnance, materials or parts are
intended for a legitimate use.



      (2)   Possession or control of any substance, device,
instrument, or article designed or specially adapted for criminal use.



      (3)   Possession or control of any substance, device,
instrument, or article commonly used for criminal purposes, under
circumstances indicating the item is intended for criminal use.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing criminal
tools.  Except as otherwise provided in this division, possessing criminal
tools is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the circumstances indicate
that the substance, device, instrument, or article involved in the offense
was intended for use in the commission of a felony, possessing criminal tools
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2923.24)



§ 137.06  FAILURE TO SECURE DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.



   (A)   No person, in acquiring, possessing, carrying, or using any
dangerous ordnance, shall negligently fail to take proper precautions:



      (1)   To secure the dangerous ordnance against theft, or
against its acquisition or use by any unauthorized or incompetent person.



      (2)   To insure the safety of persons and property.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to a secure
dangerous ordnance, a misdemeanor of the second degree.



(R.C. § 2923.19)



§ 137.07  UNLAWFUL TRANSACTIONS IN WEAPONS.



   (A)   No person shall:



      (1)   Recklessly sell, lend, give or furnish any firearm to
any person prohibited by R.C. § 2923.13 or 2923.15, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, from acquiring or using any firearm, or
recklessly sell, lend, give or furnish any dangerous ordnance to any person
prohibited by R.C. § 2923.13, 2923.15 or 2923.17, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, from acquiring or using any dangerous
ordnance;



      (2)   Possess any firearm or dangerous ordnance with purpose
to dispose of it in violation of division (A)(1) of this section;



      (3)   Manufacture, possess for sale, sell, or furnish to any
person other than a law enforcement agency for authorized use in police work,
any brass knuckles, cestus, billy, blackjack, sandbag, switchblade knife,
springblade knife, gravity knife, or similar weapon;



      (4)   When transferring any dangerous ordnance to another,
negligently fail to require the transferee to exhibit such identification,
license, or permit showing him or her to be authorized to acquire dangerous
ordnance pursuant to R.C. § 2923.17, or negligently fail to take a complete
record of the transaction and forthwith forward a copy of the record to the
sheriff of the county or Safety Director or Police Chief of the municipality
where the transaction takes place;



      (5)   Knowingly fail to report to law enforcement authorities
forthwith the loss or theft of any firearm or dangerous ordnance in the
person's possession and under his or her control.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful
transactions in weapons.  A violation of division (A)(1) or (2) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.  A
violation of division (A)(3) or (4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
second degree.  A violation of division (A)(5) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 2923.20)



§ 137.08  UNDERAGE PURCHASE OF FIREARM OR HANDGUN.



   (A)   No person under 18 years of age shall purchase or attempt to
purchase a firearm.



   (B)   No person under 21 years of age shall purchase or attempt to
purchase a handgun; provided, that this division does not apply to the
purchase or attempted purchase of a handgun by a person 18 years of age or
older and under 21 years of age if either of the following applies:



      (1)   The person is a law enforcement officer and has received
firearms training approved by the Ohio Peace Officer Training Council or
equivalent firearms training.



      (2)   The person is an active or reserve member of the armed
services of the United States or the Ohio National Guard, or was honorably
discharged from military service in the active or reserve armed services of
the United States or the Ohio National Guard, and the person has received
firearms training from the armed services or the national guard or equivalent
firearms training.



   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
underage purchase of a firearm, a delinquent act that would be a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law if it could be committed by an adult.
Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of underage purchase
of a handgun, a misdemeanor of the second degree.



(R.C. § 2923.211)



Statutory reference:



   Improperly furnishing firearms to a minor, felony, see R.C. § 2923.21



§ 137.09  DISCHARGING FIREARMS.



   (A)   Discharge of firearms on or near prohibited premises.  No
person shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Without permission from the proper officials and subject
to division (B)(1) of this section, discharge a firearm upon or over a
cemetery or within 100 yards of a cemetery;



      (2)   Subject to division (B)(2) of this section, discharge of
a firearm on a lawn, park, pleasure ground, orchard, or other ground
appurtenant to a schoolhouse, church, or inhabited dwelling, the property of
another, or a charitable institution;



      (3)   Discharge a firearm upon or over a public road or
highway.



   (B)   (1)   Division (A)(1) of this section does not apply to a
person who while on the person's own land, discharges a firearm.



      (2)   Division (A)(2) of this section does not apply to a
person who owns any type of real property described in that division and who,
while on the person's own real property, and completely within the boundaries
of such real property, discharges a firearm.



   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
discharge of a firearm on or near prohibited premises. A violation of
division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. A violation of division (A)(3) shall be punished as follows:



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(2) of this
section, a violation of division (A)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.



      (2)   If the violation created a substantial risk of physical
harm to any person, caused serious physical harm to property, caused physical
harm to any person, or caused serious physical harm to any person, a
violation of division (A)(3) is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.



(R.C. § 2923.162)



   (D)   (1)   Hunting near township park.  No person shall hunt,
shoot, or kill game within one-half mile of a township park unless the Board
of Township Park Commissioners has granted permission to kill game not
desired within the limits prohibited by this division.



(R.C. § 3773.06)



      (2)   Whoever violates division (D)(1) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 3773.99(A))



   (E)   Exceptions.  This section shall not prohibit the firing of a
military salute or the firing of weapons by persons of the nation's armed
forces acting under military authority, and shall not apply to law
enforcement officials in the proper enforcement of the law, or to any person
in the proper exercise of the right of self defense, or to any person
otherwise lawfully permitted by proper federal, state or local authorities to
discharge a firearm in a manner contrary to the provisions of this section.



   (F)   Definition.  As used in this section, the term FIREARM
includes but is not limited to airguns and air-rifles.



Statutory reference:



   Improperly discharging firearm at or into habitation or school, felony
offense, see R.C. § 2923.161



§ 137.10  LICENSE OR PERMIT TO POSSESS DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.



   (A)   Upon application to the sheriff of the county or Safety
Director or Police Chief of the municipality where the applicant resides or
has his or her principal place of business, and upon payment of the fee
specified in division (B) of this section, a license or temporary permit
shall be issued to qualified applicants to acquire, possess, carry or use a
dangerous ordnance for the following purposes:



      (1)   Contractors, wreckers, quarry workers, mine operators
and other persons regularly employing explosives in the course of a
legitimate business, with respect to explosives and explosive devices
acquired, possessed, carried or used in the course of such business.



      (2)   Farmers, with respect to explosives and explosive
devices acquired, possessed, carried or used for agricultural purposes on
lands farmed by them.



      (3)   Scientists, engineers, and instructors, with respect to
a dangerous ordnance acquired, possessed, carried or used in the course of
bona fide research or instruction.



      (4)   Financial institutions and armored car company guards,
with respect to automatic firearms lawfully acquired, possessed, carried or
used by any such person while acting within the scope of his or her duties.



      (5)   In the discretion of the issuing authority, any
responsible person, with respect to a dangerous ordnance lawfully acquired,
possessed, carried or used for a legitimate research, scientific,
educational, industrial or other proper purpose.



   (B)   Application for a license or temporary permit under this
section shall be in writing under oath to the sheriff of the county or Safety
Director or Police Chief of the municipality where the applicant resides or
has his or her principal place of business.  The application shall be
accompanied by an application fee of $50 when the application is for a
license, and an application fee of $5 when the application is for a temporary
permit.  The fees shall be paid into the general revenue fund of the county
or municipality.  The application shall contain the following information:



      (1)   The name, age, address, occupation and business address
of the applicant, if he or she is a natural person, or the name, address, and
principal place of business of the applicant if the applicant is a
corporation.



      (2)   A description of the dangerous ordnance for which a
permit is requested.



      (3)   A description of the places where and the manner in
which the dangerous ordnance is to be kept, carried, and used.



      (4)   A statement of the purposes for which the dangerous
ordnance is to be acquired, possessed, carried or used.



      (5)   Such other information as the issuing authority may
require in giving effect to this section.



   (C)   Upon investigation, the issuing authority shall issue a
license or temporary permit only if all of the following apply:



      (1)   The applicant is not otherwise prohibited by law from
acquiring, having, carrying or using a dangerous ordnance.



      (2)   The applicant is 21 years of age or over, if the
applicant is a natural person.



      (3)   It appears that the applicant has sufficient competence
to safely acquire, possess, carry or use the dangerous ordnance, and that
proper precautions will be taken to protect the security of the dangerous
ordnance and ensure the safety of persons and property.



      (4)   It appears that the dangerous ordnance will be lawfully
acquired, possessed, carried and used by the applicant for a legitimate
purpose.



   (D)   The license or temporary permit shall identify the person to
whom it is issued, identify the dangerous ordnance involved and state the
purposes for which the license or temporary permit is issued, state the
expiration date, if any, and list such restrictions on the acquisition,
possession, carriage, or use of the dangerous ordnance as the issuing
authority considers advisable to protect the security of the dangerous
ordnance and ensure the safety of persons and property.



   (E)   A temporary permit shall be issued for the casual use of
explosives and explosive devices, and other consumable dangerous ordnance,
and shall expire within 30 days of its issuance.  A license shall be issued
for the regular use of a consumable dangerous ordnance, which license need
not specify an expiration date, but the issuing authority may specify such
expiration date, not earlier than one year from the date of issuance, as it
considers advisable in view of the nature of the dangerous ordnance and the
purposes for which the license is issued.



   (F)   The dangerous ordnance specified in a license or temporary
permit may be obtained by the holder anywhere in the state.  Pursuant to
R.C. § 2923.18(F), the holder of a license may use such dangerous ordnance
anywhere in the state.  The holder of a temporary permit may use such
dangerous ordnance only within the territorial jurisdiction of the issuing
authority.



   (G)   The issuing authority shall forward to the State Fire Marshal
a copy of each license or temporary permit issued pursuant to this section,
and a copy of each record of a transaction in a dangerous ordnance and of
each report of a lost or stolen dangerous ordnance, given to the local law
enforcement authority as required by R.C. § 2923.20(A)(4) and (5) or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.  The State Fire Marshal will
keep a permanent file of all licenses and temporary permits issued pursuant
to this section, and of all records of transactions in, and losses or thefts
of a dangerous ordnance forwarded by local law enforcement authorities
pursuant to this section.



(R.C. § 2923.18)



§ 137.11  STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES.



   (A)   No person shall store at any time in any powder house or
magazine within the municipal limits a quantity of gunpowder or other similar
explosive weighing in excess of 100 pounds.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than
$150. Each day on which the violation occurs may be charged as a separate
violation.



(‘67 Code, § 134.03) (Am. Ord. 2-2004, passed 4-7-04)



§ 137.12  BLASTING PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall cause a blast to occur within the municipality
without making application in writing beforehand, setting forth the exact
nature of the intended operation, and receiving a permit to blast from the
street commissioner.  Before granting such permit the street commissioner
may require the applicant to provide a bond to indemnify the municipality and
all other persons against injury or damages which might result from the
proposed blasting.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than
$500 or imprisoned not more than 6 months, or both.



(‘67 Code, § 134.04)



§ 137.13  SALE AND USE OF FIREWORKS.



   Except as provided in R.C. § 3743.32, no person shall possess for sale
at retail, or sell at retail, or discharge, ignite, or explode any
fireworks.  FIREWORKS does not include toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or
other devices in which paper or plastic caps containing .25 grains or less of
explosive compound are used, providing they are so constructed that the hand
cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion and toy
pistol paper or plastic caps which contain .20 grains or less of explosive
mixture, the sale, and use of which is permitted.



(Ord. 5-1981, passed 3-4-81; Am. Ord. 20-1989, passed 6-7-89)



§ 137.14  DEFACED FIREARMS.



   (A)   No person shall do either of the following:



      (1)   Change, alter, remove, or obliterate the name of the
manufacturer, model, manufacturer's serial number, or other mark of
identification on a firearm.



      (2)   Possess a firearm knowing or having reasonable cause to
believe that the name of the manufacturer, model, manufacturer's serial
number, or other mark of identification on the firearm has been changed,
altered, removed, or obliterated.



   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) of this section is
guilty of defacing identification marks of a firearm. Except as otherwise
provided in this division, defacing identification marks of a firearm is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (A)(1) of this
section, defacing identification marks of a firearm is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(2) of this section is
guilty of possessing a defaced firearm. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, possessing a defaced firearm is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
violation of division (A)(2) of this section, possessing a defaced firearm is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



   (C)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any firearm on
which no manufacturer's serial number was inscribed at the time of its
manufacture.



(R.C. § 2923.201)



§ 137.15  POSSESSION OF AN OBJECT INDISTINGUISHABLE FROM A FIREARM IN A
SCHOOL SAFETY ZONE.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly possess an object in a school safety
zone if both of the following apply:



      (1)   The object is indistinguishable from a firearm, whether
or not the object is capable of being fired.



      (2)   The person indicates that the person possesses the
object and that it is a firearm, or the person knowingly displays or
brandishes the object and indicates that it is a firearm.



   (B)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:



         (a)   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any
other state or the United States, or a law enforcement officer, who is
authorized to carry deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance and is acting within
the scope of the officer's, agent's, or employee's duties, a security officer
employed by a board of education or governing body of a school during the
time that the security officer is on duty pursuant to that contract of
employment, or any other person who has written authorization from the board
of education or governing body of a school to convey deadly weapons or
dangerous ordnance into a school safety zone or to possess a deadly weapon or
dangerous ordnance in a school safety zone and who conveys or possesses the
deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance in accordance with that authorization;



         (b)   Any person who is employed in this state, who is
authorized to carry deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance, and who is subject
to and in compliance with the requirements of R.C. § 109.801, unless the
appointing authority of the person has expressly specified that the exemption
provided in this division (B)(1)(b) does not apply to the person.



      (2)   This section does not apply to premises upon which home
schooling is conducted. This section also does not apply to a school
administrator, teacher or employee who possesses an object that is
indistinguishable from a firearm for legitimate school purposes during the
course of employment, a student who uses an object that is indistinguishable
from a firearm under the direction of a school administrator, teacher or
employee, or any other person who, with the express prior approval of a
school administrator, possesses an object that is indistinguishable from a
firearm for a legitimate purpose, including the use of the object in a
ceremonial activity, a play, re-enactment or other dramatic presentation, or
a ROTC activity or another similar use of the object.



      (3)   This section does not apply to a person who conveys or
attempts to convey a handgun into, or possesses a handgun in, a school safety
zone if, at the time of that conveyance, attempted conveyance, or possession
of the handgun, all of the following apply:



         (a)   The person does not enter into a school building
or onto school premises and is not at a school activity.



         (b)   The person is carrying a valid concealed handgun
license.



         (c)   The person is in the school safety zone in
accordance with 18 U.S.C. § 922(q)(2)(B).



         (d)   The person is not knowingly in a place described
in R.C. § 2923.126(B)(1) or (B)(3) through (B)(10).



      (4)   This section does not apply to a person who conveys or
attempts to convey a handgun into, or possesses a handgun in, a school safety
zone if at the time of that conveyance, attempted conveyance, or possession
of the handgun all of the following apply:



         (a)   The person is carrying a valid concealed handgun
license.



         (b)   The person is the driver or passenger in a motor
vehicle and is in the school safety zone while immediately in the process of
picking up or dropping off a child.



         (c)   The person is not in violation of section R.C. §
2923.16.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal possession
of an object indistinguishable from a firearm in a school safety zone. Except
as otherwise provided in this division, illegal possession of an object
indistinguishable from a firearm in a school safety zone is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a
violation of this section, illegal possession of an object indistinguishable
from a firearm in a school safety zone is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



   (D)   (1)   In addition to any other penalty imposed upon a
person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this section,
and subject to division (D)(2) of this section, if the offender has not
attained 19 years of age, regardless of whether the offender is attending or
is enrolled in a school operated by a board of education or for which the
State Board of Education prescribes minimum standards under R.C. § 3301.07,
the court shall impose upon the offender a class four suspension of the
offender's probationary driver's license, restricted license, driver's
license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, or
probationary commercial driver's license that then is in effect from the
range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4) and shall deny the offender the
issuance of any permit or license of that type during the period of the
suspension. If the offender is not a resident of this state, the court shall
impose a class four suspension of the nonresident operating privilege of the
offender from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4).



      (2)   If the offender shows good cause why the court should
not suspend one of the types of licenses, permits or privileges specified in
division (D)(1) of this section or deny the issuance of one of the temporary
instruction permits specified in division (D)(1) of this section, the court
in its discretion may choose not to impose the suspension, revocation or
denial required in division (D)(1) of this section, but the court, in its
discretion, instead may require the offender to perform community service for
a number of hours determined by the court.



   (E)   As used in this section, OBJECT THAT IS INDISTINGUISHABLE FROM
A FIREARM means an object made, constructed or altered so that, to a
reasonable person without specialized training in firearms, the object
appears to be a firearm.



(R.C. § 2923.122(C) - (G))



Statutory reference:



   Conveyance or possession of deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance in a
school safety zone, felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.122(A) and (B)



§ 137.16  POSSESSION OF DEADLY WEAPON WHILE UNDER DETENTION.



   (A)   As used in this section, DETENTION and DETENTION FACILITY have
the same meanings as in R.C. § 2921.01.



   (B)   No person under detention at a detention facility shall
possess a deadly weapon.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possession of a
deadly weapon while under detention.



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(2) of this
section, possession of a deadly weapon while under detention is a felony to
be prosecuted under state law.



      (2)   If the offender, at the time of the commission of the
offense, was under detention as an alleged or adjudicated delinquent child or
unruly child and if at the time the offender commits the act for which the
offender was under detention it would not be a felony if committed by an
adult, possession of a deadly weapon while under detention is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.



(R.C. § 2923.131)



Statutory reference:



   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention, felony offenses, see
R.C. § 2923.131



§ 137.17  CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSES: POSSESSION OF A REVOKED OR SUSPENDED
LICENSE; ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS; POSTING OF SIGNS PROHIBITING POSSESSION.



   (A)   Possession of a revoked or suspended concealed handgun license.



      (1)   No person, except in the performance of official duties,
shall possess a concealed handgun license that was issued and that has been
revoked or suspended.



      (2)   Whoever violates this division (A) is guilty of
possessing a revoked or suspended concealed handgun license, a misdemeanor of
the third degree.



(R.C. § 2923.1211(B), (C))



   (B)   Additional restrictions. Pursuant to R.C. § 2923.126:



      (1)   (a)   A concealed handgun license that is issued
under R.C. § 2923.125 shall expire five years after the date of issuance. A
licensee who has been issued a license under that section shall be granted a
grace period of 30 days after the licensee’s license expires during which
the licensee’s license remains valid. Except as provided in divisions
(B)(2) and (B)(3) of this section, a licensee who has been issued a concealed
handgun license under R.C. § 2923.125 or 2923.1213 may carry a concealed
handgun anywhere in this state if the licensee also carries a valid license
and valid identification when the licensee is in actual possession of a
concealed handgun. The licensee shall give notice of any change in the
licensee’s residence address to the sheriff who issued the license within
45 days after that change.



         (b)   If a licensee is the driver or an occupant of a
motor vehicle that is stopped as the result of a traffic stop or a stop for
another law enforcement purpose and if the licensee is transporting or has a
loaded handgun in the motor vehicle at that time, the licensee shall promptly
inform any law enforcement officer who approaches the vehicle while stopped
that the licensee has been issued a concealed handgun license and that the
licensee currently possesses or has a loaded handgun; the licensee shall not
knowingly disregard or fail to comply with lawful orders of a law enforcement
officer given while the motor vehicle is stopped, knowingly fail to remain in
the motor vehicle while stopped, or knowingly fail to keep the licensee's
hands in plain sight after any law enforcement officer begins approaching the
licensee while stopped and before the officer leaves, unless directed
otherwise by a law enforcement officer; and the licensee shall not knowingly
have contact with the loaded handgun by touching it with the licensee's hands
or fingers, in any manner in violation of R.C. § 2923.16(E), after any law
enforcement officer begins approaching the licensee while stopped and before
the officer leaves. Additionally, if a licensee is the driver or an occupant
of a commercial motor vehicle that is stopped by an employee of the motor
carrier enforcement unit for the purposes defined in R.C. § 5503.04 and if
the licensee is transporting or has a loaded handgun in the commercial motor
vehicle at that time, the licensee shall promptly inform the employee of the
unit who approaches the vehicle while stopped that the licensee has been
issued a concealed handgun license and that the licensee currently possesses
or has a loaded handgun.



         (c)   If a licensee is stopped for a law enforcement
purpose and if the licensee is carrying a concealed handgun at the time the
officer approaches, the licensee shall promptly inform any law enforcement
officer who approaches the licensee while stopped that the licensee has been
issued a concealed handgun license and that the licensee currently is
carrying a concealed handgun; the licensee shall not knowingly disregard or
fail to comply with lawful orders of a law enforcement officer given while
the licensee is stopped or knowingly fail to keep the licensee’s hands in
plain sight after any law enforcement officer begins approaching the licensee
while stopped and before the officer leaves, unless directed otherwise by a
law enforcement officer; and the licensee shall not knowingly remove, attempt
to remove, grasp, or hold the loaded handgun or knowingly have contact with
the loaded handgun by touching it with the licensee’s hands or fingers, in
any manner in violation of R.C. § 2923.12(B), after any law enforcement
officer begins approaching the licensee while stopped and before the officer
leaves.



      (2)   A valid concealed handgun license does not authorize the
licensee to carry a concealed handgun in any manner prohibited under R.C. §
2923.12(B) or in any manner prohibited under R.C. § 2923.16. A valid license
does not authorize the licensee to carry a concealed handgun into any of the
following places:



         (a)   A police station, sheriff’s office, or state
highway patrol station, premises controlled by the Bureau of Criminal
Identification and Investigation, a state correctional institution, jail,
workhouse, or other detention facility, an airport passenger terminal, or an
institution that is maintained, operated, managed, and governed pursuant to
R.C. § 5119.14(A) or R.C. § 5123.03 (A)(1);



         (b)   A school safety zone if the licensee’s carrying
the concealed handgun is in violation of R.C. § 2923.122;



         (c)   A courthouse or another building or structure in
which a courtroom is located, in violation of R.C. § 2923.123;



         (d)   Any premises or open air arena for which a D
permit has been issued under R.C. Chapter 4303 if the licensee’s carrying
the concealed handgun is in violation of R.C. § 2923.121;



         (e)   Any premises owned or leased by any public or
private college, university, or other institution of higher education, unless
the handgun is in a locked motor vehicle or the licensee is in the immediate
process of placing the handgun in a locked motor vehicle;



         (f)   Any church, synagogue, mosque, or other place of
worship, unless the church, synagogue, mosque, or other place of worship
posts or permits otherwise;



         (g)   A child day-care center, a type A family day-care
home, or a type B family day-care home, except that this division does not
prohibit a licensee who resides in a type A family day-care home or a type B
family day-care home from carrying a concealed handgun at any time in any
part of the home that is not dedicated or used for day-care purposes, or from
carrying a concealed handgun in a part of the home that is dedicated or used
for day-care purposes at any time during which no children, other than
children of that licensee, are in the home;



         (h)   An aircraft that is in, or intended for operation
in, foreign air transportation, interstate air transportation, intrastate air
transportation, or the transportation of mail by aircraft;



         (i)   Any building that is a government facility of this
state or a political subdivision of this state and that is not a building
that is used primarily as a shelter, restroom, parking facility for motor
vehicles, or rest facility and is not a courthouse or other building or
structure in which a courtroom is located that is subject to division
(B)(2)(c) of this section;



         (j)   A place in which federal law prohibits the
carrying of handguns.



      (3)   (a)   Nothing in this division (B) shall negate or
restrict a rule, policy, or practice of a private employer that is not a
private college, university, or other institution of higher education
concerning or prohibiting the presence of firearms on the private
employer’s premises or property, including motor vehicles owned by the
private employer. Nothing in this division (B) shall require a private
employer of that nature to adopt a rule, policy, or practice concerning or
prohibiting the presence of firearms on the private employer’s premises or
property, including motor vehicles owned by the private employer.



         (b)   1.   A private employer shall be immune from
liability in a civil action for any injury, death, or loss to person or
property that allegedly was caused by or related to a licensee bringing a
handgun onto the premises or property of the private employer, including
motor vehicles owned by the private employer, unless the private employer
acted with malicious purpose. A private employer is immune from liability in
a civil action for any injury, death, or loss to person or property that
allegedly was caused by or related to the private employer’s decision to
permit a licensee to bring, or prohibit a licensee from bringing, a handgun
onto the premises or property of the private employer. As used in this
division, PRIVATE EMPLOYER includes a private college, university, or other
institution of higher education.



            2.   A political subdivision shall be immune from
liability in a civil action, to the extent and in the manner provided in R.C.
Chapter 2744, for any injury, death, or loss to person or property that
allegedly was caused by or related to a licensee bringing a handgun onto any
premises or property owned, leased, or otherwise under the control of the
political subdivision. As used in this division, POLITICAL SUBDIVISION has
the same meaning as in R.C. § 2744.01.



         (c)   1.   Except as provided in division (B)(3)(c)2.
of this section, the owner or person in control of private land or premises,
and a private person or entity leasing land or premises owned by the state,
the United States, or a political subdivision of the state or the United
States, may post a sign in a conspicuous location on that land or on those
premises prohibiting persons from carrying firearms or concealed firearms on
or onto that land or those premises. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, a person who knowingly violates a posted prohibition of that nature
is guilty of criminal trespass in violation of R.C. § 2911.21(A)(4) and is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If a person knowingly violates
a posted prohibition of that nature and the posted land or premises primarily
was a parking lot or other parking facility, the person is not guilty of
criminal trespass under R.C. 2911.21 or under any other criminal law of this
state or criminal law, ordinance, or resolution of a political subdivision of
this state, and instead is subject only to a civil cause of action for
trespass based on the violation.



            2.   A landlord may not prohibit or restrict a
tenant who is a licensee and who on or after September 9, 2008 enters into a
rental agreement with the landlord for the use of residential premises, and
the tenant’s guest while the tenant is present, from lawfully carrying or
possessing a handgun on those residential premises.



            3.   As used in division (B)(3)(c) of this section:



               LANDLOR D. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5321.01.



               RENTAL AGREEMENT. Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 5321.01.



               RESIDENTIAL PREMISES. Has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 5321.01, except the term does not include a dwelling unit that is
owned or operated by a college or university.



               TENANT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5321.01.



      (4)   A person who holds a valid concealed handgun license
issued by another state that is recognized by the Attorney General pursuant
to a reciprocity agreement entered into pursuant to R.C. § 109.69 or a
person who holds a valid concealed handgun license under the circumstances
described in R.C. § 109.69(B) has the same right to carry a concealed
handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license
under R.C. § 2923.125 and is subject to the same restrictions that apply to
a person who carries a license issued under that section.



      (5)   A peace officer has the same right to carry a concealed
handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license
under R.C. § 2923.125. For purposes of reciprocity with other states, a
peace officer shall be considered to be a licensee in this state.



      (6)   (a)   A qualified retired peace officer who possesses
a retired peace officer identification card issued pursuant to division
(B)(6)(b) of this section and a valid firearms requalification certification
issued pursuant to division (B)(6)(c) of this section has the same right to
carry a concealed handgun in this state as a person who was issued a
concealed handgun license under R.C. § 2923.125 and is subject to the same
restrictions that apply to a person who carries a license issued under that
section. For purposes of reciprocity with other states, a qualified retired
peace officer who possesses a retired peace officer identification card
issued pursuant to division (B)(6)(b) of this section and a valid firearms
requalification certification issued pursuant to division (B)(6)(c) of this
section shall be considered to be a licensee in this state.



         (b)   1.   Each public agency of this state or of a
political subdivision of this state that is served by one or more peace
officers shall issue a retired peace officer identification card to any
person who retired from service as a peace officer with that agency, if the
issuance is in accordance with the agency’s policies and procedures and if
the person, with respect to the person’s service with that agency,
satisfies all of the following:



               a.   The person retired in good standing
from service as a peace officer with the public agency, and the retirement
was not for reasons of mental instability.



               b.    Before retiring from service as a
peace officer with that agency, the person was authorized to engage in or
supervise the prevention, detection, investigation, or prosecution of, or the
incarceration of any person for, any violation of law and the person had
statutory powers of arrest.



               c.   At the time of the person’s
retirement as a peace officer with that agency, the person was trained and
qualified to carry firearms in the performance of the peace officer’s
duties.



               d.    Before retiring from service as a
peace officer with that agency, the person was regularly employed as a peace
officer for an aggregate of 15 years or more, or, in the alternative, the
person retired from service as a peace officer with that agency, after
completing any applicable probationary period of that service, due to a
service-connected disability, as determined by the agency.



            2.   A retired peace officer identification card
issued to a person under division (B)(6)(b)1. of this section shall identify
the person by name, contain a photograph of the person, identify the public
agency of this state or of the political subdivision of this state from which
the person retired as a peace officer and that is issuing the identification
card, and specify that the person retired in good standing from service as a
peace officer with the issuing public agency and satisfies the criteria set
forth in divisions (B)(6)(b)1.a. to (B)(6)(B)1.d. of this section. In
addition to the required content specified in this division, a retired peace
officer identification card issued to a person under division (B)(6)(b)1. of
this section may include the firearms requalification certification described
in division (B)(6)(c) of this section, and if the identification card
includes that certification, the identification card shall serve as the
firearms requalification certification for the retired peace officer. If the
issuing public agency issues credentials to active law enforcement officers
who serve the agency, the agency may comply with division (B)(6)(b)1. of this
section by issuing the same credentials to persons who retired from service
as a peace officer with the agency and who satisfy the criteria set forth in
divisions (B)(6)(b)1.a. to (B)(6)(b)1.d. of this section, provided that the
credentials so issued to retired peace officers are stamped with the word
“RETIRED”.



            3.   A public agency of this state or of a
political subdivision of this state may charge persons who retired from
service as a peace officer with the agency a reasonable fee for issuing to
the person a retired peace officer identification card pursuant to division
(B)(6)(b)1. of this section.



         (c)   1.   If a person retired from service as a
peace officer with a public agency of this state or of a political
subdivision of this state and the person satisfies the criteria set forth in
divisions (B)(6)(b)1.a. to (B)(6)(b)1.d. of this section, the public agency
may provide the retired peace officer with the opportunity to attend a
firearms requalification program that is approved for purposes of firearms
requalification required under R.C. § 109.801. The retired peace officer may
be required to pay the cost of the course.



            2.   If a retired peace officer who satisfies the
criteria set forth in divisions (B)(6)(b)1.a. to (B)(6)(b)1.d. of this
section attends a firearms requalification program that is approved for
purposes of firearms requalification required under R.C. § 109.801, the
retired peace officer’s successful completion of the firearms
requalification program requalifies the retired peace officer for purposes of
division (B)(6) of this section for five years from the date on which the
program was successfully completed, and the requalification is valid during
that five-year period. If a retired peace officer who satisfies the criteria
set forth in divisions (B)(6)(b)1.a. to (B)(6)(b)1.d. of this section
satisfactorily completes such a firearms requalification program, the retired
peace officer shall be issued a firearms requalification certification that
identifies the retired peace officer by name, identifies the entity that
taught the program, specifies that the retired peace officer successfully
completed the program, specifies the date on which the course was
successfully completed, and specifies that the requalification is valid for
five years from that date of successful completion. The firearms
requalification certification for a retired peace officer may be included in
the retired peace officer identification card issued to the retired peace
officer under division (B)(6)(b) of this section.



            3.   A retired peace officer who attends a
firearms requalification program that is approved for purposes of firearms
requalification required under R.C. § 109.801 may be required to pay the
cost of the program.



      (7)   As used in division (B) of this section:



         GOVERNMENT FACILITY OF THIS STATE OR A POLITICAL
SUBDIVISION OF THIS STATE. Means any of the following:



            1.   A building or part of a building that is
owned or leased by the government of this state or a political subdivision of
this state and where employees of the government of this state or the
political subdivision regularly are present for the purpose of performing
their official duties as employees of the state or political subdivision;



            2.   The office of a deputy registrar serving
pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4503 that is used to perform deputy registrar
functions.



         QUALIFIED RETIRED PEACE OFFICER. Means a person who
satisfies all of the following:



            1.   The person satisfies the criteria set forth
in divisions (B)(6)(b)1.a. to (B)(6)(b)1.d. of this section.



            2.   The person is not under the influence of
alcohol or another intoxicating or hallucinatory drug or substance.



            3.   The person is not prohibited by federal law
from receiving firearms.



         RETIRED PEACE OFFICER IDENTIFICATION CARD. Means an
identification card that is issued pursuant to division (B)(6)(b) of this
section to a person who is a retired peace officer.



(R.C. § 2923.126)



   (C)   Posting of signs prohibiting possession. Pursuant to R.C. §
2923.1212:



      (1)   The following persons, boards, and entities, or
designees, shall post in the following locations a sign that contains a
statement in substantially the following form: “Unless otherwise authorized
by law, pursuant to the Ohio Revised Code, no person shall knowingly possess,
have under the person’s control, convey, or attempt to convey a deadly
weapon or dangerous ordnance onto these premises.”



         (a)   The Director of Public Safety or the person or
board charged with the erection, maintenance, or repair of police stations,
municipal jails, and the municipal courthouse and courtrooms in a conspicuous
location at all police stations, municipal jails, and municipal courthouses
and courtrooms;



         (b)   The Sheriff or Sheriff’s designee who has charge
of the Sheriff’s office in a conspicuous location in that office;



         (c)   The Superintendent of the State Highway Patrol or
the Superintendent’s designee in a conspicuous location at all state
highway patrol stations;



         (d)   Each sheriff, chief of police, or person in charge
of every county, multi-county, municipal, municipal-county, or
multi-county/municipal jail or workhouse, community-based correctional
facility, halfway house, alternative residential facility, or other local or
state correctional institution or detention facility within the state, or
that person’s designee, in a conspicuous location at that facility under
that person’s charge;



         (e)   The board of trustees of a regional airport
authority, chief administrative officer of an airport facility, or other
person in charge of an airport facility in a conspicuous location at each
airport facility under that person’s control;



         (f)   The officer or officer’s designee who has charge
of a courthouse or the building or structure in which a courtroom is located
in a conspicuous location in that building or structure;



         (g)   The Superintendent of the Bureau of Criminal
Identification and Investigation or the Superintendent’s designee in a
conspicuous location in all premises controlled by that Bureau;



         (h)   The owner, administrator, or operator of a child
day-care center, a type A family day-care home, or a type B family day-care
home;



         (i)   The officer of this state or of a political
subdivision of this state, or the officer’s designee, who has charge of a
building that is a government facility of this state or the political
subdivision of this state, as defined in R.C. § 2923.126, and that is not a
building that is used primarily as a shelter, restroom, parking facility for
motor vehicles, or rest facility and is not a courthouse or other building or
structure in which a courtroom is located that is subject to R.C. §
2923.126(B)(3).



      (2)   The following boards, bodies, and persons, or designees,
shall post in the following locations a sign that contains a statement in
substantially the following form: “Unless otherwise authorized by law,
pursuant to R.C. § 2923.122, no person shall knowingly possess, have under
the person’s control, convey, or attempt to convey a deadly weapon or
dangerous ordnance into a school safety zone.”



         (a)   A board of education of a city, local, exempted
village, or joint vocational school district or that board’s designee in a
conspicuous location in each building and on each parcel of real property
owned or controlled by the board;



         (b)   A governing body of a school for which the State
Board of Education prescribes minimum standards under R.C. § 3301.07 or that
body’s designee in a conspicuous location in each building and on each
parcel of real property owned or controlled by the school;



         (c)   The principal or chief administrative officer of a
nonpublic school in a conspicuous location on property owned or controlled by
that nonpublic school.



(R.C. § 2923.1212)



CHAPTER 138:  DRUG OFFENSES



Section



   138.01   Definitions



   138.02   Trafficking in controlled substances; gift of marihuana



   138.03   Drug possession offenses



   138.04   Possessing drug abuse instruments



   138.05   Permitting drug abuse



   138.06   Illegal cultivation of marihuana



   138.07   Abusing harmful intoxicants



   138.08   Illegal dispensing of drug samples



   138.09   Federal prosecution bar to municipal prosecution



   138.10   Nitrous oxide: improper dispensing or distribution;
possession in a motor vehicle



   138.11   Laboratory report required



   138.12   Counterfeit controlled substances



   138.13   Use, possession, or sale of drug paraphernalia



   138.14   Controlled substance or prescription labels



   138.15   Possession, sale and disposal of hypodermics



   138.16   Controlled substance schedules



   138.17   Unlawful furnishing of prescription to enable persons to be
issued handicapped parking placards or license plates



   138.18   Pseudoephedrine sales



   138.19   Diversion program



Statutory reference:



   Controlled substances, regulation of pharmacists and other
professionals, see R.C. Chapters 3719 and 4729



   Conviction of professionally licensed persons - report to licensing
board, see R.C. § 2925.38



   Criminal and civil forfeiture of property for felony drug abuse
offenses, see R.C. §§ 2925.41 et seq.



   Destruction of chemicals used to produce methamphetamine; preservation
of samples, see R.C. § 2925.52



   Driver's license suspension after certain drug convictions, see R.C. §
4510.07



   Tampering with drugs, felony offense, see R.C. § 2925.24



§ 138.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Words,
terms and phrases and their derivatives used in this chapter which are not
defined in this section shall have the meanings given to them in the Ohio
Revised Code.



   ADMINISTER. The direct application of a drug, whether by injection,
inhalation, ingestion, or any other means to a person or an animal.



   ADULTERATE. To cause a drug to be adulterated as described in R.C. §
3715.63.



   BENZODIAZEPINE. A controlled substance that has United States Food and
Drug Administration approved labeling indicating that it is a benzodiazepine,
benzodiazepine derivative, triazolobenzodiazepine, or triazolobenzodiazepine
derivative, including the following drugs and their varying salt forms or
chemical congeners: alprazolam, chlordiazepoxide hydrochloride, clobazam,
clonazepam, clorazepate, diazepam, estazolam, flurazepam hydrochloride,
lorazepam, midazolam, oxazepam, quazepam, temazepam, and triazolam.



   BULK AMOUNT. Of a controlled substance means any of the following:



      (1)   For any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance
included in Schedule I, Schedule II or Schedule III, with the exception of
controlled substance analogs, marihuana, cocaine, L.S.D., heroin, and hashish
and except as provided in division (2) or (5) of this definition, whichever
of the following is applicable:



         (a)   An amount equal to or exceeding ten grams or 25
unit doses of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule I opiate or opium derivative;



         (b)   An amount equal to or exceeding ten grams of a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount
of raw or gum opium;



         (c)   An amount equal to or exceeding 30 grams or ten
unit doses of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule I hallucinogen other than
tetrahydrocannabinol or lysergic acid amide, or a Schedule I stimulant or
depressant;



         (d)   An amount equal to or exceeding 20 grams or five
times the maximum daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard
pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II opiate or opium
derivative;



         (e)   An amount equal to or exceeding five grams or ten
unit doses of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or
contains any amount of phencyclidine;



         (f)   An amount equal to or exceeding 120 grams or 30
times the maximum daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard
pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II stimulant that is
in a final dosage form manufactured by a person authorized by the Federal
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. §§ 301 et seq., as amended) and the
federal drug abuse control laws, as defined in this section, that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule II depressant substance or a Schedule II
hallucinogenic substance;



         (g)   An amount equal to or exceeding three grams of a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount
of a Schedule II stimulant, or any of its salts or isomers, that is not in a
final dosage form manufactured by a person authorized by the Federal Food,
Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. §§ 301 et seq., as amended) and the
federal drug abuse control laws;



      (2)   An amount equal to or exceeding 120 grams or 30 times
the maximum daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard
pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule III or IV substance
other than an anabolic steroid or a Schedule III opiate or opium derivative;



      (3)   An amount equal to or exceeding 20 grams or five times
the maximum daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard
pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule III opiate or opium
derivative;



      (4)   An amount equal to or exceeding 250 milliliters or 250
grams of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains
any amount of a Schedule V substance.



      (5)   An amount equal to or exceeding 200 solid dosage units,
16 grams, or 16 milliliters of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance
that is or contains any amount of a Schedule III anabolic steroid.



   CERTIFIED GRIEVANCE COMMITTEE. A duly constituted and organized
committee of the Ohio State Bar Association or of one or more local bar
associations of the state that complies with the criteria set forth in Rule
V, Section 6 of the Rules for the Government of the Bar of Ohio.



   COCAINE. Any of the following:



      (1)   A cocaine salt, isomer, or derivative, a salt of a
cocaine isomer or derivative, or the base form of cocaine.



      (2)   Coca leaves or a salt, compound, derivative, or
preparation of coca leaves, including ecgonine, a salt, isomer, or derivative
of ecgonine, or a salt of an isomer or derivative of ecgonine.



      (3)   A salt, compound, derivative, or preparation of a
substance identified in division (1) or (2) of this definition that is
chemically equivalent to or identical with any of those substances, except
that the substances shall not include decocainized coca leaves or extraction
of coca leaves if the extractions do not contain cocaine or ecgonine.



   COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A JUVENILE. An offense is “committed in
the vicinity of a juvenile” if the offender commits the offense within 100
feet of a juvenile or within the view of a juvenile, regardless of whether
the offender knows the age of the juvenile, whether the offender knows the
offense is being committed within 100 feet of or within view of the juvenile,
or whether the juvenile actually views the commission of the offense.



   COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A SCHOOL. An offense is “committed in
the vicinity of a school” if the offender commits the offense on school
premises, in a school building, or within 1,000 feet of the boundaries of any
school premises, regardless of whether the offender knows the offense is
being committed on school premises, in a school building, or within 1,000
feet of the boundaries of any school premises.



   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. A drug, compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance included in Schedule I, II, III, IV, or V of R.C. § 3719.41.



   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE ANALOG.



      (1)   The phrase means, except as provided in division (2) of
this definition, a substance to which both of the following apply:



         (a)   The chemical structure of the substance is
substantially similar to the structure of a controlled substance in Schedule
I or II.



         (b)   One of the following applies regarding the
substance:



            1.   The substance has a stimulant, depressant, or
hallucinogenic effect on the central nervous system that is substantially
similar to or greater than the stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic
effect on the central nervous system of a controlled substance in Schedule I
or II.



            2.   With respect to a particular person, that
person represents or intends the substance to have a stimulant, depressant,
or hallucinogenic effect on the central nervous system that is substantially
similar to or greater than the stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic
effect on the central nervous system of a controlled substance in Schedule I
or II.



      (2)   The phrase does not include any of the following:



         (a)   A controlled substance;



         (b)   Any substance for which there is an approved new
drug application;



         (c)   With respect to a particular person, any substance
if an exemption is in effect for investigational use for that person pursuant
to federal law to the extent that conduct with respect to that substance is
pursuant to that exemption;



         (d)   Any substance to the extent it is not intended for
human consumption before the exemption described in division (2)(c) of this
definition takes effect with respect to that substance.



      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 2925.03 or R.C.
§ 2925.11, a controlled substance analog, to the extent intended for human
consumption, shall be treated for purposes of any provision of this Code or
the Ohio Revised Code as a controlled substance in Schedule I.



   COUNTERFEIT CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Any of the following:



      (1)   Any drug that bears, or whose container or label bears,
a trademark, trade name, or other identifying mark used without authorization
of the owner of rights to the trademark, trade name, or identifying mark.



      (2)   Any unmarked or unlabeled substance that is represented
to be a controlled substance manufactured, processed, packed, or distributed
by a person other than the person that manufactured, processed, packed, or
distributed it.



      (3)   Any substance that is represented to be a controlled
substance but is not a controlled substance or is a different controlled
substance.



      (4)   Any substance other than a controlled substance that a
reasonable person would believe to be a controlled substance because of its
similarity in shape, size, and color, or its markings, labeling, packaging,
distribution, or the price for which it is sold or offered for sale.



   CULTIVATE. Includes planting, watering, fertilizing or tilling.



   DANGEROUS DRUG. Any of the following:



      (1)   Any drug to which either of the following applies:



         (a)   Under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, is
required to bear a label containing the legend “Caution: Federal law
prohibits dispensing without a prescription” or “Caution: Federal law
restricts this drug to use by or on the order of a licensed veterinarian”
or any similar restrictive statement, or may be dispensed only upon a
prescription.



         (b)   Under R.C. Chapter 3715 or 3719, may be dispensed
only upon a prescription.



      (2)   Any drug that contains a Schedule V controlled substance
and that is exempt from R.C. Chapter 3719 or to which that chapter does not
apply.



      (3)   Any drug intended for administration by injection into
the human body other than through a natural orifice of the human body.



   DECEPTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.



   DISCIPLINARY COUNSEL. The disciplinary counsel appointed by the Board
of Commissioners on Grievances and Discipline of the Ohio Supreme Court under
the Rules for the Government of the Bar of Ohio.



   DISPENSE. Means to sell, leave with, give away, dispose of, or deliver.



   DISTRIBUTE. Means to deal in, ship, transport or deliver, but does not
include administering or dispensing a drug.



   DRUG. Any of the following:



      (1)   Any article recognized in the official United States
pharmacopeia, national formulary, or any supplement intended for use in the
diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease in humans or
other animals.



      (2)   Any other article intended for use in the diagnosis,
cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease in humans or other
animals.



      (3)   Any article, other than food, intended to affect the
structure or any function of the body of humans or other animals.



      (4)   Any article intended for use as a component of any
article specified in division (1), (2), or (3) above; but does not include
devices or their components, parts, or accessories.



   DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Any of the following:



      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2913.02(A) that constitutes theft
of drugs, or any violation of R.C. § 2925.02, 2925.03, 2925.04, 2925.041,
2925.05, 2925.06, 2925.11, 2925.12, 2925.13, 2925.22, 2925.23, 2925.24,
2925.31, 2925.32, 2925.36, or 2925.37.



      (2)   A violation of an existing or former law of a
municipality, state or any other state or of the United States, that is
substantially equivalent to any section listed in division (1) of this
definition.



      (3)   An offense under an existing or former law of a
municipality, state or any other state, or of the United States, of which
planting, cultivating, harvesting, processing, making, manufacturing,
producing, shipping, transporting, delivering, acquiring, possessing,
storing, distributing, dispensing, selling, inducing another to use,
administering to another, using, or otherwise dealing with a controlled
substance is an element.



      (4)   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity
in committing or attempting to commit, any offense under division (1), (2),
or (3) of this definition.



   DRUG DEPENDENT PERSON. Any person who, by reason of the use of any drug
of abuse, is physically and/or psychologically dependent upon the use of such
drug to the detriment of the person’s health or welfare.



   DRUG OF ABUSE. Any controlled substance, any harmful intoxicant, and
any dangerous drug, as defined in this section.



   EMERGENCY FACILITY. A hospital emergency department or any other
facility that provides emergency care.



   FEDERAL DRUG ABUSE CONTROL LAWS. The “Comprehensive Drug Abuse
Prevention and Control Act of 1970,” 21 U.S.C. §§ 801 et seq., as amended.



   FELONY DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Any drug abuse offense that would constitute
a felony under the laws of this state, any other state, or the United States.



   HARMFUL INTOXICANT. Does not include beer or intoxicating liquor, but
means any of the following:



      (1)   Any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance the
gas, fumes, or vapor of which when inhaled can induce intoxication,
excitement, giddiness, irrational behavior, depression, stupefaction,
paralysis, unconsciousness, asphyxiation, or other harmful physiological
effects, and includes but is not limited to any of the following:



         (a)   Any volatile organic solvent, plastic cement,
model cement, fingernail polish remover, lacquer thinner, cleaning fluid,
gasoline, or other preparation containing a volatile organic solvent.



         (b)   Any aerosol propellant.



         (c)   Any fluorocarbon refrigerant.



         (d)   Any anesthetic gas.



      (2)   Gamma Butyrolactone;



      (3)   1,4 Butanediol.



   HASHISH. The resin or a preparation of the resin contained in
marihuana, whether in solid form or in a liquid concentrate, liquid extract,
or liquid distillate form.



   HYPODERMIC. A hypodermic syringe or needle, or other instrument or
device for the injection of medication.



   JUVENILE. A person under 18 years of age.



   LABORATORY. A laboratory approved by the State Board of Pharmacy as
proper to be entrusted with the custody of controlled substances and the use
of controlled substances for scientific and clinical purposes and for
purposes of instruction.



   LAWFUL PRESCRIPTION. A prescription that is issued for a legitimate
medical purpose by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs, that is not altered or forged, and that was not obtained by means of
deception or by the commission of any theft offense.



   LICENSED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL AUTHORIZED TO PRESCRIBE DRUGS or
PRESCRIBER. An individual who is authorized by law to prescribe drugs or
dangerous drugs or drug therapy related devices in the course of the
individual’s professional practice, including only the following:



      (1)   A dentist licensed under R.C. Chapter 4715.



      (2)   A clinical nurse specialist, certified nurse-midwife, or
certified nurse practitioner who holds a certificate to prescribe issued
under R.C. § 4723.48.



      (3)   An optometrist licensed under R.C. Chapter 4725 to
practice optometry under a therapeutic pharmaceutical agent’s certificate.



      (4)   A physician authorized under R.C. Chapter 4731 to
practice medicine and surgery, osteopathic medicine and surgery, or podiatric
medicine and surgery.



      (5)   A physician assistant who holds a license to practice as
a physician assistant issued under R.C. Chapter 4730, holds a valid
prescriber number issued by the Ohio Medical Board, and has been granted
physician-delegated prescriptive authority.



      (6)   A veterinarian licensed under R.C. Chapter 4741.



   L.S.D. Lysergic acid diethylamide.



   MAJOR DRUG OFFENDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.



   MANDATORY PRISON TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.



   MANUFACTURE. To plant, cultivate, harvest, process, make, prepare, or
otherwise engage in any part of the production of a drug, by propagation,
extraction, chemical synthesis, or compounding, or any combination of the
same, and includes packaging, repackaging, labeling, and other activities
incident to production.



   MANUFACTURER. A person who manufactures a controlled substance, as
“manufacture” is defined by this section.



   MARIHUANA. All parts of a plant of the genus cannabis, whether growing
or not, the seeds of a plant of that type; the resin extracted from a part of
a plant of that type; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative,
mixture, or preparation of a plant of that type or of its seeds or resin. The
term does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the
stalks, oils or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound,
manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks,
except the resin extracted from the mature stalks, fiber, oil, or cake, or
the sterilized seed of the plant that is incapable of germination. The term
does not include hashish.



   METHAMPHETAMINE. Methamphetamine, any salt, isomer, or salt of an
isomer of methamphetamine, or any compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance containing methamphetamine or any salt, isomer, or salt of an
isomer of methamphetamine.



   MINOR DRUG POSSESSION OFFENSE. Either of the following:



      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2925.11 as it existed prior to
July 1, 1996, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



      (2)   A violation of R.C. § 2925.11 as it exists on and after
July 1, 1996, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that is a
misdemeanor or a felony of the fifth degree.



   OFFICIAL WRITTEN ORDER. An order written on a form provided for that
purpose by the Director of the United States Drug Enforcement Administration,
under any laws of the United States making provision for the order, if the
order forms are authorized and required by federal law.



   OPIOID ANALGESIC. A controlled substance that has analgesic
pharmacologic activity at the opioid receptors of the central nervous system,
including the following drugs and their varying salt forms or chemical
congeners: buprenorphine, butorphanol, codeine (including acetaminophen and
other combination products), dihydrocodeine, fentanyl, hydrocodone (including
acetaminophen combination products), hydromorphone, meperidine, methadone,
morphine sulfate, oxycodone (including acetaminophen, aspirin, and other
combination products), oxymorphone, tapentadol, and tramadol.



   PERSON. Means any individual, corporation, government, governmental
subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership,
association or other legal entity.



   PHARMACIST. A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 to engage in the
practice of pharmacy.



   PHARMACY. Except when used in a context that refers to the practice of
pharmacy, means any area, room, rooms, place of business, department, or
portion of any of the foregoing, where the practice of pharmacy is conducted.



   POSSESS or POSSESSION. Having control over a thing or substance but may
not be inferred solely from mere access to the thing or substance through
ownership or occupation of the premises upon which the thing or substance is
found.



   PRESCRIPTION.  Means all of the following:



      (1)   A written, electronic or oral order for drugs or
combination or mixtures of drugs to be used by a particular individual or for
treating a particular animal, issued by a licensed health professional
authorized to prescribe drugs.



      (2)   For purposes of R.C. §§ 2925.61, 4723.488, 4729.44,
4730.431, and 4731.94, a written, electronic, or oral order for naloxone
issued to and in the name of a family member, friend, or other individual in
a position to assist an individual who there is reason to believe is at risk
of experiencing an opioid-related overdose.



      (3)   For purposes of R.C. §§ 4723.4810, 4729.282, 4730.432,
and 4731.93, a written, electronic, or oral order for a drug to treat
chlamydia, gonorrhea, or trichomoniasis issued to and in the name of a
patient who is not the intended user of the drug but is the sexual partner of
the intended user.



      (4)   For purposes of R.C. §§ 3313.7110, 3313.7111,
3314.143, 3326.28, 3328.29, 4723.483, 4729.88, 4730.432, 4731.96, and
5101.76, a written, electronic, or oral order for an epinephrine autoinjector
issued to and in the name of a school, school district, or camp.



      (5)   For purposes of R.C. Chapter 3728 and R.C. §§
4723.483, 4729.88, 4730.432, and 4731.96, a written, electronic, or oral
order for an epinephrine autoinjector issued to and in the name of a
qualified entity, as defined in R.C. § 3728.01.



   PRESUMPTION FOR A PRISON TERM or PRESUMPTION THAT A PRISON TERM SHALL
BE IMPOSED. A presumption as described in R.C. § 2929.13(D) that a prison
term is a necessary sanction for a felony in order to comply with the
purposes and principles of sentencing under R.C. § 2929.11.



   PROFESSIONAL LICENSE. Any license, permit, certificate, registration,
qualification, admission, temporary license, temporary permit, temporary
certificate, or temporary registration that is described in R.C. §
2925.01(W)(1) through (W)(36) and that qualifies a person as a professionally
licensed person.



   PROFESSIONALLY LICENSED PERSON. Any of the following:



      (1)   A person who has obtained a license as a manufacturer of
controlled substances or a wholesaler of controlled substances under R.C.
Chapter 3719;



      (2)   A person who has received a certificate or temporary
certificate as a certified public accountant or who has registered as a
public accountant under R.C. Chapter 4701 and who holds an Ohio permit issued
under that chapter;



      (3)   A person who holds a certificate of qualification to
practice architecture issued or renewed and registered under R.C. Chapter
4703;



      (4)   A person who is registered as a landscape architect
under R.C. Chapter 4703 or who holds a permit as a landscape architect issued
under that chapter;



      (5)   A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4707;



      (6)   A person who has been issued a certificate of
registration as a registered barber under R.C. Chapter 4709;



      (7)   A person licensed and regulated to engage in the
business of a debt pooling company by a legislative authority, under
authority of R.C. Chapter 4710;



      (8)   A person who has been issued a cosmetologist’s
license, hair designer’s license, manicurist’s license, esthetician’s
license, natural hair stylist’s license, managing cosmetologist’s
license, managing hair designer’s license, managing manicurist’s license,
managing esthetician’s license, managing natural hair stylist’s license,
cosmetology instructor’s license, hair design instructor’s license,
manicurist instructor’s license, esthetics instructor’s license, natural
hair style instructor’s license, independent contractor’s license, or
tanning facility permit under R.C. Chapter 4713;



      (9)   A person who has been issued a license to practice
dentistry, a general anesthesia permit, a conscious intravenous sedation
permit, a limited resident’s license, a limited teaching license, a dental
hygienist’s license, or a dental hygienist’s teacher’s certificate
under R.C. Chapter 4715;



      (10)   A person who has been issued an embalmer’s license, a
funeral director’s license, a funeral home license, or a crematory license,
or who has been registered for an embalmer’s or funeral director’s
apprenticeship under R.C. Chapter 4717;



      (11)   A person who has been licensed as a registered nurse or
practical nurse, or who has been issued a certificate for the practice of
nurse-midwifery under R.C. Chapter 4723;



      (12)   A person who has been licensed to practice optometry or
to engage in optical dispensing under R.C. Chapter 4725;



      (13)   A person licensed to act as a pawnbroker under R.C.
Chapter 4727;



      (14)   A person licensed to act as a precious metals dealer
under R.C. Chapter 4728;



      (15)   A person licensed as a pharmacist, a pharmacy intern, a
wholesale distributor of dangerous drugs, or a terminal distributor of
dangerous drugs under R.C. Chapter 4729;



      (16)   A person who is authorized to practice as a physician
assistant under R.C. Chapter 4730;



      (17)   A person who has been issued a certificate to practice
medicine and surgery, osteopathic medicine and surgery, a limited branch of
medicine, or podiatry under R.C. Chapter 4731;



      (18)   A person licensed as a psychologist or school
psychologist under R.C. Chapter 4732;



      (19)   A person registered to practice the profession of
engineering or surveying under R.C. Chapter 4733;



      (20)   A person who has been issued a license to practice
chiropractic under R.C. Chapter 4734;



      (21)   A person licensed to act as a real estate broker or
real estate salesperson under R.C. Chapter 4735;



      (22)   A person registered as a registered sanitarian under
R.C. Chapter 4736;



      (23)   A person licensed to operate or maintain a junkyard
under R.C. Chapter 4737;



      (24)   A person who has been issued a motor vehicle salvage
dealer’s license under R.C. Chapter 4738;



      (25)   A person who has been licensed to act as a steam
engineer under R.C. Chapter 4739;



      (26)   A person who has been issued a license or temporary
permit to practice veterinary medicine or any of its branches, or who is
registered as a graduate animal technician under R.C. Chapter 4741;



      (27)   A person who has been issued a hearing aid dealer’s
or fitter’s license or trainee permit under R.C. Chapter 4747;



      (28)   A person who has been issued a class A, class B, or
class C license or who has been registered as an investigator or security
guard employee under R.C. Chapter 4749;



      (29)   A person licensed and registered to practice as a
nursing home administrator under R.C. Chapter 4751;



      (30)   A person licensed to practice as a speech-language
pathologist or audiologist under R.C. Chapter 4753;



      (31)   A person issued a license as an occupational therapist
or physical therapist under R.C. Chapter 4755;



      (32)   A person who is licensed as a licensed professional
clinical counselor, licensed professional counselor, social worker,
independent social worker, independent marriage and family therapist, or
marriage and family therapist, or registered as a social work assistant under
R.C. Chapter 4757;



      (33)   A person issued a license to practice dietetics under
R.C. Chapter 4759;



      (34)   A person who has been issued a license or limited
permit to practice respiratory therapy under R.C. Chapter 4761;



      (35)   A person who has been issued a real estate appraiser
certificate under R.C. Chapter 4763;



      (36)   A person who has been admitted to the bar by order of
the Ohio Supreme Court in compliance with its prescribed and published rules.



   PUBLIC PREMISES. Any hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall, or
other place of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort.



   SALE. Includes delivery, barter, exchange, transfer, or gift, or offer
thereof, and each transaction of those natures made by any person, whether as
principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee.



   SAMPLE DRUG. A drug or pharmaceutical preparation that would be
hazardous to health or safety if used without the supervision of a licensed
health professional authorized to prescribe drugs, or a drug of abuse, and
that, at one time, had been placed in a container plainly marked as a sample
by a manufacturer.



   SCHEDULE I, II, III, IV OR V. Controlled substance Schedules I, II,
III, IV, and V established pursuant to R.C. § 3719.41, as amended pursuant
to R.C. § 3719.43 or 3719.44.



   SCHOOL. Any school operated by a board of education, any community
school established under R.C. Chapter 3314, or any nonpublic school for which
the State Board of Education prescribes minimum standards under R.C. §
3301.07, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or
training provided by the school is being conducted at the time a criminal
offense is committed.



   SCHOOL BUILDING. Any building in which any of the instruction,
extracurricular activities, or training provided by a school is conducted,
whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training
provided by the school is being conducted in the school building at the time
a criminal offense is committed.



   SCHOOL PREMISES. Either of the following:



      (1)   The parcel of real property on which any school is
situated, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or
training provided by the school is being conducted on the premises at the
time a criminal offense is committed.



      (2)   Any other parcel of real property that is owned or
leased by a board of education of a school, the governing authority of a
community school established under R.C. Chapter 3314, or the governing body
of a nonpublic school for which the State Board of Education prescribes
minimum standards under R.C. § 3301.07 and on which some of the instruction,
extracurricular activities, or training of the school is conducted, whether
or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training provided by
the school is being conducted on the parcel of real property at the time a
criminal offense is committed.



   STANDARD PHARMACEUTICAL REFERENCE MANUAL. The current edition, with
cumulative changes if any, of references that are approved by the State Board
of Pharmacy.



   THEFT OFFENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.



   UNIT DOSE. An amount or unit or a compound, mixture, or preparation
containing a controlled substance that is separately identifiable and in a
form that indicates that it is the amount or unit by which the controlled
substance is separately administered to or taken by an individual.



   WHOLESALER. A person who, on official written orders other than
prescriptions, supplies controlled substances that the person has not
manufactured, produced or prepared personally and includes WHOLESALE
DISTRIBUTOR OF DANGEROUS DRUGS , which means a person engaged in the sale of
dangerous drugs at wholesale and includes any agent or employee of that
person authorized by that person to engage in the sale of dangerous drugs at
wholesale.



(R.C. §§ 2925.01, 3719.01, 3719.011, 3719.013, 4729.01)



§ 138.02  TRAFFICKING IN CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES; GIFT OF MARIHUANA.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:



      (1)   Sell or offer to sell a controlled substance or a
controlled substance analog;



      (2)   Prepare for shipment, ship, transport, deliver, prepare
for distribution, or distribute a controlled substance or a controlled
substance analog, when the offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe
that the controlled substance or a controlled substance analog is intended
for sale or resale by the offender or another person.



   (B)   This section does not apply to any of the following:



      (1)   Manufacturers, licensed health professionals authorized
to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, and other persons
whose conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729,
4730, 4731, and 4741.



      (2)   If the offense involves an anabolic steroid, any person
who is conducting or participating in a research project involving the use of
an anabolic steroid if the project has been approved by the United States
Food and Drug Administration.



      (3)   Any person who sells, offers for sale, prescribes,
dispenses, or administers for livestock or other nonhuman species an anabolic
steroid that is expressly intended for administration through implants to
livestock or other nonhuman species and approved for that purpose under the
"Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act" (21 U.S.C. §§ 301 et seq., as
amended), and is sold, offered for sale, prescribed, dispensed, or
administered for that purpose in accordance with that Act.



   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of the
following:



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(2) of this
section, trafficking in controlled substances is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the
offense involves a gift of 20 grams or less of marihuana, trafficking in
marihuana is a minor misdemeanor upon a first offense and a misdemeanor of
the third degree upon a subsequent offense.  If the offense involves a gift
of 20 grams or less of marihuana and if the offense was committed in the
vicinity of a school or in the vicinity of a juvenile, trafficking in
marihuana is a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (D)   In addition to any prison term authorized or required by
division (C) of this section and R.C. §§ 2929.13 and 2929.14, and in
addition to any other sanction imposed for the offense under this section or
R.C. §§ 2929.11 through 2929.18, the court that sentences a person who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of division (A) of this section
shall do all of the following that are applicable regarding the offender:



      (1)   The court shall suspend the driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit of the offender in accordance with R.C. §
2925.03(G).



      (2)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, the
court immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.



   (E)   (1)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of R.C. §
3719.21 and except as provided in R.C. § 2925.03(H), the Clerk of the Court
shall pay any mandatory fine imposed pursuant to this section and any fine
other than a mandatory fine that is imposed for a violation of this section
pursuant to R.C. § 2929.18(A) or (B)(5) to the county, township,
municipality, park district, as created pursuant to R.C. § 511.18 or
1545.04, or state law enforcement agencies in this state that primarily were
responsible for or involved in making the arrest of, and in prosecuting, the
offender. However, the Clerk shall not pay a mandatory fine so imposed to a
law enforcement agency unless the agency has adopted a written internal
control policy under division (E)(2) of this section that addresses the use
of the fine moneys that it receives. Each agency shall use the mandatory
fines so paid to subsidize the agency's law enforcement efforts that pertain
to drug offenses, in accordance with the written internal control policy
adopted by the recipient agency under division (E)(2) of this section.



      (2)   Prior to receiving any fine moneys under division (E)(1)
of this section or R.C. § 2925.42(B), a law enforcement agency shall adopt a
written internal control policy that addresses the agency’s use and
disposi-tion of all fine moneys so received and that provides for the keeping
of detailed financial records of the receipts of those fine moneys, the
general types of expenditures made out of those fine moneys, and the specific
amount of each general type of expenditure. The policy shall not provide for
or permit the identification of any specific expenditure that is made in an
on-going investigation. All financial records of the receipts of those fine
moneys, the general type of expenditures made out of those fine moneys, and
the specific amount of each general type of expenditure by an agency are
pub-lic records open for inspection under R.C. § 149.43. Additionally, a
written internal control policy adopted under this division is such a public
record, and the agency that adopted it shall comply with it.



      (3)   As used in division (E) of this section:



         LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES. Includes but is not limited to
the State Board of Pharmacy and the office of a prosecutor.



         PROSECUTOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01.



   (F)   As used in this section, DRUG includes any substance that is
represented to be a drug.



(R.C. § 2925.03)



Statutory reference:



   Felony drug trafficking offenses, see R.C. § 2925.03(C)



§ 138.03  DRUG POSSESSION OFFENSES.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly obtain, possess, or use a controlled
substance or a controlled substance analog.



   (B)   This section does not apply to any of the following:



      (1)   Manufacturers, licensed health professionals authorized
to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, and other persons
whose conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729,
4730, 4731, and 4741.



      (2)   If the offense involves an anabolic steroid, any person
who is conducting or participating in a research project involving the use of
an anabolic steroid if the project has been approved by the United States
Food and Drug Administration.



      (3)   Any person who sells, offers for sale, prescribes,
dispenses, or administers for livestock or other nonhuman species an anabolic
steroid that is expressly intended for administration through implants to
livestock or other nonhuman species and approved for that purpose under the
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, and is sold, offered for sale,
prescribed, dispensed, or administered for that purpose in accordance with
that Act.



      (4)   Any person who obtained the controlled substance
pursuant to a prescription issued by a licensed health professional
authorized to prescribe drugs.



   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of one
of the following:



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (C)(2),
(C)(3), (C)(4), and (C)(5), if the drug involved in the violation is a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance included in Schedule I or II of
R.C. § 3719.41, or is cocaine, L.S.D., heroin, a controlled substance
analog, or a compound, mixture or preparation containing such drugs,
possession of drugs is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (2)   If the drug involved is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule III, IV, or V of R.C. §
3719.41, whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
possession of drugs. The penalty for the offense shall be determined as
follows:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in the following
division, possession of drugs is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the
offender previously has been convicted of a drug abuse offense, it is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



         (b)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or
exceeds the bulk amount, possession of drugs is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.



      (3)   If the drug involved in the violation is marihuana or a
compound, mixture, preparation or substance containing marihuana other than
hashish, whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
possession of marihuana. The penalty for the offense shall be determined as
follows:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in the following
divisions, possession of marihuana is a minor misdemeanor.



         (b)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or
exceeds 100 grams but is less than 200 grams, possession of marihuana is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



         (c)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or
exceeds 200 grams, possession of marihuana is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



      (4)   If the drug involved in the violation is hashish or a
compound, mixture, preparation or substance containing hashish, whoever
violates division (A) of this section is guilty of possession of hashish. The
penalty for the offense shall be determined as follows:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in the following
divisions, possession of hashish is a minor misdemeanor.



         (b)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or
exceeds five grams but is less than ten grams of hashish in a solid form or
equals or exceeds one gram but is less than two grams of hashish in a liquid
concentrate, liquid extract, or liquid distillate form, possession of hashish
is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



         (c)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or
exceeds ten grams of hashish in a solid form or equals or exceeds two grams
of hashish in a liquid concentrate, liquid extract, or liquid distillate
form, possession of hashish is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.



   (D)   Arrest or conviction for a minor misdemeanor violation of this
section does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the
person so arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the
person’s criminal record, including any inquiries contained in any
application for employment, license, or other right or privilege, or made in
connection with the person’s appearance as a witness.



   (E)   In addition to any prison term or jail term authorized or
required by division (C) of this section and R.C. §§ 2929.13, 2929.14,
2929.22, 2929.24, and 2929.25, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, and in addition to any other sanction that is imposed for the
offense under this section, R.C. §§ 2929.11 through 2929.18, or R.C. §§
2929.21 through 2929.28, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
the court that sentences an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to
a violation of division (A) of this section shall do the following if
applicable regarding the offender:



      (1)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of R.C. §
3719.21, the Clerk of Court shall pay a fine imposed for a violation of this
section pursuant to R.C. § 2929.18(A) in accordance with and subject to the
requirements of R.C. § 2925.03(F). The agency that receives the fine shall
use the fine as specified in R.C. § 2925.03(F).



      (2)   The court shall suspend for not less than six months nor
more than five years the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or permit.



      (3)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in
addition to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the
court immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.



(R.C. § 2925.11)



Statutory reference:



   Felony drug possession offenses, see R.C. § 2925.11(C)



§ 138.04  POSSESSING DRUG ABUSE INSTRUMENTS.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly make, obtain, possess, or use any
instrument, article, or thing the customary and primary purpose of which is
for the administration or use of a dangerous drug, other than marihuana, when
the instrument involved is a hypodermic or syringe, whether or not of crude
or extemporized manufacture or assembly, and the instrument, article, or
thing involved has been used by the offender to unlawfully administer or use
a dangerous drug, other than marihuana, or to prepare a dangerous drug, other
than marihuana, for unlawful administration or use.



   (B)   This section does not apply to manufacturers, licensed health
professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of
pharmacies, and other persons whose conduct was in accordance with R.C.
Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, and 4741.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing drug
abuse instruments, a misdemeanor of the second degree.  If the offender
previously has been convicted of a drug abuse offense, violation of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



   (D)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for
a violation of this section, the court shall suspend for not less than six
months nor more than five years the offender's driver's or commercial
driver's license or permit. If the offender is a professionally licensed
person, in addition to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this
section, the court immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.



(R.C. § 2925.12)



§ 138.05  PERMITTING DRUG ABUSE.



   (A)   No person who is the owner, operator, or person in charge of a
locomotive, watercraft, aircraft, or other vehicle, as defined in R.C. §
4501.01, shall knowingly permit the vehicle to be used for the commission of
a felony drug abuse offense.



   (B)   No person, who is the owner, lessee, or occupant, or who has
custody, control, or supervision of premises, or real estate, including
vacant land, shall knowingly permit his or her premises, or real estate,
including vacant land, to be used for the commission of a felony drug abuse
offense by another person.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of permitting drug
abuse.



      (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(2) of this section,
permitting drug abuse is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (2)   Permitting drug abuse is a felony, and punishable under
appropriate state law, if the felony drug abuse offense in question is a
violation of R.C. §§ 2925.02 or 2925.03.



   (D)   In addition to any prison term authorized or required by
division (C) of this section and R.C. §§ 2929.13 and 2929.14, and in
addition to any other sanction imposed for the offense under this section or
R.C. §§ 2929.11 through 2929.18, the court that sentences a person who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of division (A) of this section
shall do all of the following that are applicable regarding the offender:



      (1)   The court shall suspend for not less than six months nor
more than five years the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license
or permit.



      (2)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in
addition to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the
court immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.



   (E)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of R.C. § 3719.21, the
Clerk of Court shall pay a fine imposed for a violation of this section
pursuant to R.C. § 2929.18(A) in accordance with and subject to the
requirements of R.C. § 2925.03(F).  The agency that receives the fine shall
use the fine as specified in R.C. § 2925.03(F).



   (F)   Any premises or real estate that is permitted to be used in
violation of division (B) of this section constitutes a nuisance subject to
abatement pursuant to R.C. Chapter 3767.



(R.C. § 2925.13)



§ 138.06  ILLEGAL CULTIVATION OF MARIHUANA.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly cultivate marihuana.



   (B)   This section does not apply to any person listed in R.C. §
2925.03(B)(1), (2) or (3), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
to the extent and under the circumstances described in that division.



   (C)   Whoever commits a violation of division (A) of this section is
guilty of illegal cultivation of marihuana.



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in the following divisions,
illegal cultivation of marihuana is a minor misdemeanor or, if the offense
was committed in the vicinity of a school or in the vicinity of a juvenile, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



      (2)   If the amount of marihuana involved equals or exceeds
100 grams but is less than 200 grams, illegal cultivation of marihuana is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree or, if the offense was committed in the
vicinity of a school or in the vicinity of a juvenile, a misdemeanor of the
third degree.



      (3)   If the amount of marihuana involved equals or exceeds
200 grams, illegal cultivation of marihuana is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.



   (D)   In addition to any prison term authorized or required by
division (C) of this section and R.C. §§ 2929.13 and 2929.14, and in
addition to any other sanction imposed for the offense under this section or
R.C. §§ 2929.11 through 2929.18, the court that sentences a person who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of division (A) of this section
shall do all of the following that are applicable regarding the offender:



      (1)   The court shall suspend the offender's driver's or
commercial driver's license or permit in accordance with R.C. § 2925.03(G).
If an offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit is
suspended in accordance with that division, the offender may request
termination of, and the court may terminate, the suspension in accordance
with that division.



      (2)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, the
court immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.



   (E)   Arrest or conviction for a minor misdemeanor violation of this
section does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the
person so arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the
person's criminal record, including any inquiries contained in any
application for employment, license, or other right or privilege, or made in
connection with the person's appearance as a witness.



(R.C. § 2925.04)



Statutory reference:



   Illegal manufacturing of controlled substances, felony, see R.C. §
2925.04



   Sale or use of drugs not approved by Food and Drug Administration,
felony, see R.C. § 2925.09



§ 138.07  ABUSING HARMFUL INTOXICANTS.



   (A)   Except for lawful research, clinical, medical, dental, or
veterinary purposes, no person, with purpose to induce intoxication or
similar physiological effects, shall obtain, possess, or use a harmful
intoxicant.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of abusing harmful
intoxicants, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the offender previously
has been convicted of a drug abuse offense, abusing harmful intoxicants is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



   (C)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for
a violation of this section, the court shall suspend for not less than six
months nor more than five years the offender's driver's or commercial
driver's license or permit. If the offender is a professionally licensed
person, in addition to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this
section, the court immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.



(R.C. § 2925.31)



§ 138.08  ILLEGAL DISPENSING OF DRUG SAMPLES.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly furnish a sample drug to another
person.



   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to manufacturers,
wholesalers, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, licensed health professionals
authorized to prescribe drugs, and other persons whose conduct is in
accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4725, 4729, 4730, 4731, and
4741.



   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal
dispensing of drug samples.



      (2)   If the drug involved in the offense is a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance included in Schedule I or II of R.C. §
3719.41 with the exception of marihuana, illegal dispensing of drug samples
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (3)   If the drug involved in the offense is a dangerous drug
or a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance included in Schedule III,
IV or V of R.C. § 3719.41, or is marihuana, the penalty for the offense
shall be determined as follows:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in the following
division, illegal dispensing of drug samples is a misdemeanor of the second
degree.



         (b)   If the offense was committed in the vicinity of a
school or in the vicinity of a juvenile, illegal dispensing of drug samples
is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



   (D)   In addition to any prison term authorized or required by
division (C) of this section and R.C. §§ 2929.13 and 2929.14, and in
addition to any other sanction imposed for the offense under this section or
R.C. §§ 2929.11 through 2929.18, the court that sentences an offender who
is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of division (A) of this
section shall do both of the following:



      (1)   The court shall suspend for not less than six months nor
more than five years the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license.



      (2)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in
addition to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the
court immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.



   (E)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of R.C. § 3719.21, the
Clerk of Court shall pay a fine imposed for a violation of this section
pursuant to R.C. § 2929.18(A) in accordance with and subject to the
requirements of R.C. § 2925.03(F).  The agency that receives the fine shall
use the fine as specified in R.C. § 2925.03(F).



(R.C. § 2925.36)



Statutory reference:



   Felony offenses, see R.C. § 2925.36(C)(2)



§ 138.09  FEDERAL PROSECUTION BAR TO MUNICIPAL PROSECUTION.



   If a violation of this chapter is a violation of the federal drug abuse
control laws, as defined in R.C. § 3719.01, a conviction or acquittal under
the federal drug abuse control laws for the same act is a bar to prosecution
in this state.



(R.C. § 2925.50)



§ 138.10  NITROUS OXIDE: IMPROPER DISPENSING OR DISTRIBUTION; POSSESSION IN
A MOTOR VEHICLE.



   (A)   Improper dispensing or distribution.



      (1)   No person who dispenses or distributes nitrous oxide in
cartridges shall fail to comply with either of the following:



         (a)   The record-keeping requirements established under
division (A)(3) of this section.



         (b)   The labeling and transaction identification
requirements established under division (A)(4) of this section.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(1)(a) or (A)(1)(b) of this
section is guilty of improperly dispensing or distributing nitrous oxide, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



      (3)   Beginning July 1, 2001, a person who dispenses or
distributes nitrous oxide shall record each transaction involving the
dispensing or distribution of the nitrous oxide on a separate card.  The
person shall require the purchaser to sign the card and provide a complete
residence address.  The person dispensing or distributing the nitrous oxide
shall sign and date the card.  The person shall retain the card recording a
transaction for one year from the date of the transaction.  The person shall
maintain the cards at the person's business address and make them available
during normal business hours for inspection and copying by officers or
employees of the State Board of Pharmacy or of other law enforcement agencies
that are authorized to investigate violations of this code, R.C. Chapters
2925, 3719, or 4729, or federal drug abuse control laws.  The cards used to
record each transaction shall inform the purchaser of the following:



         (a)   That nitrous oxide cartridges are to be used only
for purposes of preparing food;



         (b)   That inhalation of nitrous oxide can have
dangerous health effects; and



         (c)   That it is a violation of state law to distribute
or dispense cartridges of nitrous oxide to any person under age 21,
punishable as a felony of the fifth degree.



      (4)   (a)   Each cartridge of nitrous oxide dispensed or
distributed in this municipality shall bear the following printed warning: 
"Nitrous oxide cartridges are to be used only for purposes of preparing
food.  Nitrous oxide cartridges may not be sold to persons under age 21. 
Do not inhale contents.  Misuse can be dangerous to your health."



         (b)   Each time a person dispenses or distributes one or
more cartridges of nitrous oxide, the person shall mark the packaging
containing the cartridges with a label or other device that identifies the
person who dispensed or distributed the nitrous oxide and the person's
business address.



(R.C. § 2925.32(B)(4), (D)(2), (F), (G))



   (B)   Possession in a motor vehicle.



      (1)   As used in this section, MOTOR VEHICLE, STREET, and
HIGHWAY have the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.



      (2)   Unless authorized by this code or by state law, no
person shall possess an open cartridge of nitrous oxide in either of the
following circumstances:



         (a)   While operating or being a passenger in or on a
motor vehicle on a street, highway, or other public property public or
private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular traffic or
parking.



         (b)   While being in or on a stationary motor vehicle on
a street, highway, or other public or private property open to the public for
purposes of vehicular traffic or parking.



      (3)   Whoever violates this division (B) is guilty of
possessing nitrous oxide in a motor vehicle, a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.



(R.C. § 2925.33)



Statutory reference:



   Trafficking in harmful intoxicants, see R.C. § 2925.32



§ 138.11  LABORATORY REPORT REQUIRED.



   (A)   (1)   In any criminal prosecution for a violation of this
chapter or R.C. Chapters 2925 or 3719, a laboratory report from the Bureau of
Criminal Identification and Investigation or a laboratory operated by another
law enforcement agency, or a laboratory established by or under the authority
of an institution of higher education that has its main campus in this state
and that is accredited by the Association of American Universities or the
North Central Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools, primarily for
the purpose of providing scientific service to law enforcement agencies, and
signed by the person performing the analysis, stating that the substance that
is the basis of the alleged offense has been weighed and analyzed and stating
the findings as to the content, weight, and identity of the substance and
that it contains any amount of a controlled substance and the number and
description of unit dosages, is prima facie evidence of the content,
identity, and weight or the existence and number of unit dosages of the
substance. In any criminal prosecution for a violation of R.C. § 2925.041 or
a violation of this chapter, R.C. Chapter 2925 or R.C. Chapter 3719 that is
based on the possession of chemicals sufficient to produce a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance included in Schedule I, II, III, IV, or V,
a laboratory report from the Bureau or from any laboratory that is operated
or established as described in this division that is signed by the person
performing the analysis, stating that the substances that are the basis of
the alleged offense have been weighed and analyzed and stating the findings
as to the content, weight, and identity of each of the substances, is prima
facie evidence of the content, identity, and weight of the substances.



      (2)   Attached to that report shall be a copy of a notarized
statement by the signer of the report giving the name of the signer and
stating that the signer is an employee of the laboratory issuing the report
and that performing the analysis is a part of the signer's regular duties,
and giving an outline of the signer's education, training, and experience for
performing an analysis of materials included under this section. The signer
shall attest that scientifically accepted tests were performed with due
caution, and that the evidence was handled in accordance with established and
accepted procedures while in the custody of the laboratory.



   (B)   The prosecuting attorney shall serve a copy of the report on
the attorney of record for the accused, or on the accused if the accused has
no attorney, prior to any proceeding in which the report is to be used
against the accused other than at a preliminary hearing or grand jury
proceeding where the report may be used without having been previously served
upon the accused.



   (C)   The report shall not be prima facie evidence of the contents,
identity, and weight or the existence and number of unit dosages of the
substance if the accused or the accused's attorney demands the testimony of
the person signing the report, by serving the demand upon the prosecuting
attorney, within seven days from the accused or the accused's attorney's
receipt of the report. The time may be extended by a trial judge in the
interests of justice.



   (D)   Any report issued for use under this section shall contain
notice of the right of the accused to demand, and the manner in which the
accused shall demand, the testimony of the person signing the report.



   (E)   Any person who is accused of a violation of this chapter or
R.C. Chapters 2925 or 3719 is entitled, upon written request made to the
prosecuting attorney, to have a portion of the substance that is, or of each
of the substances that are, the basis of the alleged violation preserved for
the benefit of independent analysis performed by a laboratory analyst
employed by the accused person, or, if the accused is indigent, by a
qualified laboratory analyst appointed by the court. Such portion shall be a
representative sample of the entire substance that is, or of each of the
substances that are, the basis of the alleged violation and shall be of
sufficient size, in the opinion of the court, to permit the accused's analyst
to make a thorough scientific analysis concerning the identity of the
substance or substances. The prosecuting attorney shall provide the accused's
analyst with the sample portion at least 14 days prior to trial, unless the
trial is to be held in a court not of record or unless the accused person is
charged with a minor misdemeanor, in which case the prosecuting attorney
shall provide the accused's analyst with the sample portion at least three
days prior to trial. If the prosecuting attorney determines that such a
sample portion cannot be preserved and given to the accused's analyst, the
prosecuting attorney shall so inform the accused person, or the accused's
attorney. In such a circumstance, the accused person is entitled, upon
written request made to the prosecuting attorney, to have the accused's
privately employed or court appointed analyst present at an analysis of the
substance that is, or the substances that are, the basis of the alleged
violation, and, upon further written request, to receive copies of all
recorded scientific data that result from the analysis and that can be used
by an analyst in arriving at conclusions, findings, or opinions concerning
the identity of the substance or substances subject to the analysis.



   (F)   In addition to the rights provided under division (E) of this
section, any person who is accused of a violation of this chapter or R.C.
Chapters 2925 or 3719 that involves a bulk amount of a controlled substance,
or any multiple thereof, or who is accused of a violation of R.C. § 2925.11
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, other than a minor
misdemeanor violation, that involves marihuana, is entitled, upon written
request made to the prosecuting attorney, to have a laboratory analyst of the
accused's choice, or, if the accused is indigent, a qualified laboratory
analyst appointed by the court, present at a measurement or weighing of the
substance that is the basis of the alleged violation. Also, the accused
person is entitled, upon further written request, to receive copies of all
recorded scientific data that result from the measurement or weighing and
that can be used by an analyst in arriving at conclusions, findings, or
opinions concerning the weight, volume, or number of unit doses of the
substance subject to the measurement or weighing.



(R.C. § 2925.51)



   (G)   In addition to the financial sanctions authorized or required
under R.C. §§ 2929.18 and 2929.28 and to any costs otherwise authorized or
required under any provision of law, the court imposing sentence upon an
offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a drug abuse offense may
order the offender to pay to the state, municipal, or county law enforcement
agencies that handled the investigation and prosecution all of the costs that
the state, municipal corporation, or county reasonably incurred in having
tests performed under this section or R.C. § 2925.51 or in any other manner
on any substance that was the basis of, or involved in, the offense to
determine whether the substance contained any amount of a controlled
substance if the results of the tests indicate that the substance tested
contained any controlled substance. No court shall order an offender under
this section to pay the costs of tests performed on a substance if the
results of the tests do not indicate that the substance tested contained any
controlled substance. The court shall hold a hearing to determine the amount
of costs to be imposed under this section. The court may hold the hearing as
part of the sentencing hearing for the offender.



(R.C. § 2925.511)



§ 138.12  COUNTERFEIT CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly possess any counterfeit controlled
substance.



   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section shall be guilty
of possession of counterfeit controlled substances, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.



   (C)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of R.C. § 3719.21, the
Clerk of Court shall pay a fine imposed for a violation of this section
pursuant to R.C. § 2929.18(A) in accordance with and subject to the
requirements of R.C. § 2925.03(F).  The agency that receives the fine shall
use the fine as specified in R.C. § 2925.03(F).



(R.C. § 2925.37(A), (G), (M))



Statutory reference:



   Trafficking and other felony counterfeit controlled substance offenses,
see R.C. § 2925.37(H) - (K)



§ 138.13  USE, POSSESSION, OR SALE OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.



   (A)   As used in this section, DRUG PARAPHERNALIA means any
equipment, product, or material of any kind that is used by the offender,
intended by the offender for use, or designed for use, in propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging,
storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing into the human body, a controlled substance in violation of this
chapter. The term includes but is not limited to any of the following
equipment, products, or materials that are used by the offender, intended by
the offender for use, or designed by the offender for use, in any of the
following manners:



      (1)   A kit for propagating, cultivating, growing, or
harvesting any species of a plant that is a controlled substance or from
which a controlled substance can be derived.



      (2)   A kit for manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing, or preparing a controlled substance.



      (3)   Any object, instrument, or device for manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing methamphetamine.



      (4)   An isomerization device for increasing the potency of
any species of a plant that is a controlled substance.



      (5)   Testing equipment for identifying, or analyzing the
strength, effectiveness, or purity of, a controlled substance.



      (6)   A scale or balance for weighing or measuring a
controlled substance.



      (7)   A diluent or adulterant, such as quinine hydrochloride,
mannitol, mannite, dextrose, or lactose, for cutting a controlled substance.



      (8)   A separation gin or sifter for removing twigs and seeds
from, or otherwise cleaning or refining, marihuana.



      (9)   A blender, bowl, container, spoon, or mixing device for
compounding a controlled substance.



      (10)   A capsule, balloon, envelope, or container for
packaging small quantities of a controlled substance.



      (11)   A container or device for storing or concealing a
controlled substance.



      (12)   A hypodermic syringe, needle, or instrument for
parenterally injecting a controlled substance into the human body.



      (13)   An object, instrument, or device for ingesting,
inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body, marihuana, cocaine,
hashish, or hashish oil, such as a metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone,
plastic, or ceramic pipe, with or without a screen, permanent screen, hashish
head, or punctured metal bowl; water pipe; carburetion tube or device;
smoking or carburetion mask; roach clip or similar object used to hold
burning material, such as a marihuana cigarette, that has become too small or
too short to be held in the hand; miniature cocaine spoon, or cocaine vial;
chamber pipe; carburetor pipe; electric pipe; air driver pipe; chillum; bong;
or ice pipe or chiller.



   (B)   In determining if any equipment, product, or material is drug
paraphernalia, a court or law enforcement officer shall consider, in addition
to other relevant factors, the following:



      (1)   Any statement by the owner or by anyone in control of
the equipment, product, or material, concerning its use.



      (2)   The proximity in time or space of the equipment,
product, or material, or of the act relating to the equipment, product, or
material, to a violation of any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter
2925.



      (3)   The proximity of the equipment, product, or material to
any controlled substance.



      (4)   The existence of any residue of a controlled substance
on the equipment, product, or material.



      (5)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of the
owner, or of anyone in control, of the equipment, product, or material, to
deliver it to any person whom he or she knows intends to use the equipment,
product, or material to facilitate a violation of any provision of this
chapter or R.C. Chapter 2925. A finding that the owner or anyone in control
of the equipment, product, or material is not guilty of a violation of any
other provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2925 does not prevent a
finding that the equipment, product, or material was intended or designed by
the offender for use as drug paraphernalia.



      (6)   Any oral or written instruction provided with the
equipment, product, or material concerning its use.



      (7)   Any descriptive material accompanying the equipment,
product, or material and explaining or depicting its use.



      (8)   National or local advertising concerning the use of the
equipment, product, or material.



      (9)   The manner and circumstances in which the equipment,
product, or material is displayed for sale.



      (10)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of the
sales of the equipment, product, or material to the total sales of the
business enterprise.



      (11)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses of the
equipment, product, or material in the community.



      (12)   Expert testimony concerning the use of the equipment,
product, or material.



   (C)   (1)   Subject to division (D)(2) of this section, no person
shall knowingly use, or possess with purpose to use, drug paraphernalia.



      (2)   No person shall knowingly sell, or possess or
manufacture with purpose to sell, drug paraphernalia, if he or she knows or
reasonably should know that the equipment, product, or material will be used
as drug paraphernalia.



      (3)   No person shall place an advertisement in any newspaper,
magazine, handbill, or other publication that is published and printed and
circulates primarily within this state, if he or she knows that the purpose
of the advertisement is to promote the illegal sale in this municipality or
in this state of the equipment, product, or material that the offender
intended or designed for use as drug paraphernalia.



   (D)   (1)   This section does not apply to manufacturers,
licensed health professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists,
owners of pharmacies, and other persons whose conduct is in accordance with
R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, and 4741. This section
shall not be construed to prohibit the possession or use of a hypodermic as
authorized by R.C. § 3719.172.



      (2)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not apply to a
person’s use, or possession with purpose to use, any drug paraphernalia
that is equipment, a product, or material of any kind that is used by the
person, intended by the person for use, or designed for use in storing,
containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing into the human body marihuana.



   (E)   Notwithstanding R.C. Chapter 2981, any drug paraphernalia that
was used, possessed, sold, or manufactured in violation of this section shall
be seized, after a conviction for that violation, shall be forfeited, and
upon forfeiture shall be disposed of pursuant to R.C. § 2981.12(B).



   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates division (C)(1) of this section is
guilty of illegal use or possession of drug paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.



      (2)   Except as provided in division (F)(3) of this section,
whoever violates division (C)(2) of this section is guilty of dealing in drug
paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the second degree.



      (3)   Whoever violates division (C)(2) of this section by
selling drug paraphernalia to a juvenile is guilty of selling drug
paraphernalia to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (4)   Whoever violates division (C)(3) of this section is
guilty of illegal advertising of drug paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the
second degree.



   (G)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for
a violation of this section, the court shall suspend for not less than six
months nor more than five years the offender's driver's or commercial
driver's license or permit. If the offender is a professionally licensed
person, in addition to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this
section, the court immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.



(R.C. § 2925.14)



   (H)   Illegal use or possession of marihuana drug paraphernalia.



      (1)   As used in this division (H), DRUG PARAPHERNALIA has the
same meaning as in division (A) of this section.



      (2)   In determining if any equipment, product, or material is
drug paraphernalia, a court or law enforcement officer shall consider, in
addition to other relevant factors, all factors identified in division (B) of
this section.



      (3)   No person shall knowingly use, or possess with purpose
to use, any drug paraphernalia that is equipment, a product, or material of
any kind that is used by the person, intended by the person for use, or
designed for use in storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting,
inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body marihuana.



      (4)   This division (H) does not apply to any person
identified in division (D)(1) of this section, and it shall not be construed
to prohibit the possession or use of a hypodermic as authorized by R.C. §
3719.172.



      (5)   Division (E) of this section applies with respect to any
drug paraphernalia that was used or possessed in violation of this section.



      (6)   Whoever violates division (H)(3) of this section is
guilty of illegal use or possession of marihuana drug paraphernalia, a minor
misdemeanor.



      (7)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an
offender for a violation of this section, the court shall suspend for not
less than six months or more than five years the offender’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit. If the offender is a professionally
licensed person, in addition to any other sanction imposed for a violation of
this section, the court immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.



(R.C. § 2925.141)



§ 138.14  CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE OR PRESCRIPTION LABELS.



   (A)   Whenever a manufacturer sells a controlled substance, and
whenever a wholesaler sells a controlled substance in a package the
wholesaler has prepared, the manufacturer or wholesaler shall securely affix
to each package in which the controlled substance is contained a label
showing in legible English the name and address of the vendor and the
quantity, kind and form of controlled substance contained therein.  No
person, except a pharmacist for the purpose of dispensing a controlled
substance upon a prescription, shall alter, deface or remove any label so
affixed.



   (B)   No person shall alter, deface or remove any label affixed
pursuant to R.C. § 3719.08 as long as any of the original contents remain.



(R.C. § 3719.08(A), (E))



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.  If the offender previously has been convicted of a
violation of this section, or R.C. § 3719.07 or 3719.08, or a drug abuse
offense, a violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.  If the violation involves the sale, offer to sell,
or possession of a Schedule I or II controlled substance, with the exception
of marihuana, and if the offender, as a result of the violation, is a major
drug offender, then R.C. § 3719.99(D) applies.



(R.C. § 3719.99(C))



§ 138.15  POSSESSION, SALE AND DISPOSAL OF HYPODERMICS.



   (A)   Possession of a hypodermic is authorized for the following:



      (1)   A manufacturer or distributor of, or dealer in
hypodermics, or medication packaged in hypodermics, and any authorized agent
of employee of that manufacturer, distributor or dealer, in the regular
course of business;



      (2)   A terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, in the
regular course of business;



      (3)   A person authorized to administer injections, in the
regular course of the person's profession or employment;



      (4)   A person, when the hypodermic in his possession was
lawfully obtained and is kept and used for the purpose of self-administration
of insulin or other drug prescribed for the treatment of disease by a
licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs;



      (5)   A person whose use of a hypodermic is for legal
research, clinical, educational or medicinal purposes;



      (6)   A farmer, for the lawful administration of a drug to an
animal;



      (7)   A person whose use of a hypodermic is for lawful
professional, mechanical, trade or craft purposes.



   (B)   No manufacturer or distributor of, or dealer in, hypodermics
or medication packaged in hypodermics, or their authorized agents or
employees, and no terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, shall display any
hypodermic for sale.  No person authorized to possess a hypodermic pursuant
to division (A) of this section shall negligently fail to take reasonable
precautions to prevent any hypodermic in the person's possession from theft
or acquisition by any unauthorized person.



(R.C. § 3719.172(A), (B))



   (C)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.  If the offender previously has been
convicted of a violation of division (B) of this section, R.C. § 3719.05,
3719.06, 3719.13, 3719.172(B), or 3719.31, or a drug abuse offense, a
violation of division (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.



(R.C. § 3719.99(E))



Statutory reference:



   Felony offenses, see R.C. § 3719.172(C), (D)



§ 138.16  CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE SCHEDULES.



   Controlled Substance Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as established in
R.C. § 3719.41 and amended by R.C. §§ 3719.43 and 3719.44, are hereby
adopted by reference, and shall be treated as if set forth in full herein.



Statutory reference:



   For comprehensive lists of drugs identified under each of the following
Schedules, see R.C. § 3719.41, as amended by R.C. §§ 3719.43 and 3719.44:



   Schedule I



      (A)   Narcotics - opiates



      (B)   Narcotics - opium derivatives



      (C)   Hallucinogens



      (D)   Depressants



      (E)   Stimulants



   Schedule II



      (A)   Narcotics - opium and opium derivatives



      (B)   Narcotics - opiates



      (C)   Stimulants



      (D)   Depressants



      (E)   Hallucinogenic substances



      (F)   Immediate precursors



   Schedule III



      (A)   Stimulants



      (B)   Depressants



      (C)   Narcotic antidotes



      (D)   Narcotics - narcotic preparations



      (E)   Anabolic steroids



      (F)   Hallucinogenic substances



   Schedule IV



      (A)   Narcotic drugs



      (B)   Depressants



      (C)   Fenfluramine



      (D)   Stimulants



      (E)   Other substances



   Schedule V



      (A)   Narcotic drugs



      (B)   Narcotics - narcotic preparations



      (C)   Stimulants



§ 138.17  UNLAWFUL FURNISHING OF PRESCRIPTION TO ENABLE PERSONS TO BE
ISSUED HANDICAPPED PARKING PLACARDS OR LICENSE PLATES.



   (A)   No physician or chiropractor shall do either of the following:



      (1)   Furnish a person with a prescription in order to enable
the person to be issued a removable windshield placard, temporary removable
windshield placard, or license plates under R.C. § 4503.44, knowing that the
person does not meet any of the criteria contained in R.C. § 4503.44(A)(1).



      (2)   Furnish a person with a prescription described in
division (A)(1) of this section and knowingly misstate on the prescription
the length of time the physician or chiropractor expects the person to have
the disability that limits or impairs the person's ability to walk in order
to enable the person to retain a placard issued under R.C. § 4503.44 for a
period of time longer than that which would be estimated by a similar
practitioner under the same or similar circumstances.



(R.C. §§ 4731.481, 4734.161)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.



(R.C. §§ 4731.99(F), 4734.99(B))



Cross-reference:



   Parking privileges for persons with disabilities, see § 76.05



§ 138.18  PSEUDOEPHEDRINE SALES.



   (A)   Unlawful purchases.



      (1)   As used in divisions (A), (B), (C) and (D) of this
section:



         CONSUMER PRODUCT. Any food or drink that is consumed or
used by humans and any drug, including a drug that may be provided legally
only pursuant to a prescription, that is intended to be consumed or used by
humans.



         EPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation
that contains any quantity of ephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers,
or salts of optical isomers.



         EPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains
ephedrine.



         PSEUDOEPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture, or
preparation that contains any quantity of pseudoephedrine, any of its salts,
optical isomers, or salts of optical isomers.



         PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains
pseudoephedrine.



         RETAILER. A place of business that offers consumer products
for sale to the general public.



         SINGLE-INGREDIENT PREPARATION. A compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance that contains a single active ingredient.



         TERMINAL DISTRIBUTOR OF DANGEROUS DRUGS. Has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.



      (2)   (a)   1.   No individual shall knowingly purchase,
receive, or otherwise acquire an amount of pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product that is greater than either of the following unless the
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product is dispensed by a pharmacist
pursuant to a valid prescription issued by a licensed health professional
authorized to prescribe drugs and the conduct of the pharmacist and the
licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs is in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, or 4741:



               a,   Three and six tenths grams within a
period of a single day;



               b.   Nine grams within a period of 30
consecutive days.



            2.   The limits specified in divisions
(A)(2)(a)1.a. and (A)(2)(a)1.b. of this section apply to the total amount of
base pseudoephedrine or base ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product, respectively. The limits do not apply to the product’s
overall weight.



         (b)   It is not a violation of division (B)(1) of this
section for an individual to receive or accept more than an amount of
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product specified in division
(A)(2)(a)1.a. or (A)(2)(a)1.b. of this section if the individual is an
employee of a retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, and the
employee receives or accepts from the retailer or terminal distributor of
dangerous drugs the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product in a sealed
container in connection with manufacturing, warehousing, placement, stocking,
bagging, loading, or unloading of the product.



      (3)   (a)   No individual under 18 years of age shall
knowingly purchase, receive, or otherwise acquire a pseudoephedrine product,
or ephedrine product unless the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
is dispensed by a pharmacist pursuant to a valid prescription issued by a
licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs and the conduct of
the pharmacist and the licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731,
or 4741.



         (b)   Division (A)(3)(a) of this section does not apply
to an individual under 18 years of age who purchases, receives, or otherwise
acquires a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product from any of the
following:



            1.   A licensed health professional authorized to
prescribe drugs or pharmacist who dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides the
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to that individual and whose
conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730,
4731, or 4741;



            2.   A parent or guardian of that individual who
provides the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the individual;



            3.   A person, as authorized by that
individual’s parent or guardian, who dispenses, sells, or otherwise
provides the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the individual;



            4.   A retailer or terminal distributor of
dangerous drugs who provides the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
to that individual if the individual is an employee of the retailer or
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs and the individual receives or
accepts from the retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs the
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product in a sealed container in
connection with manufacturing, warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging,
loading, or unloading of the product.



      (4)   No individual under 18 years of age shall knowingly show
or give false information concerning the individual’s name, age, or other
identification for the purpose of purchasing, receiving, or otherwise
acquiring a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product.



      (5)   No individual shall knowingly fail to comply with the
requirements of R.C. § 3715.051(B).



      (6)   Whoever violates division (A)(2)(a) of this section is
guilty of unlawful purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product, a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (7)   Whoever violates division (A)(3)(a) of this section is
guilty of underage purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product, a delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if
it could be committed by an adult.



      (8)   Whoever violates division (A)(4) of this section is
guilty of using false information to purchase a pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product, a delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor of the first
degree if it could be committed by an adult.



      (9)   Whoever violates division (A)(5) of this section is
guilty of improper purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 2925.55)



   (B)   Unlawful retail sales.



      (1)   (a)   1.   Except as provided in division
(B)(1)(b) of this section, no retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous
drugs or an employee of a retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs
shall knowingly sell, offer to sell, hold for sale, deliver, or otherwise
provide to any individual an amount of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product that is greater than either of the following:



               a.   Three and six tenths grams within a
period of a single day;



               b.   Nine grams within a period of 30
consecutive days.



            2.   The maximum amounts specified in divisions
(B)(1)(a)1.a. and (B)(1)(a)1.b. of this section apply to the total amount of
base pseudoephedrine or base ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product, respectively. The maximum amounts do not apply to the
product’s overall weight.



         (b)   1.   Division (B)(1)(a) of this section does
not apply to any quantity of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
dispensed by a pharmacist pursuant to a valid prescription issued by a
licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs if the conduct of
the pharmacist and the licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731,
or 4741.



            2.   It is not a violation of division (B)(1)(a)
of this section for a retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, or
employee of either to provide to an individual more than an amount of
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product specified in division
(B)(1)(a)1.a. or (B)(1)(a)1.b. of this section under either of the following
circumstances:



               a.   The individual is an employee of the
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, and the employee
receives or accepts from the retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous
drugs, or employee the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product in a
sealed container in connection with manufacturing, warehousing, placement,
stocking, bagging, loading, or unloading of the product;



               b.   A stop-sale alert is generated after
the submission of information to the national precursor log exchange under
the conditions described in R.C. § 3715.052(A)(2).



      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (B)(2)(b) of
this section, no retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs or an
employee of a retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall sell,
offer to sell, hold for sale, deliver, or otherwise provide a pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to an individual who is under 18 years of age.



         (b)   Division (B)(2)(a) of this section does not apply
to any of the following:



            1.   A licensed health professional authorized to
prescribe drugs or pharmacist who dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides a
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to an individual under 18 years
of age and whose conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723,
4729, 4730, 4731, or 4741;



            2.   A parent or guardian of an individual under
18 years of age who provides a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
to the individual;



            3.   A person who, as authorized by the
individual’s parent or guardian, dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides a
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to an individual under 18 years
of age;



            4.   The provision by a retailer, terminal
distributor of dangerous drugs, or employee of either of a pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product in a sealed container to an employee of the
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs who is under 18 years of
age in connection with manufacturing, warehousing, placement, stocking,
bagging, loading, or unloading of the product.



      (3)   No retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs
shall fail to comply with the requirements of R.C. § 3715.051(A) or R.C. §
3715.052(A)(2).



      (4)   No retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs
shall fail to comply with the requirements of R.C. § 3715.052(A)(1).



      (5)   Whoever violates division (B)(1)(a) of this section is
guilty of unlawfully selling a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product,
a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (6)   Whoever violates division (B)(2)(a) of this section is
guilty of unlawfully selling a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
to a minor, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



      (7)   Whoever violates division (B)(3) of this section is
guilty of improper sale of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
misdemeanor of the second degree.



      (8)   Whoever violates division (B)(4) of this section is
guilty of failing to submit information to the national precursor log
exchange, a misdemeanor for which the offender shall be fined not more than
$1,000 per violation.



(R.C. § 2925.56)



   (C)   Transaction scans.



      (1)   As used in this division and division (D) of this
section:



         CARD HOLDER. Means any person who presents a driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or an identification card to a seller, or an
agent or employee of a seller, to purchase or receive any pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product from the seller, agent, or employee.



         IDENTIFICATION CARD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2927.021.



         SELLER. Means a retailer or terminal distributor of
dangerous drugs.



         TRANSACTION SCAN. Means the process by which a seller or an
agent or employee of a seller checks by means of a transaction scan device
the validity of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an
identification card that is presented as a condition for purchasing or
receiving any pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product.



         TRANSACTION SCAN DEVICE . Has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 2927.021.



      (2)   (a)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller
may perform a transaction scan by means of a transaction scan device to check
the validity of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
identification card presented by a card holder as a condition for selling,
giving away, or otherwise distributing to the card holder a pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product.



         (b)   If the information deciphered by the transaction
scan performed under division (C)(2)(a) of this section fails to match the
information printed on the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
identification card presented by the card holder, or if the transaction scan
indicates that the information so printed is false or fraudulent, neither the
seller nor any agent or employee of the seller shall sell, give away, or
otherwise distribute any pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the
card holder.



         (c)   Division (C)(2)(a) of this section does not
preclude a seller or an agent or employee of a seller as a condition for
selling, giving away, or otherwise distributing a pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product to the person presenting the document from using a
transaction scan device to check the validity of a document other than a
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification card if the
document includes a bar code or magnetic strip that may be scanned by the
device.



      (3)   Rules adopted by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles under
R.C. § 4301.61(C) apply to the use of transaction scan devices for purposes
of this division (C) and division (D) of this section.



      (4)   (a)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller
shall electronically or mechanically record or maintain any information
derived from a transaction scan, except the following:



            1.   The name, address, and date of birth of the
person listed on the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
identification card presented by a card holder;



            2.   The expiration date, identification number,
and issuing agency of the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
identification card presented by a card holder.



         (b)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall
use the information that is derived from a transaction scan or that is
permitted to be recorded and maintained under division (C)(4)(a) of this
section except for purposes of division (D) of this section, R.C. § 2925.58,
or R.C. § 3715.052(A)(1).



         (c)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall
use a transaction scan device for a purpose other than the purpose specified
in division (C)(2)(a) of this section.



         (d)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall
sell or otherwise disseminate the information derived from a transaction scan
to any third party, including but not limited to selling or otherwise
disseminating that information for any marketing, advertising, or promotional
activities, but a seller or agent or employee of a seller may release that
information pursuant to a court order or as specifically authorized by
division (D) of this section or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code.



      (5)   Nothing in this division (C) or division (D) of this
section relieves a seller or an agent or employee of a seller of any
responsibility to comply with any other applicable state or federal laws or
rules governing the sale, giving away, or other distribution of
pseudoephedrine products or ephedrine products.



      (6)   Whoever violates division (C)(2)(b) or (C)(4) of this
section is guilty of engaging in an illegal pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product transaction scan, and the court may impose upon the
offender a civil penalty of up to $1,000 for each violation. The Clerk of the
Court shall pay each collected civil penalty to the County Treasurer for
deposit into the County Treasury.



(R.C. § 2925.57)



   (D)   Affirmative defenses.



      (1)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may not be
found guilty of a charge of a violation of division (B) of this section in
which the age of the purchaser or other recipient of a pseudoephedrine
product is an element of the alleged violation if the seller, agent, or
employee raises and proves as an affirmative defense that all of the
following occurred:



         (a)   A card holder attempting to purchase or receive a
pseudoephedrine product presented a driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or an identification card.



         (b)   A transaction scan of the driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or identification card that the card holder presented
indicated that the license or card was valid.



         (c)   The pseudoephedrine product was sold, given away,
or otherwise distributed to the card holder in reasonable reliance upon the
identification presented and the completed transaction scan.



      (2)   In determining whether a seller or an agent or employee
of a seller has proven the affirmative defense provided by division (D)(1) of
this section, the trier of fact in the action for the alleged violation of
division (B) of this section shall consider any written policy that the
seller has adopted and implemented and that is intended to prevent violations
of division (B) of this section. For purposes of division (D)(1)(c) of this
section, the trier of fact shall consider that reasonable reliance upon the
identification presented and the completed transaction scan may require a
seller or an agent or employee of a seller to exercise reasonable diligence
to determine, and that the use of a transaction scan device does not excuse a
seller or an agent or employee of a seller from exercising reasonable
diligence to determine, the following:



         (a)   Whether a person to whom the seller or agent or
employee of a seller sells, gives away, or otherwise distributes a
pseudoephedrine product is 18 years of age or older;



         (b)   Whether the description and picture appearing on
the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card
presented by a card holder is that of the card holder.



      (3)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense
provided by division (D)(1) of this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles or a deputy registrar who issued an identification card under R.C.
§§ 4507.50 through 4507.52 shall be permitted to submit certified copies of
the records of that issuance in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of or
contractors with the Bureau of Motor Vehicles in the action.



(R.C. § 2925.58)



   (E)   Retailer’s duties.



      (1)   As used in divisions (E) and (F) of this section:



         CONSUMER PRODUCT. Any food or drink that is consumed or
used by humans and any drug, including a drug that may be provided legally
only pursuant to a prescription, that is intended to be consumed or used by
humans.



         DRUG. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.



         EPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation
that contains any quantity of ephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers,
or salts of optical isomers.



         EPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains
ephedrine.



         LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL. An officer or employee of any
agency or authority of the United States, a state, a territory, a political
subdivision of a state or territory, or an Indian tribe, who is empowered by
the law to investigate or conduct an official inquiry into a potential
violation of law or prosecute or otherwise conduct a criminal, civil, or
administrative proceeding arising from an alleged violation of law.



         LICENSED HEALTH PRO-FESSIONAL AUTHORIZED TO PRESCRIBE
DRUGS. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.



         NATIONAL PRECURSOR LOG EXCHANGE or EXCHANGE. The electronic
system for tracking sales of pseudoephedrine products and ephedrine products
on a national basis that is administered by the National Association of Drug
Diversion Investigators or a successor organization.



         PHARMACIST. A person licensed under Chapter 4729. of the
Revised Code to engage in the practice of pharmacy.



         PHARMACY. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.



         PRESCRIBER. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.



         PRESCRIPTION. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.



         PROOF OF AGE. A driver’s license, a commercial driver’s
license, a military identification card, a passport, or an identification
card issued under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to 4507.52 that shows a person is 18
years of age or older.



         PSEUDOEPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture, or
preparation that contains any quantity of pseudoephedrine, any of its salts,
optical isomers, or salts of optical isomers.



         PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains
pseudoephedrine.



         RETAILER. A place of business that offers consumer products
for sale to the general public.



         SINGLE-INGREDIENT PREP-ARATION. A compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance that contains a single active ingredient.



         STOP-SALE ALERT. A notification sent from the national
precursor log exchange to a retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous
drugs indicating that the completion of a sale of a pseudoephedrine product
or ephedrine product would result in a violation of R.C. § 2925.56(A)(1) or
federal law.



         TERMINAL DISTRIBUTOR OF DANGEROUS DRUGS. Has the same
meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.



         WHOLESALER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.



      (2)   A retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs
that sells, offers to sell, holds for sale, delivers, or otherwise provides a
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the public shall do all of
the following:



         (a)   Segregate pseudoephedrine products or ephedrine
products from other merchandise so that no member of the public may procure
or purchase such products without the direct assistance of a pharmacist or
other authorized employee of the retailer or terminal distributor of
dangerous drugs;



         (b)   With regard to each time a pseudoephedrine product
or ephedrine product is sold or otherwise provided without a valid
prescription:



            1.   Determine, by examination of a valid proof of
age, that the purchaser or recipient is at least 18 years of age;



            2.   a.   Using any information available,
including information from the national precursor log exchange if the
information is accessible, make a reasonable attempt to ensure that no
individual purchases or receives an amount of pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product that is greater than either of the following:



                  i.   Three and six tenths grams within
a period of a single day;



                  ii.   Nine grams within a period of 30
consecutive days.



               b.   The maximum amounts specified in
divisions (E)(2)(b)2.a.i. and (E)(2)(b)2.a.ii. of this section apply to the
total amount of base pseudoephedrine or base ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product, respectively. The maximum amounts do not apply
to the product’s overall weight.



         (c)   Maintain a log book of pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product purchases, in accordance with R.C. § 3715.051;



         (d)   If required to comply with section R.C. §
3715.052, submit the information specified in divisions (A)(1)(a) to
(A)(1)(d) of that section to the national precursor log exchange.



      (3)   Prescriptions, orders, and records maintained pursuant
to this section and stocks of pseudoephedrine products and ephedrine products
shall be open for inspection to federal, state, county, and municipal
officers, and employees of the State Board of Pharmacy whose duty it is to
enforce the laws of this state or of the United States relating to controlled
substances. Such prescriptions, orders, records, and stocks shall be open for
inspection by the State Medical Board and its employees for purposes of
enforcing R.C. Chapter 4731.



(R.C. § 3715.05)



   (F)   Theft or loss; reporting requirements.



      (1)   Each retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs,
pharmacy, prescriber, or wholesaler that sells, offers to sell, holds for
sale, delivers, or otherwise provides any pseudoephedrine product and that
discovers the theft or loss of any pseudoephedrine product in an amount of
more than nine grams per incident of theft or loss shall notify all of the
following upon discovery of the theft or loss:



         (a)   The State Board of Pharmacy, by telephone
immediately upon discovery of the theft or loss;



         (b)   Law enforcement authorities. If the incident is a
theft and the theft constitutes a felony, the retailer, terminal distributor
of dangerous drugs, pharmacy, prescriber, or wholesaler shall report the
theft to the law enforcement authorities in accordance with R.C. § 2921.22.



      (2)   Within 30 days after making a report by telephone to the
State Board of Pharmacy pursuant to division (F)(1)(a) of this section, a
retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, pharmacy, prescriber, or
wholesaler shall send a written report to the State Board of Pharmacy.



      (3)   The reports required under this section shall identify
the product that was stolen or lost, the amount of the product stolen or
lost, and the date and time of discovery of the theft or loss.



(R.C. § 3715.06)



§ 138.19  DIVERSION PROGRAM.



   If a person is charged in a criminal complaint with violating a
provision of this chapter, classified as any degree of misdemeanor, R.C. §
2935.36 shall apply to the offense permitting a diversion program in lieu of
conviction, except that a person is ineligible for diversion under this
section if the person previously has been diverted from conviction pursuant
to section or similar section under state law or another municipal code.  If
the person completes the diversion program to the satisfaction of the court,
the court shall dismiss the complaint and order the record in the case sealed
under R.C. § 2953.52. If the person fails to satisfactorily complete the
diversion program, the court shall proceed with the complaint.



(Ord. 9-2012, passed 11-7-12)



TITLE XV: LAND USAGE



       Chapter




         150.01   TITLE, PURPOSE AND APPLICATION





         150.02   GENERAL PROVISIONS





         150.03   DEFINITIONS





         150.10   ADMINISTRATIVE POWERS AND DUTIES





         150.12   PROCEDURES FOR ZONING CERTIFICATES,
CERTIFICATES OF APPROVAL, AND CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY





         150.14   ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES FOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN
REVIEW





         150.16   CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS AND SIMILAR USES





         150.18   REGULATIONS FOR LANDMARK PROPERTIES





         150.20   ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES FOR APPEALS AND
VARIANCES





         150.22   ZONING AMENDMENTS





         150.30   ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES





         151.01   ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS AND MAP





         151.10   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS





         151.12   BUSINESS DISTRICT REGULATIONS





         151.13   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS AND INTERIM
DEVELOPMENT CONTROL DISTRICTS





         151.14   HERITAGE OVERLAY DISTRICT REGULATIONS





         151.15   OLD MONTGOMERY GATEWAY DISTRICT REGULATIONS





         151.16   HOSPITAL CORRIDOR OVERLAY DISTRICT REGULATIONS
(HOS)





         151.18   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES





         151.20   CONDITIONAL USE REGULATIONS





         151.30   SIGN REGULATIONS





         151.32   OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS





         151.34   LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING REGULATIONS





         151.36   REGULATIONS FOR WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION
FACILITIES





         151.50   NONCONFORMING USE REGULATIONS





         152.   BUILDING CODE





         153.   LAND USE FEES





         154.   WATER MANAGEMENT AND SEDIMENT CONTROL





         155.   RENEWAL AND REDEVELOPMENT





         156.01   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS: INTRODUCTION AND
GENERAL INTERPRETATION





         156.02   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS: REQUIREMENTS FOR
SUBDIVISION APPROVAL





         157.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION




CHAPTER 150.01:  TITLE, PURPOSE AND APPLICATION



Section



   150.0101   Title



   150.0102   Purpose



   150.0103   Application



   150.0104   Conflicting laws



   150.0105   Scope



   150.0106   Severability



§ 150.0101  TITLE.



   These rules, regulations, procedures and map shall be known, cited and
referred to as the Montgomery Zoning Code Update, or Zoning Code.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.0102  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of this Zoning Code and the intent of the
legislative authority in its adoption is to promote and protect the public
health, safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity, and general welfare in the
City, by dividing the municipality into districts (zones) of such number and
dimension as to achieve a coordinated, beneficial and meaningful development
of land uses by the following:



      (1)   Regulating the use of buildings, other structures and
land for residential, business, and other uses;



      (2)   Regulating the area and dimension of lots, and yards;



      (3)   Regulating and restricting the location, bulk, height,
design and land coverage of buildings;



      (4)   Regulating the density of land occupancy; and



      (5)   Providing regulations and procedures for the
administration, amendment and enforcement thereof.



   (B)   In addition, this Zoning Code is intended to achieve, among
others, the following objectives:



      (1)   To protect the character, integrity and value of the
residential, business, institutional, and recreational areas and to assure
their orderly and beneficial development;



      (2)   To provide adequate open space and prevent overcrowding
of the land and an excessive concentration of the population;



      (3)   To protect commercial opportunity, enhance the viability
of the commercial establishment, and preserve a balance of business services
to facilitate the availability of retail and professional services sufficient
to meet the needs of the residential population of the City;



      (4)   To regulate the location of buildings and intensity of
uses in relation to streets and traffic flow to assure the least interference
with traffic movement thereby improving and promoting the public safety;



      (5)   To facilitate adequate provisions for public utilities
and facilities such as recreation, school, sewerage, water, transportation
and other public requirements;



      (6)   To promote the compatibility of adjacent uses;



      (7)   To guide the future development of the City in a manner
that brings about the gradual conformity of land and building uses in
accordance with comprehensive plans adopted by the City; and



      (8)   To accomplish the specific intentions and goals set
forth hereinafter in this Zoning Code.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.0103  APPLICATION.



   Unless specifically noted otherwise, the provisions of this Zoning Code
shall be considered as the minimum requirements necessary for public health,
safety, and general welfare.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.0104  CONFLICTING LAWS.



   This Zoning Code shall not repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair
or interfere with any existing law or ordinance, or any rules, regulations,
deed restrictions or covenants heretofore or hereafter adopted or promulgated
pursuant to law regulating the use of land or buildings. However, in cases
where this Zoning Code imposes a greater restriction upon the use of
buildings or premises, upon the height of buildings, upon the lot area per
family or requires larger yards or other open spaces than are imposed or
required by such other laws or ordinances, or by such rules and regulations,
the provisions of this Zoning Code shall control.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.0105  SCOPE.



   Nothing in this Code shall be construed to limit Council in the
exercise of all of the powers to zone or redistrict now or hereafter
authorized by the Ohio Constitution or Ohio statutes or the City Charter.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.0106  SEVERABILITY.



   Sections and subsections of this Zoning Code and the several parts or
provisions thereof are hereby declared to be independent sections,
subsections, parts and provisions, and the holding of any such section,
subsection, part or provision thereof to be unconstitutional, void or
ineffective for any cause shall not affect nor render invalid any other such
section, subsection, part or provision thereof.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



CHAPTER 150.02:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   150.0201   General regulation of lots



   150.0202   Nuisances prohibited



   150.0203   Visibility at intersections



   150.0204   General regulation of structures and construction



§ 150.0201  GENERAL REGULATION OF LOTS.



   (A)   Required Street Frontage. All zoning lots shall front on a
dedicated public street. All lots created as a result of lot splits or
subdivisions shall have frontage on a dedicated street in the amount required
in this Code.



   (B)   Required Yard and Open Space Maintained. The required yards
surrounding an existing principal building, which have been counted or
calculated as part of a side yard, rear yard, front yard, or other open space
required by this Zoning Code shall not, by reason of change in ownership or
otherwise, be counted or calculated to satisfy the yard or other open space
requirement for any other principal building, nor shall any area occupied by
a street right-of-way be included as part of the minimum yard and open space
requirements or lot area requirements.



   (C)   Required Lot Area To Be Maintained. A parcel of land may be
subdivided into two or more lots provided any lot resulting from such
division is located in only one district and shall conform to the lot area
and lot width requirements in this Code. A nonconforming lot of record that
is owned separately from adjoining lots on the effective date of this Zoning
Code or as amended which affected its conformity shall not be reduced in any
manner that would increase its nonconforming situation.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.0202  NUISANCES PROHIBITED.



   No use shall be permitted or authorized to be established which, when
conducted in compliance with the provisions of this Zoning Code and any
additional conditions and requirements prescribed, may be hazardous, noxious,
or offensive due to the emission of odor, dust, smoke, fumes, cinders, gas,
noise, vibration, light, electrical interference, refuse matters and water
carried wastes, or which will interfere with adjacent landowners enjoyment of
the use of their lands.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.0203  VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTIONS.



   On every corner lot there shall be no material impairment to visibility
(whether by the location of structures including fences, landscaping or other
means) between a height of 2 feet and a height of 6 feet above the natural
grade, within the triangle formed by the right-of-way lines of two
intersecting streets, and a line drawn between two points, one on each such
right-of-way line, each 30 feet from the point of intersection of such
right-of-way lines.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.0204  GENERAL REGULATION OF STRUCTURES AND CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   Minimum Construction Standards. All structures, except those
exempt as specified in this Zoning Code, shall comply with the standards of
all enabling codes adopted by the City of Montgomery. Compliance to the
building code is required regardless of whether the structure is constructed
on the building site, fabricated in a factory, or moved in from a location
outside the City.



   (B)   Permitted Height Exemption.



      (1)   With the exception of a residential structure in a
residential district or an accessory structure in a residential district,
roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating
fans or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the building; fire
or parapet walls, skylights, towers, steeples, stage lofts, and screens; and
the following, either rooftop or freestanding: flagpoles, chimneys,
smokestacks, radio and television aerials, wireless masts, water tanks or
similar structures shall be permitted to exceed the maximum height set forth
for the district in which the structure is located provided:



         (a)   No such structure shall exceed the height limits
of the district in which it is located by more than 15 feet; and



         (b)   No such structure shall have a total area greater
than 25% of the roof area of the building.



         (c)   Fire or parapet walls shall not exceed 10% of the
linear feet of the elevation of the building facade on which it is located.



      (2)   Residential structures in a residential district or
accessory structures to a residential use or structure in a residential
district shall not exceed the height limits of the district in which they are
located.



   (C)   Accessory Buildings. Accessory buildings and uses shall be
permitted in accordance with district regulations provided that no accessory
structure or building is permitted on a lot unless there exists a principal
building on such lot.



   (D)   Structures for Human Habitation. Only structures that meet all
the requirements for a permitted dwelling unit shall be permitted to be
occupied for human habitation.



   (E)   Temporary Facilities. Temporary construction facilities for
use incidental to construction work may be erected in any zoning districts
herein established; however, such facilities shall be removed within 30 days
of removal of the temporary certificate of occupancy or upon completion or
abandonment of the construction work. Such facilities shall not be occupied
for human habitation. Temporary facilities include: construction fencing,
construction sheds and offices, tool sheds, and portable toilet facilities.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



CHAPTER 150.03:  DEFINITIONS



Section



   150.0301   Interpretation of terms and words



   150.0302   Definitions



§ 150.0301  INTERPRETATION OF TERMS AND WORDS.



   For the purpose of this Code, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted as follows:



   (A)   The word "shall" is a mandatory requirement, the word "may" is
a permissive requirement, and the word "should" is a preferred requirement.



   (B)   The word "building" includes the word "structure."



   (C)   The words "used" and "occupied" include the words "intended,
designed or arranged to be used or occupied."



   (D)   The present tense includes the future tense, the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular.



   (E)   The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company or corporation as well as an individual.



   (F)   Whenever a number of days are specified, days shall mean
calendar days unless specifically noted otherwise.



   (G)   The words "include," "for example", "such as", or words of
similar meaning are nonexclusive and interpreted to mean "including, but not
necessarily limited to" any items or provisions following such words.



   (H)   In the case of any real or apparent conflict between the text
of this zoning code and any other illustration explaining the text, the text
shall apply.



   (I)   Section and subsection headings contained herein, are provided
for illustrative purposes only, and shall not be deemed to limit, govern,
modify, or otherwise affect the scope, meaning, or intent of any provision of
this zoning code.



   (J)   Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, the
following conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows:



      (1)   "And" indicates that all connected items or provisions
apply.



      (2)   "Or" indicates that the connected items or provisions
may apply singly or in any combination.



      (3)   "Either...or" indicates that the connected items or
provisions shall apply singly, but not in combination.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05; Am. Ord. 6-2010, passed 7-7-10)



§ 150.0302  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Words used in this Code are used in their ordinary English
usage.



   (B)   For the purpose of this Code the following terms, whenever
used in this Code, shall have the meaning herein indicated:



   ACCESS DRIVE.   A paved strip, which provides a vehicular connection
between off-street parking spaces and a public street.



   ACCESSORY USE OR BUILDING. Subordinate use or building customarily
incidental to and located on the same lot with the principle building or use.



   ADULT DAY-CARE FACILITY.   An establishment that during any part of
the normal business day provides supervised educational, recreational and
social activities to elderly and/or handicapped adults, but not including
persons suffering from acute or chronic alcoholism or other drug dependency
and persons who regularly require restraint.



   ALTER OR ALTERATION.  Any material change in external architectural
feature(s) of any property or any change to an archaeological feature of the
property, including a change or rearrangement in the structural parts or
building service equipment or an enlargement, whether by extending on a side
or by increasing height. ALTERATION shall include a change in design, color,
texture, materials or exterior architectural feature. Ordinary maintenance to
correct any deterioration or damage to a structure or to restore the
structure to its condition prior to such deterioration or damage is excluded
from the definition of ALTERATION, provided such work does not involve a
change in design, color, texture, material or exterior architectural feature.



   ANIMAL ENCLOSURE. Any structure used to restrict an animal or animals
to a limited amount of space, such as a pen, cage, coop or hutch. Animal
enclosures shall also include any structure used to house an animal or
animals and/or provide protection from the elements, such as a dog house.
Animal enclosures shall not include bird houses.



   ANIMAL BOARDING FACILITY. A facility providing for the shelter and care
of dogs and cats on a commercial basis including activities such as feeding,
exercising, grooming and incidental medical care.



   ANIMAL GROOMING FACILITY. A facility providing bathing, cutting and
trimming services for dogs and cats on a commercial basis, but shall not
include the overnight boarding of animals.



   ANIMAL HOSPITAL OR CLINIC. A place where animals are given medical or
surgical treatment and the boarding of animals occurs only as an incidental
use.



   APPLICANT. Any owner, owners, association, partnership, corporation, or
agents thereof, who applies for a zoning certificate, building permit,
certificate of occupancy, variance, conditional use permit, sign permit,
zoning amendment or certificate of approval.



   ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE. Ornamentation or decorative features attached to
or protruding from an exterior wall of a building, including, but not limited
to: cornices, eaves, gutters, belt courses, sills, lintels, bay windows,
chimneys, and other decorative ornaments.



   ASSOCIATION. A legal entity operating under recorded land agreements or
contracts through which each unit owner in a single-family detached cluster
development, single-family attached dwellings or multi-family development is
a member and each dwelling unit is subject to charges for a proportionate
share of the expenses of the organization's activities such as maintaining
common open space and other common areas and providing services needed for
the development. An association can take the form of a homeowners'
association, community association, condominium association or other similar
entity.



   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION (See also GASOLINE STATION).  A building,
part of a building, structure or space which is used for the retail sale of
lubricants and motor vehicle accessories.



   AUTOMOBILE/TRUCK RENTAL AGENCY. The use of any building, land area or
other premise for the leasing of automobiles, vans, and/or single axle trucks
or trailers.



   AUTOMOBILE/TRUCK SALES AGENCY. Any establishment engaged in activities
such as displaying, offering for sale and selling new and used motor vehicles
at retail, and which may also include, as an incidental use to such sales,
operating a service facility to perform repairs and maintenance on motor
vehicles, offering for sale and selling motor vehicle parts at retail, and
conducting all other acts that are usual and customary to the operation of a
new or used motor vehicle dealership. For purposes of this chapter,
possession of either a valid new or used motor vehicle dealer franchise
agreement or a new or used motor vehicle dealer license, or both of these
items, is not evidence that a person is operating as an automobile/truck sale
agency. Also for purposes of this chapter, the terms used herein not
specifically defined in this chapter, shall be defined as in R.C. Chapter
4517 and successors.



   AWNING.  An awning shall include any structure made of cloth, metal,
plastic or any other similar material with a frame attached to a building or
other structure and projecting outward therefrom. An awning may be
retractable so as to permit it to be raised to a position flat against the
building when not in use, but its general purpose will be to provide shelter
or shade.



   BASEMENT.  A story or an area of the building having its floor sub
grade (below ground level) on all sides and for that part, it shall not have
more than one-half of its height below grade. A basement is counted as a
half-story for the purposes of height regulation.



   BED AND BREAKFAST.  A private owner-occupied or manager-occupied
residence where overnight accommodations are available and compensation is
paid by guests for overnight stay.



   BLOCK.  The area between two adjacent streets or if no streets are
present an area not to exceed 600 feet in length or width.



   BOARD.  The Montgomery Board of Zoning Appeals, as established by
Charter.



   BUFFER.  An area of healthy and viable vegetation, natural or planted,
adjoining or surrounding a land use and unoccupied in its entirety by any
building structure, paving or portion of such land use, for the purpose of
separating screening and softening the effects of the land use. A buffer may
include a wall, fence or berm. No part of this buffer is to be used for
active recreation, parking, or interior access drives.



   BUILDABLE AREA.   The area of the lot remaining after the minimum
zoning requirements for yards, setbacks, coverage and allowance for
panhandles, easements and restrictions have been met. See Figure 1.







 



   Figure 1. Buildable Area.



   BUILDING.   Any structure with a roof and walls designed or intended
for the support, enclosure, shelter, or protection of persons, animal or
property.



      (1)   BUILDING, ACCESSORY.   A subordinate building detached
from, but located on the same lot as the principal building, the use of which
is incidental to that of the principal building or use. The footprint of an
accessory building shall be smaller than the footprint of the principal
building on a residential lot.



      (2)   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL.   A building occupied by the main
use of the lot on which said building is located.



   BUILDING COVERAGE.   The lot area covered by the principal building(s)
and any roofed over accessory buildings or structures, measured from the
exterior faces of exterior walls, but excluding decks, terraces and other
accessory uses which are open to the sky.



   BUILDING DEPARTMENT. The Building Department of the City of Montgomery,
Ohio, its chief enforcement official or his/her regularly authorized deputy.



   BUILDING, HEIGHT OF.   The vertical distance from the average lot
grade at the front of the structure to the highest point of the structure,
i.e. to the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or
the mean height between eaves and ridge for hip and gable roofs.



   BUILDING LINE.   An imaginary linear extension of the building wall
parallel to the street right-of-way line defining the limits of the front
yard, or in the case of a corner lot, either yard abutting the street.



   CANOPY.   A canopy shall include any structure, made of cloth, metal,
plastic, concrete or any other similar material which is supported by poles,
stanchions or a frame projecting from the ground which has as its general
purpose providing shelter or shade.



   CAR WASH.   A building or enclosed area that provides facilities for
washing and cleaning motor vehicles, which may use production line methods
with a conveyor, blower, or other mechanical devices and/or which may employ
hand labor.



   CELLAR.   A space between the floor and the ceiling next above it
having more than one-half of its height below grade.  A cellar is counted as
a story for the purposes of height regulation only if it is used for dwelling
purposes.



   CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL.   A document issued by the Landmarks
Commission signifying that the proposed demolition or moving of a designated
landmark or the construction, reconstruction or alteration of a designated
landmark has been reviewed by the Landmarks Commission, and found to be in
compliance with the requirements for historical and architectural landmarks,
as outlined in this Zoning Code. Certificates of approval shall also be
issued by the Zoning Administrator for exterior changes to buildings in the
Heritage Overlay District that are neither a designated landmark nor subject
to development plan review, in accordance with the provisions of this Zoning
Code.



   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.  A certificate stating that a building or
structure, as illustrated on approved plans and as constructed, conforms to
the provisions of this Zoning Code.



   CHILD DAY-CARE.  Administering to the needs of infants, toddlers,
preschool children, and school children outside of school hours by persons
other than their parents or guardians, custodians, or relatives by blood,
marriage, or adoption for any part of the 24 hour day in a place or residence
other than a child's own home.



   CHILD DAY-CARE FACILITY. Any place other than a family daycare home in
which child day-care is provided.



   CLINIC. An establishment where sick, ailing, infirm, or injured persons
are admitted for examination and treatment on an outpatient basis by one or
more physicians, dentists, or other medical personnel and where patients are
not kept longer than 23 hours. Such clinics may include ambulatory or
emergency care centers.



   CLUB. A building or portion thereof or premises owned or operated by a
corporation, association, or group of persons for a social, educational,
recreational, charitable, political, patriotic or athletic purpose, but not
primarily for profit or to render a service which is customarily carried on
as a business.



   COMMISSION. The Landmarks or Planning Commission of the City of
Montgomery.



   COMMON AREA. Any land area, and associated facilities, within a
single-family detached cluster development, attached single-family
development or multi-family development that is held in common ownership by
the residents of the development through a homeowners' association, community
association or other legal entity, or which is held by the individual members
of a condominium association as tenants-in-common.



   COMMON DRIVE. A shared means of vehicular ingress and egress located
within an easement of access serving two to six lots not dedicated to the
city by recorded instrument that is maintained solely by the party or parties
using such drive for private access.



   COMMUNITY MARKET. The temporary outdoor sale and display of goods
operated by a non-for-profit or service organization supporting the
Montgomery community.



   COMPOST HEAP. A pile of organic materials kept under controlled
conditions so that the original raw materials are transformed by decay and
degradation into compost.



   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. A document adopted by City Council which sets forth
the community characteristics, articulates goals, and explores alternative
long-term plans for the future of the city.



   CONDITIONAL USE. See USE, CONDITIONAL.



   CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT. A permit issued by the Zoning Administrator
upon approval by the Planning Commission and/or Council to allow a use other
than a principally permitted use to be established within the district on a
specific parcel. See also: USE, CONDITIONAL .



   CONSTRUCTION & MECHANICAL SERVICES.   Contracting businesses including
heating, air conditioning, plumbing, electrical, and general contracting,
which typically require storage of machinery, equipment, and/or material on
premise in addition to administrative offices and service counters.



   CONTRIBUTING PROPERTY.   A building, structure, or site within the
Heritage Overlay District that is not a designated landmark, but which adds
to the historic significance of the District because of its historic
associations, historic architectural qualities, or archaeological values for
which the District is significant. A contributing property must also retain
its "integrity", meaning it must retain enough of its historic physical
features to convey its significance as part of the District.



   COUNCIL. City Council of the City of Montgomery.



   CREMATORY. A building where human bodies or human remains are burned to
ashes.



   DENSITY. A unit or measurement describing the number of dwelling units
permitted per gross acre of land.



   DESIGN CONSISTENT PROPERTY. A property located in the Heritage Overlay
District that was built since the adoption of the Heritage District Design
Guidelines and conforms to those guidelines.



   DISTRICT. A section of the municipality for which the regulations
governing the use of buildings, the size of yards, and the area of lots are
uniform.



   DRIVE-THRU FACILITY.   An establishment which is designed to provide
service to customers while in their motor vehicles, which may be in addition
to similar services offered within the building. The term "drive-thru" shall
also include "drive-up" and "drive-in", including kiosks and ATM's, but shall
not include car wash, gasoline station, and automobile service station.



   DRIVEWAY, PRIVATE RESIDENCE. A paved drive extending from the street
pavement to a private garage or garages on a residential lot which is used by
residents of the lot for vehicular access to and from such street and for the
temporary storage of registered and licensed motor vehicles.



   DWELLING.   Any building or portion thereof containing one or more
dwelling units which is designed or used for residential purposes
exclusively, except as expressly permitted in this Zoning Code.



   DWELLING, ATTACHED SINGLE-FAMILY. Dwelling units that are structurally
attached to one another, side by side, and erected as one building, each
dwelling unit being separated from the adjoining unit or units by a party
wall without openings extending from the basement floor to the roof and each
such building being separated from any other building by space on all sides,
and including such elements as separate ground floor entrances, services and
attached garages.



   DWELLING, CLUSTER SINGLE-FAMILY.  A dwelling unit which is designed
and used exclusively by one family and separated from all other dwelling
units by open space from ground to sky, which is grouped with other dwelling
units on a site and which may be located on its own subdivided lot without a
front, side and/or rear yard in compliance with the standard zoning district
regulations.



   DWELLING, DETACHED SINGLE-FAMILY. A dwelling unit designed for or
occupied exclusively by one family situated on a lot located on a public
street with a front, side and rear yard and separated from all other dwelling
units by open space from ground to sky.



   DWELLING, MULTIPLE. A dwelling or portion thereof designed for or
occupied by more than two families living independently of each other in more
than two dwelling units where the units are separated by party walls with
varying arrangements of entrances.



   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A dwelling designed for or occupied exclusively
by two families living independently of each other in two dwelling units. The
dwelling units may be either attached side by side or one above the other.



   DWELLING UNIT. A group of rooms comprising living, dining, sleeping
room or rooms, storage closets, as well as space and equipment for cooking,
bathing and toilet facilities, all used by only one family.



   EASEMENT.  A grant by a property owner of the use, for a specific
purpose or purposes, of a designated strip of land to the general public, a
corporation, or other individuals.



   ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION AREA. A tract of land that has been awarded
protected status in order to ensure that natural features or biota are
safeguarded.



   FAMILY.  One or more persons related by blood, adoption, marriage or
legal guardianship plus no more than five unrelated individuals residing in a
household as a functional family maintaining a common household as their
permanent residence, as distinguished from a group occupying a hotel (or
motel), as defined herein.



   FAMILY DAY CARE HOME, TYPE B. A permanent residence of the provider in
which child day-care or child day-care services are provided for one to six
children at one time and in which no more than three children may be under
two years of age at one time. In counting children for the purposes of this
division, any children under six years of age who are related to the provider
and who are on the premises of the type B home shall be counted. TYPE B
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME does not include a residence in which the needs of
children are administered to, if all of the children whose needs are being
administered to are siblings of the same immediate family and the residence
is the home of the siblings, nor does it include any child day camp.



   FARM ANIMALS/LIVESTOCK. Animals, including horses, pigs, goats, cows,
sheep, geese, ostriches, roosters and other animals typically kept on farms.
FARM ANIMALS/LIVESTOCK does not include chickens/hens or rabbits.



   FENCE. A vertical structure of a linear nature that is a barrier and is
used as a boundary, as a means of protection, confinement, decoration, or as
part of a buffer, which is made of traditional manufactured fencing material,
such as but not limited to chain link, wood or stone material.



   FIRE PIT. A below ground pit or a manufactured portable device intended
to contain and control outdoor wood fires. Below ground fire pits shall be at
least four inches in depth, no greater than 16 square feet or four feet in
diameter and shall be surrounded on the outside, above ground, by a
noncombustible material such as steel, brick or masonry. Manufactured
portable fire pits shall be used in accordance with the manufacturer's
specifications.



   FLOOR AREA, GROSS. The total number of square feet of all floor space
contained within the outside surface of the exterior walls of a building or
from the center line of a common wall separating two buildings but not
including space in cellars or basements, space in machinery penthouses or
floor space used for accessory off-street parking. However, if the cellar or
basement is used for business or commercial purposes, including storage in a
habitable space, it shall be counted as floor area in computing off-street
parking requirements.



   FLOOR AREA, DWELLING UNIT. The sum of the gross horizontal area of a
building devoted to residential use measured from the exterior faces of
exterior walls or from the centerline of common walls separating two dwelling
units. It shall not include unfinished basements, attached garages, attics,
terraces, breezeways, open porches, and covered steps.



   FOUNDATION. The support base of a building or structure built at or
below grade which serves as the support of a wall, pier, column or other
structural part of a building or structure.



   FOSTER HOME. A residence certified by the State of Ohio to provide
foster care for children.



   FRONTAGE. That portion of the boundary of a lot which abuts a dedicated
public street right-of-way or easement.



   FUNERAL HOME. A building or part thereof used for human funeral
services. Such building may contain space and facilities for: (a) embalming
and the performance of other services used in preparation of the dead for
burial; (b) the performance of autopsies and other surgical procedures; (c)
the storage of caskets, funeral urns, and other related funeral supplies; and
(d) the storage of funeral vehicles, but shall not include facilities for
cremation. Where a funeral home is permitted, a funeral chapel shall also be
permitted.



   GARAGE, PARKING (see also PARKING LOT). A principal or accessory
building or an enclosed space within the principal building in which motor
vehicles owned by the general public are parked, including facilities
operated as a business enterprise with a service charge or fee paid to the
owner or operator of such facility, with no facilities for mechanical service
or repair of a commercial or public nature.



   GARAGE, PRIVATE. An accessory building or portion of the main building
designed or used principally for the storage of self-propelled passenger
vehicles or trailers by the families resident upon the premises.



   GASOLINE STATION (see also AUTO- MOBILE SERVICE STATION). An
establishment where liquids used as motor fuels are stored and dispersed into
the fuel tanks of motor vehicles by an attendant or by persons other than the
station attendant and may include facilities available for the sale of other
retail products.



   GRADE. The elevation of the finished surface of the ground adjoining
the building after final grading and normal settlement. The grade shall be
determined by:



      (1)   For buildings five feet or less from a street, the grade
is the sidewalk elevation at the center of the building. If there is more
than one street, an average sidewalk elevation is to be used. If there is no
sidewalk, the Zoning Administrator shall establish the sidewalk grade.



      (2)   For buildings more than five feet from any street, the
grade is the average level of the finished surface of the ground within 50
feet of the exterior walls of the building.



   GREEN SPACE.  An area that is permanently set aside in a natural,
undisturbed or re-vegetated condition and will not be developed with any
impervious cover and/or structures.



   HOME OCCUPATION. Any activity carried out for gain by a resident
conducted as an accessory use in the resident's dwelling.



   HOSPITAL. An institution providing health services primarily for
in-patient medical or surgical care and emergency services for human patients
and including related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient
departments, training facilities, and staff offices that are an integral part
of the facilities.



   HOTEL (or MOTEL). A building in which lodging is provided and offered
to the public for compensation on a daily rate and which is open to occupancy
for periods of less than one week.



   IMPERVIOUS COVER. Any surface in the urban/suburban landscape that
cannot effectively absorb or infiltrate rainfall.



   INDOOR RECREATION. An indoor facility for any number of uses such as
game courts, exercise equipment, exercise and/or dance floor area, pools,
locker rooms, spa, whirlpool or hot tub, and which may include an accessory
retail shop for the sale of related equipment.



   INSTITUTION. A building occupied by a non-profit corporation or a
non-profit establishment for public use.



   LANDSCAPE AREA. A portion of property where the surface of the ground
has been purposely planted, cultivated and maintained to create an aesthetic
effect, which includes, but is not limited to lawn grass, ornamental grass,
bushes, trees, flowers or other vegetation and surface covering, such as
gravel, rocks, shale, bark, mulch, soils and paving stones, but does not
include weeds or noxious weeds.



   LANDMARK PROPERTY.  Any property which has special character,
historical aesthetic, architectural, or archaeological value as part of the
heritage, development, or cultural characteristics of the city, state, or the
United States, and which has been designated as an approved landmark pursuant
to the provisions of this Zoning Code.



   LIGHT POLE.   A freestanding vertical support used for the purpose of
elevating a light source.



   LOADING SPACE, OFF-STREET. An area located on the same lot with a
building or contiguous to a group of buildings, completely outside of any
public right-of-way, for the temporary parking of vehicles entering the
premises for picking up and making delivery of goods and materials.



   LOT.   A combination of complete lots of record, a combination of
complete lots of record and portions of lots of record, or a combination of
portions of lots of record. If more than one lot or a portion of a lot is
used collectively to meet the minimum lots requirements, the lots must be
contiguous and allow for either the construction with appropriate setbacks
for any proposed building on the site, or the safe movement within the site
of motor vehicle traffic between the lots over a surface drive of appropriate
width and meeting all Code requirements for setbacks and two way travel. The
term ZONING LOT is used synonymously with LOT in this Zoning Code. A lot may
consist of:



      (1)   A single lot of record;



      (2)   A portion of a lot of record;



      (3)   A combination of complete lots of record, of complete
lots of record and portions of lots of record, or of portions of lots of
record. If more than one lot is used collectively to meet the minimum lot
requirements, they must be contiguous and allow for the safe and convenient
movement of automobile and customer movement between the lots and allow for
adequate construction of a proposed building on site.



   LOT AREA. The area contained within the lot lines exclusive of any
portion of the right-of-way of any public street.



   LOT COVERAGE. The ratio of total ground floor area of all buildings on
a lot to the area of the lot expressed as a percentage.



   LOT, DEPTH OF. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear
lot lines.



   LOT LINE. The boundary line defining the limits of the lot. Lot line is
synonymous with "property line". See Figure 2.



      (1)   LOT LINE, FRONT. The lot line separating a lot from a
street right-of-way.



      (2)   LOT LINE, REAR. The lot line opposite and most distant
from the front lot line; or in the case of triangular or irregularly shaped
lots, a line ten feet in length entirely within the lot, parallel to and at a
maximum distance from the front lot line.



      (3)   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot line other than a front or rear
lot line.







 



   Figure 2. Lot Lines.



   LOT OF RECORD. A lot which is part of a subdivision, the map of which
has been recorded in the office of the recorder of Hamilton County, Ohio, or
a parcel of land, the deed to which was on record on or prior to the
effective date of this Zoning Code. For the purposes of these regulations,
any plan of a subdivision which has been approved by official action of the
City Planning Commission on or before the effective date of this Zoning Code
shall have the same status as if the subdivision plan was officially recorded
in the office of the recorder of  Hamilton County, Ohio.



   LOT TYPES (See Figure 3).



      (1)   CORNER LOT.   A lot abutting upon two or more streets
at their intersection or upon two or more parts of the same street which, in
either case, form an interior angle of less than 135 degrees.



      (2)   DOUBLE FRONTAGE (OR THROUGH) LOT. A lot having frontage
on two streets not at an intersection, as distinguished from a corner lot.



      (3)   INTERIOR LOT. A lot abutting or with frontage on only
one street.



      (4)   PANHANDLE LOT. A lot utilizing a strip of land to
provide access to or legal frontage on a public street, but where the
majority of the area of the lot is situated immediately behind one or more
lots (front lots) relative to the street right-of-way to which the panhandle
lot has access. Such lots are commonly referred to as "rear lots" and "flag
lots". The intended use of the panhandle lot is for a residential dwelling,
separate and apart from the front lot.







 



   Figure 3. Lot Types.



   LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured
along a straight line parallel to the front lot line at the required setback
line.



   MANSARD. A sloped roof or rooflike facade architecturally comparable to
a building wall.



   MAUSOLEUM. Any building designed or intended as a tomb for the
interment of one or more human bodies or human cremains at or above grade
level.



   MEDICAL OFFICE. A building or portion thereof where human patients are
admitted for examination and treatment by members of the medical, dental, or
healing arts profession in group or individual practice, but who are not
lodged overnight.



   MINOR ALTERATION. Any incidental construction, addition or modification
of a building or structure, as set forth in § 150.1405.



   MOTEL. See HOTEL .



   NEW MOTOR VEHICLE.   A motor vehicle, the legal title to which has
never been transferred by a manufacturer, remanufacturer, distributor or
dealer to an ultimate purchaser.



   NONCONFORMING BUILDING. A building or other structure existing when
this Zoning Code or any amendment thereto became effective which does not
conform to the regulations governing structures of the district in which it
is located.



   NONCONFORMING LOT. A lot lawfully existing on the effective date of
this Zoning Code or any amendment thereto, which on such effective date, does
not conform to the lot area, width or frontage requirements of the district
in which it is located.



   NONCONFORMING SITE CONDITION.   Any structure lawfully existing on the
effective date of this Zoning Code or any amendment thereto, which, on such
effective date, does not conform to the yard regulations, off-street parking
and loading requirements, sign regulations, landscaping or screening
requirements or other development standards of the district in which it is
situated.



   NONCONFORMING USE. Any structure or land lawfully occupied by a use on
the effective date of this Zoning Code or any amendment thereto but which
does not conform to the use regulations, off-street parking and loading
requirements, or performance standards of the district in which it is located.



   NON-CONTRIBUTING PROPERTY. A property within the Heritage Overlay
District that does not add historic significance to the District because it
was built prior to the adoption of the Heritage District Guidelines and is
not consistent with the 19th century village theme, or a building which may
have originally had architectural characteristics that represented the
desired 19th century village theme, but has been altered over time and no
longer contributes to the District theme.



   NURSING HOME.   An extended or intermediate care facility which
provides skilled nursing and dietary care for persons who are ill or
incapacitated or which provides service for the rehabilitation of the persons
who are convalescing from illness or incapacitation, excluding homes or
similar institutions or facilities for persons suffering from acute or
chronic alcoholism or other drug dependency, or persons who are mentally
incapacitated from causes other than simple senility or who regularly require
constraint.



   OPEN SPACE. An area that is permanently set aside for public use and
may be used for passive or active recreation, stormwater management,
landscaped areas and other similar uses.



   OUTDOOR DISPLAY. The placing of merchandise in an outdoor area that is
open to the general public when the merchandise on display is removed from
its shipping packaging and is representative of merchandise that is available
for purchase inside the building and/or is available for purchase by the
general public directly from the display area.



   OUTDOOR BOILER, STOVE OR FURNACE. An accessory structure, designed and
intended, through the burning of wood or other solid fuel for the purpose of
heating the principal structure or any other site, building, or structure on
the premises.



   OUTDOOR FIREPLACE. A permanent outdoor fireplace consisting of such
elements such as a center firebox, chimney, screen and back wall. Materials
include prefabricated metal, terracotta, brick, stucco and stacked stone. For
the purposes of this chapter, fire pits are not considered outdoor
fireplaces. See also FIRE PIT .



   OUTDOOR KITCHEN. A permanent cooking area in an outdoor living space,
usually designed for dining and entertaining. Outdoor kitchens may consist of
a simple barbecue and counter or can be more involved with a grill, cook
stove or cook top, sink, refrigerator, lighting, cabinetry, fireplace,
countertops, etc. For the purposes of this chapter, portable grills are not
considered outdoor kitchens.



   PARAPET. The extension of a false front or wall above a roofline.



   PARKING LOT (see also GARAGE, PARKING). A paved area made up of marked,
unenclosed parking spaces where vehicles may be stored for the purposes of
temporary, daily or overnight off-street parking.



   PARKING SPACE, OFF-STREET. An open or enclosed area sufficient in size
to store an automobile with room for opening doors on both sides and with
access to a public street. Arrangement of the parking space shall be such as
to allow satisfactory ingress and egress of an automobile, and shall be
located totally outside of any public right-of-way.



   PATIO. A paved outdoor space that adjoins a dwelling unit, includes an
area also referred to as terrace.



   PELLET STOVE. A device that burns compressed wood or biomass pellets to
create a source of heat.



   PERGOLA. An arbor or passageway of columns supporting a roof of
trelliswork on which climbing plants are often trained to grow.



   PLACE OF WORSHIP. A building, structure, or other indoor or outdoor
facility used for public worship. The word PLACE OF WORSHIP includes the
words "church," "chapel," "synagogue", "tabernacle," "mosque," and "temple"
and their uses and activities that are customarily related.



   PLAN, DEVELOPMENT. Drawing(s) and map(s) illustrating the proposed
design, layout and other features for the development of one or more lots.



      (1)   GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN. Drawings and maps including
all the elements set forth in § 150.1406.



      (2)   FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN. Drawings and maps including all
the elements set forth in § 150.1407.



   POLE BUILDING. A permanent structure which has the primary support
derived of wood or metal posts supported by individual submerged footers,
rather than a single continuous foundation, and the framing of the structure
is horizontal rather than vertical. Pole structures include freestanding
unattached, unenclosed carports, with or without poured footers.



   PROPERTY LINE. See LOT LINE.



   PUBLIC OFFICES. Governmentally owned and operated office facility
established to provide administrative services for said governmental agency.



   PUBLIC PARK. A public park is any publicly owned park, playground,
swimming pool or other similar use within the jurisdiction and control of the
city. Accessory structures such as restrooms, gazeboes, picnic tables,
barbeque grills, basketball hoops and other similar uses shall be permitted
in public parks.



   PUBLIC SAFETY FACILITY. A governmentally owned and operated facility
established to provide local police or fire safety services to the
surrounding area.



   PUBLIC SERVICE FACILITY. The erection, construction, alteration,
operation, or maintenance of buildings, power plants, or substations, water
treatment plants, or pumping stations, sewage disposal or pumping plants, and
other similar public service structures by a public utility, a railroad,
whether publicly or privately owned, or a municipal or other governmental
agency, including the furnishing of electrical, gas, rail transport,
communication, public water and sewage service.



   RAIN BARREL. A barrel used as a cistern to hold rainwater.



   RAIN GARDEN.  A landscaping feature that is planted with native
perennial plants and is used to manage stormwater runoff from impervious
surfaces such as roofs, sidewalks, parking areas, etc.



   RECONSTRUCTION. The reproducing by new construction of the exact form
and detail of a vanished structure, or a part thereof, as it appeared at a
specific period of time, as detailed in the Secretary of the Interior's
guidelines.



   REHABILITATION. The restoration, rehabilitation or conservation of
blighted premises by improvement, modernization or repair of a structure or
structures thereon to bring it into conformance with applicable building and
zoning provisions of the city. The restoration, rehabilitation or
conservation of a deteriorating or blighted area by:



      (1)   Formulating and carrying out a plan for a program of
voluntary improvement, modernization or repair or rehabilitation of privately
owned structures;



      (2)   The acquisition of real estate and the demolition or
removal of buildings thereto where necessary to eliminate unhealthful,
unsanitary or unsafe conditions, lessen density or eliminate blight or
incompatible land uses detrimental to the public health and welfare;



      (3)   Otherwise removing or preventing the spread of blight or
deterioration;



      (4)   Constructing or reconstructing necessary streets,
playgrounds, utilities, parks and other public improvements;



      (5)   Acquiring and clearing land for development of privately
owned community facilities;



      (6)   Disposing, for uses in accordance with the urban renewal
plan, of property acquired;



      (7)   Purchasing, repairing and rehabilitating for guidance
purposes and reselling of buildings which are located in the urban renewal
area and which, under the urban renewal plan, are to be repaired or
rehabilitated for dwelling use or related facilities, provided that there
shall not be acquired for such purposes, in any urban renewal area, buildings
which contain or will contain more than 100 dwelling units, or 5% of the
total number of dwelling units in such area which under the urban renewal
plan are to be repaired or rehabilitated, whichever is the lesser;



      (8)   Rehabilitation shall not include the construction or
improvement by the city of any building other than municipal buildings,
except as provided in division (7) hereof.



   RESIDENTIAL FACILITY. A publically or privately operated home as
defined by R.C. Chapter 5119.  RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES shall further be
divided into Category I and Category II which are defined below:



      (1)   Category I means a residential facility providing
accommodations and personal care services for one to five unrelated persons
and licensed as a residential facility by the State of Ohio.



      (2)   Category II means a residential facility providing
accommodations and personal care services for six to 16 persons and licensed
as a residential facility by the State of Ohio.



   RESTAURANT, COUNTER SERVICE. A retail service establishment whose
principal business is the sale of foods, frozen desserts, or beverages in
ready-to-consume individual servings, for consumption either within the
restaurant building or for carry-out, and where customers are not served
their food, frozen desserts, or beverages by a restaurant employee at the
same table or counter where the items are consumed.



   RESTAURANT, TABLE SERVICE. A retail service establishment wherein the
entire business activity, or substantially all of the business activity,
consists of the sale of food and service to patrons seated at tables for
consumption within the building.



   RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT. An establishment engaged in the selling of goods
or merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption,
which is open to the general public during regular business hours and which
has display areas that are designed and laid out to attract the general
public. In determining a use to be a retail use, the Planning Commission may
consider the proportion of display area vs. storage area and the proportion
of the building facade devoted to display windows.



   RETAIL, GENERAL. General retail uses are higher volume, larger
footprint retail establishments that offer a wide variety of merchandise and
serve a broad customer base with extended hours and parking needs. General
retail uses are higher intensity operations which have higher traffic volumes
and deliveries. Larger parking areas and trash receptacles are required, as
is the need for outdoor display and signage. General retail uses include
department stores, furniture and appliance stores, electronic stores, fruit
and vegetable markets, hardware stores, hobby stores, dry goods and other
similar uses.



   RETAIL, SPECIALTY. Specialty retail uses are retail establishments
which have limited impact on traffic and surrounding properties due to the
size and nature of the business. Specialty retail uses are low intensity
operations requiring limited space and a limited number of employees. These
businesses do not generate a high volume of traffic and do not need large
parking fields or large amounts of lighting and signage. Inventory of
merchandise is delivered infrequently by vans or small trucks and deliveries
do not require a loading dock. Specialty retail uses include boutique
clothing, gift shops, book stores, card stores, art galleries and other
similar uses.



   RETIREMENT VILLAGE.  A residential facility to provide for the
personal, social and/or medical needs of individuals who are elderly. The
facility may include one or more of the following types of residential
facilities: independent living with congregate dining facilities, congregate
living, or assisted living, any of which may include nursing care as an
accessory use.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY.  A strip of land taken, dedicated, or otherwise recorded
as an irrevocable right-of-passage for use as a public way.  In addition to
the roadway, it normally incorporates the curbs, lawn strips, sidewalks,
water and sewer lines, lighting, and drainage facilities, and may include
special features (required by the topography or treatment) such as grade
separation, landscaped areas, viaducts, and bridges.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE.  The line between a lot, tract, or parcel of land
and a contiguous public street, and demarcating the public right-of-way.
RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE also means STREET LINE.



   ROOFLINE.   The top edge of a roof or building parapet, whichever is
higher, excluding any cupolas, pylons, chimneys or minor projections. See
Figure 4.







 



   Figure 4. Roof Types.



   SATELLITE DISH. A device capable of receiving communications from a
transmitter or a transmitter relay located in planetary orbit. This
definition is meant to include, but not be limited to, what are commonly
referred to as satellite earth stations, and satellite microwave antennas.



   SCHOOL FACILITIES. Publicly or privately owned facilities providing
full-time or part time instruction and training at the elementary, junior
high and high school levels in accordance with the requirements of R.C.
Chapter 3313; or publicly or privately owned facilities providing
kindergarten or nursery school training and care which are operated by a
board of education or an established religious organization.



   SCHOOL, COMMERCIAL AND TRADE. A higher education facility primarily
teaching useable skills that prepare students for jobs in a trade.



   SCREEN. A method of reducing the impact of noise and unsightly visual
intrusions with more harmonious elements, such as plants, berms, fences,
walls, or a combination thereof, in compliance with this Zoning Code.



   SETBACK. The required minimum horizontal distance between a lot line
and a structure as established by this Zoning Code.



   SETBACK LINE (See also YARD, REQUIRED ). A line established by this
Zoning Code generally parallel with and measured from the lot line, defining
the limits of the required yard in which no building, or structure may be
located above ground, except as may be provided in this Zoning Code. The term
SETBACK LINE shall also include "required setback line."



   SIDEWALK. That portion of a right-of-way between the curb line and the
adjacent property lines, intended for the use of pedestrians.



   SIGN. Any object, device, display, graphic, architectural feature,
structure, or part thereof, which is situated indoors or outdoors or is
attached to, painted on, or displayed from any premises in order to direct
attention to or announce an object, person, institution, organization,
business, product, service, event, or location by any means, including words,
letters, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination, or
projected images.



   STABLE, PRIVATE. An accessory building to a residential, principal use
that shelters animals for the exclusive use of the occupants of the premises.



   STORMWATER BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE ("STORMWATER BMP"). A structural or
non-structural technique designed to temporarily store or treat stormwater
runoff in order to mitigate flooding, reduce pollution, and provide other
amenities.  Examples include rain gardens, bio-retention areas, filter
strips, swales, and other progressive environmental methods.



   STORY. That portion of a building, other than a cellar as defined
herein, included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the
floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between
the floor and the ceiling next above it.



   STORY, HALF. A space under a sloping roof which has the line of
intersection of roof decking and wall face not more than three feet above the
top floor level and in which space not more than two-thirds of the floor area
is finished off for use, or a basement.



   STREET. All property dedicated for public street, highway, freeway, or
roadway purposes or subject to public easements. Included is the land between
the street right-of-way lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may
comprise pavement, gutters, sidewalks, division strips or other areas within
the right-of-way lines. Streets are further classified as follows:



      (1)   ALLEY. A street used primarily for service access to the
rear or side of properties abutting also on other streets.



      (2)   ARTERIAL STREET. A street primarily for through traffic
usually on a continuous route. This facility provides for through traffic
movement between areas, across the country, and to and from expressways.



      (3)   COLLECTOR STREET. A street that primarily carries
traffic from local to arterial streets, including the principal entrance and
circulation routes within residential subdivisions.



      (4)   LOCAL STREET. A street primarily for providing access to
residential or other abutting property.



      (5)   PRIVATE STREET. A local private way that provides
vehicular access to more than one residential structure that is not and will
not be dedicated to public use, but which is owned and maintained by an
association.



      (6)   PUBLIC STREET. An existing state, county, or city street
or public road shown on the recorded subdivision plat.



   STREAM BUFFER. A vegetated area bordering a stream which exists or is
established to protect a stream system.



   STREET LINE.   See RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE .



   STREETSCAPE. The planned system of pedestrian walkways and improvements
on major and secondary arteries in historic downtown Montgomery as specified
by ordinance.



   STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change in the supporting members of the
building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or
any increase in the area or cubical content of the building.



   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, having permanent location
on or in the ground or attached to something having a permanent location on
or in the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, barriers,
bridges, decks, fences, gazebos, outdoor seating facilities, platforms,
poles, advertising signs, back stops for athletic fields or courts, pergolas,
pools, patios, sheds and walls.



   STUDIOS FOR INSTRUCTION. A building, or portion thereof, that is used
or intended to be used for nonacademic group instructional purposes for a
fee, which include but are not limited to arts, crafts, dance, and computer
instruction.



   SWIMMING POOL. An outdoor structure, in-ground or above-ground, used
for recreational swimming, which is designed to contain at least two feet of
water at any point and has a diameter greater than six feet.



   TEMPORARY STORAGE CONTAINER.   Any container, storage unit, or other
portable structure designed and primarily used for the temporary storage of
personal property and which is located outside an enclosed building. 
Accessory buildings complying with all building and zoning requirements shall
not be considered a temporary storage container.



   TRANSFER.   Any sale, lease, assignment, or other conveyance by an
applicant, either voluntary or by operation of law, of any permit or approval
granted to such applicant under this Zoning Code, or occupancy or management
by  any  person  other  than the applicant or its employees of any
property which is the subject of such a permit or approval, without the prior
written consent of the Planning Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals, or City
Council, as applicable.  If the applicant is a corporation, then any merger,
consolidation, dissolution or liquidation, or any change (whether in one or a
series of transactions) in ownership or power to vote 50% or more of its
outstanding voting stock shall constitute a transfer requiring prior written
consent.  If the applicant is a limited liability company, partnership,
joint venture or other entity, then any liquidation or dissolution, or any
transfer of ownership of interests totaling 50% or more of the total
interests in such entity (whether in one or a series of transactions) shall
constitute a transfer requiring prior written consent.  These provisions
shall not be applicable so long as the stock of the applicant is traded at a
recognized regional stock exchange.



   USE. The purpose for which land, a building or structure is arranged,
designed, intended, maintained or occupied; or any occupation, activity or
operation carried on in a building or structure or on land.



      (1)   USE, ACCESSORY. A use of land incidental to the
principal use of a lot or building located on the same lot.



      (2)   USE, CONDITIONAL. A use permitted in a district, other
than a principal use permitted by right, which is allowed only under certain
conditions as set forth in Chapter 151.20 and which requires a conditional
use permit and approval in accordance with the standards and procedures set
forth in Chapter 150.16.



      (3)   USE, PERMITTED. A use that is authorized by this Zoning
Code as either a use permitted by right, a conditional use or an accessory
use.



      (4)   USE PERMITTED BY RIGHT. A permitted use that is approved
administratively when it complies with the standards and requirements set
forth in the Zoning Code, the approval of which does not require a public
hearing.



      (5)   USE, PRINCIPAL. The primary or main use or activity of a
building or lot.



   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the strict requirements of the Zoning
Code, provided, however, that such grant does not have the effect of
nullifying the intent and purpose of the Zoning Code.



   VARIANCE, DIMENSIONAL. A grant of relief from the dimensional or area
requirements (i.e. height, setbacks, yard) of the Zoning Code, when it is
determined that the strict enforcement of the Code will result in practical
difficulty to the applicant, pursuant to § 150.2010.



   VEHICLE MAINTENANCE & REPAIR FACILITY. The repair, rebuilding or
reconstruction of motor vehicles or parts thereof including collision
service, painting, washing and steam cleaning of vehicles. This also includes
general maintenance facilities such as tire and/or exhaust system
replacement, and oil and lube facilities.



   WALL.   A vertical structure of a linear nature that is a barrier and
is used as a boundary, as a means of protection or confinement or as a
buffer, which is made of manufactured material, such as but not limited to
wood or stone material.



   YARD (See Figure 5). An open space on the same lot with a principal
building extending between the lot line and the extreme front, rear or side
wall of the main building or structure.



      (1)   YARD, FRONT. A yard extending across the full width of
the lot between the front of the principal building and the front lot line.
Where a lot is located at the intersection of two or more streets, there
shall be a front yard on each street side of a corner



lot. Where a lot has frontage on two streets not at an intersection (double
frontage or through lots), there shall be a front yard on both streets.



      (2)   YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the full width of
the lot between the rear of the principal building and the rear lot line. On
corner lots, the rear yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon
which the lot has its least dimension.



      (3)   YARD, REQUIRED (see also SETBACK LINE ). The open space
between a lot line and a setback line for a building, parking area or use
that is the minimum area required to comply with the regulations of the
district in which the lot is located, and within which no structure shall be
located except as expressly permitted in this Zoning Code.



      (4)   YARD, SIDE. A yard between the principal building and
the side lot line and extending from the front yard or front lot line to the
rear yard or rear lot line.







 



   Figure 5. Yards.



   YARD STRUCTURE.   A subordinate structure detached from, but located
on the same lot as the principal building, the use of which is incidental to
that of the principal building or use and having permanent location on or in
the ground. Yard structures include, but are not limited to gazebos, play
equipment, trellises, arbors, pergolas, basketball hoops, fire pits, dog
houses, skateboard ramps, fountains, sculptures, ponds, and animal enclosures.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05; Am. Ord. 6-2006, passed 4-5-06; Am. Ord.
2-2009, passed 3-4-09; Am. Ord. 13-2009, passed 12-2-09; Am. Ord. 6-2010,
passed 7-7-10; Am. Ord. 6-2011, passed 4-6-11; Am. Ord. 16-2013, passed
11-6-13; Am. Ord. 2-2014, passed 3-5-14; Am. Ord. 19-2014, passed 12-3-14)



CHAPTER 150.10:  ADMINISTRATIVE POWERS AND DUTIES



Section



   150.1001   Purpose



   150.1002   Zoning Administrator



   150.1003   Landmarks Consultant



   150.1004   Planning Commission



   150.1005   Landmarks Commission



   150.1006   Board of Zoning Appeals



   150.1007   City Council



§ 150.1001  PURPOSE.



   This Chapter sets forth the powers and duties of the Zoning
Administrator, Landmarks Consultant, Planning Commission, Landmarks
Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals, and City Council with respect to the
administration of the provisions of this Zoning Code.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.1002  ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   Establishment. The Zoning Administrator shall be appointed by
the City Manager and act as the administrative officer for the purpose of
effecting the proper administration of the Zoning Code.



   (B)   Powers and Duties. The Zoning Administrator shall have the
following powers and duties:



      (1)   Enforce the provisions of this Code and interpret the
meaning and application of its provisions.



      (2)   Issue zoning certificates as provided by this Code and
keep a record of the same with a notation of any special conditions involved.



      (3)   Review and act on applications for exterior changes to
buildings in the Heritage Overlay District, according to the procedures set
forth in this Zoning Code.



      (4)   Accept, review for completeness, and respond to
questions regarding applications upon which the Zoning Administrator is
authorized by the provisions of this Code to review including amendments to
the Code, development plan review, conditional uses, variances, and appeals.



      (5)   Coordinate the City's administrative review of
applications required by this Zoning Code including, rezoning applications,
development plan review and conditional use applications.



      (6)   Maintain any records required by this Code including
inspection documents, and records of all variances, amendments, and
conditional uses.



      (7)   Make such records available for the use of Council,
Planning Commission, Landmarks Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals, and the
public.



      (8)   Conduct or cause the inspection of buildings and uses of
land to determine compliance with this Code.



      (9)   Determine the existence of any violations of this Zoning
Code and cause such notifications, revocation notices, stop orders, or
citations to be issued, or initiate such other administrative or legal action
as needed, to address such violations.



      (10)   Maintain in current status the "Official Zone Map of
the City of Montgomery".



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.1003  LANDMARKS CONSULTANT.



   (A)   Establishment. The office of Landmarks Consultant is hereby
created. The City shall appoint a primary consultant to aid in the review of
development proposals. The primary consultant shall have training or
experience in aesthetics and design within the fields of architecture,
architectural history, historic preservation, archaeology, planning or
related profession. One additional consultant may be designated as an
alternate to the primary consultant and shall perform the duties of the
primary consultant as necessary and when requested.



   (B)   Powers and Duties. For the purposes of this Zoning Code, the
Landmarks Consultant shall provide guidance and advice on design, amenities,
quality, relationships to natural features and all other aspects which relate
to the appearance of an entire project, its parts or its surroundings as
specified below:



      (1)   Assist and advise the Landmarks Commission in its review
of projects proposed in the Heritage Overlay District.



      (2)   Assist and advise the Landmarks Commission in its review
of nominations for the National Register or designation of a listed landmark
property.



   (C)   Conflicts of Interest. In the event the primary consultant has
a conflict of interest in a proposed project, the alternate consultant shall
be designated by the Zoning Administrator to review the proposed project.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.1004  PLANNING COMMISSION.



   (A)   Establishment. The Planning Commission shall consist of seven
members, as established by the Charter and appointed by Council to serve a
four-year term.



   (B)   Powers and Duties. In general, without limiting the specific
powers and duties set forth in the Charter or this Zoning Code, the Planning
Commission shall have the following powers and duties:



      (1)   Make and adopt plans and maps of the City of Montgomery
and periodically amend, extend, delete or add to the plans and maps.



      (2)   Review and act on all development plans required by this
Zoning Code.



      (3)   Review and act on all applications for conditional use
permits, proposed uses which are substantially similar to uses permitted
herein, or proposed uses not otherwise permitted herein according to the
procedures, standards and criteria stated in this Zoning Code.



      (4)   Review all proposed amendments to this Zoning Code and
make recommendations to City Council as provided in this Zoning Code.



      (5)   Investigate and propose on its own initiative such
amendments to the Zoning Code as it may deem consistent with the purposes of
this Zoning Code and which further the public health, safety, and general
welfare of the City of Montgomery.



      (6)   Review and act on plans and plats for the subdividing of
land.



      (7)   Adopt rules and bylaws for the holding of regular and
special meetings, for the transaction and disposition of its business and the
exercise of its powers.



   (C)   Meetings. The Planning Commission shall schedule meetings
twice per month. The Chairman may cancel a meeting if properly prepared
application has not been received in a timely manner. At its first meeting
each February, it shall select its Chairman and Vice-chairman. Meetings of
the Commission shall be open to the public.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.1005  LANDMARKS COMMISSION.



   (A)   Establishment. The Montgomery Landmarks Commission is created
by Charter. This Commission shall be comprised of seven members, who shall be
appointed by Council to serve three-year terms. The City Manager shall
provide staff to the Commission, who will serve as liaisons between the
Landmarks Commission and the Planning Commission. Members shall be residents
of or owners of property in the City, with the exception of the professionals
specified below, who may also be business owners or professionals working in
the City. Members should have, to the highest extent possible, a recognized
knowledge of and a known interest in historic preservation together with a
determination to work for the overall improvement of the quality of the
City's physical environment. It is recommended that one or more members of
the Commission be preservation-related professional members from the fields
of architecture, architectural history, history, archaeology, planning or a
related discipline.



   (B)   Powers and Duties. The duties of the Landmarks Commission are
as follows:



      (1)   To improve the quality of life in the City by striving
to further and achieve the spirit and purpose of this Zoning Code;



      (2)   To act in an advisory role to other officials and
departments of local government regarding the protection of local cultural
properties;



      (3)   To review and make recommendations to the Planning
Commission regarding development plans for proposed development within the
Heritage Overlay District. The recommendation by the Landmarks Commission
shall be weighed with other evidence presented to the Planning Commission
during the development plan review process in determining whether or not the
development plan conforms with the requirements for the district, the
underlying district, and the guidelines for development within the City.



      (4)   To act as a liaison on behalf of the local government to
individuals and organizations concerned with historic, architectural and
archaeological preservation;



      (5)   To recommend to the City Planning Commission and City
Council legislation that would serve to beautify, preserve, restore and
develop the City or that would result in additions or revisions to this
Zoning Code;



      (6)   To conduct or cause to be conducted a continuing survey
of cultural resources in the community including all buildings, structures
sites, objects, and areas of architectural, archaeological, historic or
aesthetic interest according to survey guidelines established by the Ohio
Historic Preservation Office;



      (7)   Based upon information available or presented to it, to
make recommendations to the City Council for the designation of properties as
landmarks;



      (8)   To review proposed National Register nominations for
properties within its jurisdiction in accordance with Ohio Certified Local
Government guidelines;



      (9)   To keep a current register of all listed properties and
provide a current copy thereof. The register shall be located at the
Montgomery City Building at 10101 Montgomery Road, Montgomery, Ohio, 45242
and shall be accessible to the public. All inventory material shall be
recorded on Ohio Historic Inventory, Ohio Archaeological Inventory forms,
and/or forms compatible with the Ohio Historical Preservation Office's
computerized inventory and therefore compatible with the state-wide
comprehensive preservation planning process. They shall be made available to
the Ohio Historical Preservation Office. Listed properties and corresponding
data shall be updated periodically to reflect changes, alterations and
demolitions;



      (10)   To review and act upon all applications for
certificates of approval as required by Chapter 150.12 and to establish
criteria, rules and regulations not otherwise included in Chapter 150.12 for
evaluating applications for certificates of approval submitted to it;



      (11)   To consider whether a certificate of approval may be
issued without substantial detriment to the public welfare and without
substantial derogation of the interest and purposes stated herein.



      (12)   To prepare an annual report documenting the
Commission's activities, cases, decisions, special projects and membership
that will be available for public inspection;



      (13)   To conduct or encourage members to attend educational
sessions at least once a year pertaining to the function of the Commission or
relating to specific historic or archaeological preservation issues; and



      (14)   To work for the continuing education of the residents
of the City with respect to the architectural, historic and archaeological
heritage of the City and historic and archaeological preservation issues and
concerns;



   (C)   Meetings. The Landmarks Commission shall meet not less than
once per month at regularly scheduled meetings. At the first meeting of
February of each calendar year, the Commission shall organize and select a
chairperson and vice-chair.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.1006  BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.



   (A)   Establishment. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall consist of
seven members as established by the Charter, and appointed by Council as set
forth within the Code of Ordinances. The members shall be appointed to serve
for five-year terms.



   (B)   Powers and Duties. In general, without limiting the specific
powers and duties set forth in the Charter or this Zoning Code, the Board of
Zoning Appeals shall have the following powers and duties:



      (1)   To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is
an error in any order, requirement, decision, interpretation, or
determination made by an administrative official in the administration or
enforcement of this Zoning Code, unless otherwise provided in this Zoning
Code.



      (2)   To authorize such variances from the terms of this
Zoning Code, as provided herein.



      (3)   To resolve any disputes with respect to the precise
location of a zoning district boundary, using, where applicable, the
standards and criteria of § 151.01.



      (4)   To permit the substitution of one nonconforming use with
another nonconforming use in conformance with the provisions of this Zoning
Code.



      (5)   To authorize the restoration or repair of a
nonconforming use or nonconforming building that is destroyed by any means to
the extent of more than 60% of its assessed taxable value in conformance with
the provisions of this Zoning Code.



      (6)   To adopt rules or bylaws for the holding of regular and
special meetings, for the transaction and disposition of its business and the
exercise of its powers.



   (C)   Meetings. At the first meeting of February of each calendar
year, the Board shall organize and select a chairperson and a
vice-chairperson. The Board shall keep a record of its proceedings. The
minutes shall show the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent
or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall contain a record of its
examinations and other official actions, a copy of which shall be filed as
soon as practical after a meeting of the Board in the office of the zoning
administrator and shall be a public record. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall
meet not less than once per month at regularly scheduled meetings. All
meetings of the Board shall be open to the public.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.1007  CITY COUNCIL.



   City Council is established by Charter. In general, without limiting
the specific powers and duties set forth in the Charter or this Zoning Code,
Council shall have the following powers and duties:



   (A)   To initiate or act upon proposed amendments to this Zoning
Code, according to the procedures set forth herein.



   (B)   To review and act upon the recommendation from the Planning
Commission for approval of a conditional use.



   (C)   To review and act upon the recommendation from the Planning
Commission regarding the determination of a similar use.



   (D)   To review and act upon the recommendation from the Planning
Commission, for approval of a proposed use that is not listed as a permitted
or conditional use in the district it is proposed.



   (E)   To review and act upon the recommendation from the Landmarks
Commission for the designation of a landmark.



   (F)   To review and act on Subdivision Improvement Plans pursuant to
the requirements set forth in Chapter 156.02.



   (G)   To review and act upon appeals as provided herein.



   (H)   To review and act upon the recommendation of the Planning
Commission to approve site plans with equivalencies.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



CHAPTER 150.12:  PROCEDURES FOR ZONING CERTIFICATES, CERTIFICATES OF
APPROVAL, AND CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY



Section



   150.1201   Purpose



   150.1202   Zoning certificate required



   150.1203   Zoning certificate for a single-family dwelling,
two-family dwelling or use accessory thereto



   150.1204   Staking required



   150.1205   Expiration of zoning certificate



   150.1206   Certificate of approval required for listed landmarks



   150.1207   Exterior changes to buildings in the heritage overlay
district reviewed by zoning administrator



   150.1208   Certificate of occupancy



§ 150.1201  PURPOSE.



   The administrative provisions of this Chapter establish the procedures
for reviewing and acting upon applications for zoning certificates, including
certificates of approval and certificates of occupancy, in order to
accomplish the purposes for which this Zoning Code is adopted.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.1202  ZONING CERTIFICATE REQUIRED.



   No building or structure shall be erected, constructed, enlarged,
structurally altered, demolished or moved in whole or in part, no use shall
be established or changed and no space shall be re-occupied in the City of
Montgomery until a zoning certificate is issued by the Zoning Administrator.
Applications for interior alterations only that do not require a change in
use of an existing building or structure shall be exempt from the zoning
certificate requirements set forth herein. A zoning certificate shall be
issued only when the plans for the proposed use, building or structure comply
with the regulations set forth in this Zoning Code.



   (A)   A zoning certificate shall be issued for the following when
the required steps are accomplished:



      (1)   Single-Family Dwellings, Two-Family Dwellings and Uses
Accessory Thereto; when an application for a single-family dwelling,
two-family dwelling or use accessory thereto has been reviewed and approved
by the Zoning Administrator according to the procedures of this Chapter.



      (2)   All Other Permitted Uses; when an application for
development plan approval for any other permitted use not described in
division (A) above has been reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission
and/or Council according to the development plan procedures set forth in
Chapter 150.14.



      (3)   Conditional Uses; When an application for a conditional
use has been reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission and/or Council
according to the procedures set forth in Chapter 150.16.



      (4)   Variance Requests; when an application for which a
variance from a requirement of this Zoning Code is requested has been
reviewed and approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals, according to the
procedures set forth in Chapter 150.20.



      (5)   Signs; when an application for a sign permit has been
reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Administrator
according to the procedures set forth in Chapter 151.30.



      (6)   Similar Uses; when an application for any building or
use not specifically listed in this Code as a permitted or conditional use
has been reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission and Council
according to the procedures set forth in Chapter 150.16.



   (B)   Applications for zoning certificates are available in the
office of the Zoning Administrator. A completed application form accompanied
by all other applicable submission requirements shall be submitted to the
Zoning Administrator.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.1203  ZONING CERTIFICATES FOR A SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY
DWELLING OR USE ACCESSORY THERETO.



   (A)   Submission of Applications. An application for the
construction or alteration of a single-family dwelling, two-family dwelling
or use accessory thereto shall include the items set forth below, unless
specific items are determined by the Zoning Administrator to be inapplicable
or unnecessary and are waived in writing by the Zoning Administrator. Such
applications may be submitted simultaneously with an application for a
building permit.



      (1)   The completed application form, along with the
application fee as established by City Council.



      (2)   One copy of a general vicinity map.



      (3)   Three copies of a plot plan. The plot plan shall be
legibly drawn to scale, shall be based on an accurate survey, prepared by a
registered surveyor, and shall include the following.



         (a)   Property boundary lines showing the actual shape,
exact dimensions, and area of the lot to be built upon or utilized.



         (b)   Right-of-way of adjacent streets.



         (c)   Location, dimensions, height, and bulk of all
existing and proposed buildings and structures to be erected or altered.



         (d)   The existing and intended use(s) of all land,
buildings and structures.



         (e)   Dimensions of yards, driveways and parking areas.



         (f)   The number of dwelling units the building is
designed to accommodate.



         (g)   Location and use of buildings and adjoining lots
within 10 feet of all property lines.



         (h)   Grading plan showing pre-existing grade, finish
grade and erosion control measures to be maintained during construction.



         (i)   A tree preservation plan identifying trees to be
removed, trees to be maintained, and methods used to protect trees during
construction.



         (j)   Any other pertinent data as may be required by the
Zoning Administrator to determine and provide for the enforcement of this
Zoning Code.



   (B)   Review for Completeness. The Zoning Administrator shall review
each submitted application to determine compliance with the submission
requirements. If the application is deemed insufficient, the Zoning
Administrator shall notify the applicant of necessary changes or additional
information needed. When the application is deemed complete and the
application fee has been paid, the Zoning Administrator shall officially
accept the application for consideration of the action(s) requested on the
date such determination is made.



   (C)   Action by Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall
evaluate the application and approve or deny it within 30 days from the date
it was determined to be complete. In evaluating the application, the Zoning
Administrator may consult with any department, agency, public body, official,
company, or individual necessary to determine whether the application
complies with the regulations of this Zoning Code.



      (1)   Approval. The Zoning Administrator shall issue a zoning
certificate upon finding that the building, structure or use, as proposed,
complies with the provisions of this Zoning Code.



      (2)   Denial. If it is determined by the Zoning Administrator
that the proposed building, structure or use would violate one or more
provisions of this Zoning Code, then the zoning certificate shall not be
issued. The Zoning Administrator shall state on the application the reason
for the denial, including the regulation(s) that would be violated by the
proposed use.



      (3)   Report of Zoning Administrator. One copy of the plot
plan signed, dated and noted as approved or disapproved shall be returned to
the applicant, the original application shall be retained as a public record.
If the Zoning Administrator does not act on the application within 30 days,
it may be deemed denied.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.1204  STAKING REQUIRED.



   The lot and location thereon of the intended buildings or structures
shall be staked out on the ground before construction is started, when
required by the Zoning Administrator.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.1205  EXPIRATION OF ZONING CERTIFICATE.



   A zoning certificate shall become void at the expiration of 12 months
after the date of issuance unless, prior thereto, construction is begun, or
an extension has been granted by the Zoning Administrator. If no construction
is begun within one year of the date of the certificate and an extension has
not been granted, a new application and certificate shall be required.
Construction is deemed to have begun when all necessary excavation and piers
or footings of the structure included in the application have been completed.
The date of expiration shall be noted on the zoning certificate.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.1206  CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL REQUIRED FOR LISTED LANDMARKS.



   (A)   A certificate of approval shall be obtained from the Landmarks
Commission prior to commencing any of the following:



      (1)   Demolition or moving of a listed landmark property in
the City, in compliance with the procedures set forth in this section and §
150.1804; or



      (2)   Any change to a listed landmark, including
reconstruction or alteration or partial demolition of the structure or
exterior architectural feature thereto and including any exterior change to
the property such as accessory buildings, fences, walks, paint and similar
features. Such proposals may also be subject to development plan review, as
required in § 150.1402.



   (B)   The Chief Building Official or Fire Chief may order repairs,
demolition, or other corrective action to a listed landmark without a
certificate of approval when, in his determination, there is an imminent
threat to public health or safety.



   (C)   The application for a certificate of approval shall be filed
with the City with such plans, specifications, and other material as the
Landmarks Commission may from time to time prescribe.



   (D)   The application shall be transmitted to the Landmarks
Consultant within ten days for a recommendation. Within 60 days, the
Landmarks Commission shall review the application, plans, specifications, and
the advice of the Landmarks Consultant and determine whether a certificate of
approval shall be issued or denied. If after 60 days Landmarks Commission
fails to act on the application from the date the application was determined
to be administratively complete, or an extended period as may be agreed upon,
then the applicant may consider the application denied and such denial may be
appealed to Planning Commission by filing a written notice of appeal with the
secretary of the Planning Commission within 30 days of the expiration of the
60 day date.



   (E)   The Landmarks Commission shall determine whether the proposed
construction, reconstruction, or alteration, is appropriate, or whether it
has an adverse effect upon the property. In making such determination, the
Landmarks Commission shall consider the advice of the Landmarks Consultant,
refer to the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation, to the
design guidelines adopted by City Council, or to other information available.
In the case of archaeological properties, the Landmarks Commission shall
refer to the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation's Treatment of
Archaeological Properties: A Handbook.



   (F)   The Landmarks Commission may require any person applying for a
certificate of approval to file with the Landmarks Commission, prior to any
hearing or determination, information concerning the applicant's intentions.
The Landmarks Commission may also ask any interested person to file with the
Landmarks Commission, prior to any hearing or determination, information
concerning any adverse or supporting interests.



   (G)   If the proposed construction, reconstruction, alteration, or
partial demolition is determined to have no adverse effect on the property,
then the certificate of approval shall be issued. The certificate may also
contain conditions imposed by the Landmarks Commission to insure that the
construction, reconstruction or alteration will be compatible with the
historic nature of the property.



   (H)   If the Landmarks Commission determines that the proposed
construction, reconstruction, alteration, or partial demolition will have an
adverse effect on the property, then the Landmarks Commission shall deny
issuance of the certificate of approval.



   (I)   In the event that the Landmarks Commission determines that a
certificate of approval shall not be issued, it shall forthwith state in its
records reasons for such determination, and may include recommendations
relative to the proposed construction, reconstruction, alteration, or
demolition of any building, structure, site, or object. The Landmarks
Commission shall notify the applicant in writing of such determination and
transmit to him/her the reasons for denial and recommendations, if any, of
the Landmarks Commission.



   (J)   When the proposed construction or alteration is also subject
to development plan review, the Landmarks Commission may act on the
application for a certificate of approval prior to Planning Commission's
approval of the development plan.



   (K)   The applicant may appeal the denial of the certificate of
approval to the Planning Commission only when the decision of the Landmarks
Commission is contrary to the recommendation of the Landmarks Consultant. In
such instance, the Planning Commission may reverse or modify the decision of
the Landmarks Commission upon review of the recommendation of the Landmarks
Consultant and the determination of the Landmarks Commission.



   (L)   Applicants may appeal the decision of the Planning Commission
to the Court of Common Pleas as provided under Ohio Law.



   (M)   Applications for exterior changes to property in the heritage
overlay district that is neither a listed landmark property nor subject to
development plan review shall comply with the procedures set forth in §
150.1207.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.1207  EXTERIOR CHANGES TO BUILDINGS IN THE HERITAGE OVERLAY DISTRICT
REVIEWED BY ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   A certificate of approval shall be obtained from the Zoning
Administrator prior to commencing any exterior change to a building in the
Heritage Overlay District that is neither a listed landmark property nor
subject to development plan review. For the purposes of this section, an
exterior change shall include:



      (1)   Ordinary maintenance to correct any deterioration or
damage to a structure;



      (2)   Any changes in the material, color, general design or
arrangement of the exterior of the building, including but not limited to
roof coverings, windows, doors, siding materials, foundations, awnings,
porches, staircases, chimneys, cornices, columns, dormers, signs, and
railings that do not alter its original footprint or ground floor area; and



      (3)   Any proposed project that is determined to be a minor
alteration, pursuant to § 150.1405, exclusive of land within the OM District.



   (B)   The application for a certificate of approval shall be filed
with the Zoning Administrator with such plans and specifications, including
materials and installation methods, or other information that the Zoning
Administrator may require.



   (C)   The Zoning Administrator shall review the proposal to
determine if it is in compliance with the design review criteria set forth in
Chapter 151.14 and the purposes and objectives of this Zoning Code. In making
such determination, the Zoning Administrator may refer the application to the
Landmark's Commission for their review and recommendation. Within 30 days,
the Zoning Administrator shall review the application, plans, specifications,
and the recommendation of the Landmarks Commission, if requested, and
determine whether a certificate of approval shall be issued or denied.



   (D)   If the Zoning Administrator finds that the proposed exterior
change complies with the provisions of this Zoning Code, then the
Administrator shall approve the application and issue a certificate of
approval.



   (E)   If the Zoning Administrator denies the proposal, he or she
shall notify the applicant and transmit his or her reasons for the denial.
The applicant may appeal such denial to the Landmarks Commission, who shall
consider such appeal in accordance with the procedures set forth in §
150.1206.



   (F)   In the event that the decision of the Zoning Administrator is
contrary to the recommendation of the Landmarks Commission, if requested,
then a determination on the certificate of approval shall not be issued. In
such instance, the application shall be subject to the review and approval of
the Planning Commission in accordance with the development plan review
procedures set forth in Chapter 150.14. The Planning Commission shall
consider the decision of the Zoning Administrator and recommendation of the
Landmarks Commission during their evaluation of the application.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.1208  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.



   (A)   Certificate of Occupancy Required. Land shall not be occupied
or used and a building which has been erected or altered shall not be
occupied or used until a certificate of occupancy had been applied for and
issued as follows:



      (1)   Occupancy of a Building. A zoning certificate of
occupancy shall be required in addition to a building certificate of
occupancy before a building that has been constructed, or an existing
building that has been altered, moved, changed in use, or changed as to
off-street parking or loading requirements may be occupied. A certificate of
occupancy shall only be issued after the completion of the erection or
alteration, or change in use of the building and the building is found, upon
inspection, to conform to the provisions of this Zoning Code.



      (2)   Occupancy of Land. A zoning certificate of occupancy
shall be required before occupancy of the land or where use of the land has
been changed to a use different from the prior use. A certificate of
occupancy shall be issued when it is determined, upon inspection, that the
use conforms to the provisions of this Zoning Code.



      (3)   Change in Use of Nonconforming Building or Use. A
certificate of occupancy shall be required whenever a nonconforming use of a
building or land is changed, and shall not be issued until the Board of
Zoning Appeals has approved the change.



   (B)   Temporary Certificate of Occupancy. Pending the issuance of a
zoning certificate of occupancy, a temporary zoning certificate for all or
partial occupancy of a building or land may be issued for a period not
exceeding six months when, due to weather conditions, final grading or
landscaping can not be completed before the building certificate of occupancy
or temporary certificate of occupancy is ready. Such temporary certificate
shall not be issued except under such restrictions and provisions as will
adequately ensure the safety of the occupants.



   (C)   Applications. Applications for a certificate of occupancy are
available in the office of the Zoning Administrator and shall include
accurate information provided by the owner, or authorized representative,
regarding the size and location of the lot, dimensions of all yards and open
space, the use of land or building operations or processes and other
pertinent information as may be requested by the City.



   (D)   Certification. The certificate of occupancy shall document
that the building or proposed use of land or building conforms to the
provisions of this Zoning Code.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



CHAPTER 150.14:  ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES FOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW



Section



   150.1401   Purpose



   150.1402   Development plan review required



   150.1403   Filing an application



   150.1404   Pre-application meeting encouraged



   150.1405   Minor alterations reviewed by Zoning Administrator



   150.1406   General development plan submission requirements



   150.1407   Final development plan submission requirements



   150.1408   Development plan review procedures



   150.1409   Planning Commission review of a general development plan



   150.1410   Planning Commission review of a final development plan



   150.1411   Request for additional information



   150.1412   Simultaneous plat approval



   150.1413   Action by Planning Commission



   150.1414   Equivalency provision



   150.1415   Action by Council



   150.1416   Significance of an approved development plan; plan
revisions



   150.1417   Expiration of development plan approval



§ 150.1401  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this Chapter is to provide adequate review of proposed
developments in those zoning districts where the uses are of such a nature,
because of their size, scale or effect on surrounding property, that review
of specific plans is deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety
and general welfare of the community.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.1402  DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW REQUIRED.



   Review and approval of a general development plan and/or final
development plan shall be conducted in compliance with the following prior to
the issuance of a zoning certificate:



   (A)   General Development Plan. A general development plan that
indicates the general concept of development for an entire site including the
general location of use areas, open space and circulation pattern, shall be
required for any project that includes phased development, which, at the
option of the applicant, may run concurrent with the final development plan
approval process. Applicants for other types of projects may but are not
required to submit a general development plan.



   (B)   Final Development Plan. A final development plan that
indicates, among other things, the exact location of buildings, landscaping,
parking areas, access drives, signs, and outdoor storage areas shall be
required for the following:



      (1)   All single-family residential developments not otherwise
subject to the subdivision regulations.



      (2)   For any proposed development for which, according to
division (A) above, a general development plan is required.



      (3)   New construction of all permitted uses in multi-family
and business districts;



      (4)   New construction of all conditional uses;



      (5)   Any existing or previously approved development meeting
the criteria of division (B)(2) through (B)(4) above that proposes to alter,
reconstruct, or otherwise modify a use or site including expanding the floor
area of the permitted use; increasing the number of dwelling units in a
multi-family development; or changing the use which requires an increase in
the amount of parking or a change in the site's circulation, unless exempt
from development plan review pursuant to § 150.1405.



      (6)   Any development not otherwise exempted in this code.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.1403  FILING AN APPLICATION.



   Applications for development plan review shall be filed by a property
owner, designated agent or a lessee with formal and sufficient consent of the
property owner.



§ 150.1404  PRE-APPLICATION MEETING ENCOURAGED.



   The applicant is encouraged to meet with the Zoning Administrator or
the Planning Commission prior to submitting an application for general
development plan review or final development plan review. The purpose of this
meeting is to discuss early and informally with the applicant the purpose and
effect of this Zoning Code and the criteria and standards contained within.
However, no action shall be taken at such a meeting and no opinions,
suggestions, or recommendations discussed shall be relied on by the applicant
to indicate subsequent approval or disapproval of the development plan.



§ 150.1405  MINOR ALTERATIONS REVIEWED BY ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.



   When a minor alteration is proposed to an existing building, structure
or site arrangement on a zoning lot or to an approved development plan prior
to or during the time of construction, the Zoning Administrator may make a
determination that such a proposal is not subject to development plan review.



   (A)   For the purposes of this section, a proposed development may
be considered a minor alteration when it complies with both divisions (A)(1)
and (A)(2) below:



      (1)   It is limited to the following:



         (a)   The construction, addition, or alteration of a
principal or accessory structure permitted in the O, L-B, or G-B Districts,
or a principal or accessory structure of a conditional use permitted in any
district, excluding the OM District, that results in an increase in the
building footprint of that principal or accessory structure by less than 25%
but not more than 1,000 sq. ft, whichever is less.



         (b)   Any construction on a property in the O, L-B or
G-B District, or a conditional use in any district, excluding the OM
District, which results in an increase of the total impervious surface area
on the lot up to 10% but not more than 2,000 square feet.



         (c)   Minor modifications to a landscape or lighting
plan, provided that the plan remains in compliance with the requirements of
Chapters 151.32 and 151.34 and does not significantly reduce the number of
full shade trees or visual screening of the original approved plan.



         (d)   In any case, a proposed increase in the original
building footprint of 500 square feet or less may be considered a minor
alteration.



      (2)   The Zoning Administrator determines that the minor
alteration will have no discernible impact on neighboring properties, the
general public, or those intended to occupy or use the proposed development.



   (B)   The applicant shall submit a scaled drawing indicating the
proposed minor alteration.



   (C)   The Zoning Administrator shall review the proposal to
determine that it is appropriate and not contrary to this Zoning Code. In
making such determination, the Zoning Administrator may consult with the
Chair of the Planning Commission.



   (D)   In the event that the Zoning Administrator approves the
proposal, he or she shall issue a Zoning Certificate to the applicant. If the
Zoning Administrator denies the proposal, he shall notify the applicant and
transmit his reasons for the denial. The Zoning Administrator shall complete
his review and make a determination within 30 days of receipt of a complete
application. The Zoning Administrator shall record his determination and
report it to the Planning Commission at their next regularly scheduled
meeting.  If the Zoning Administrator denies the proposal, he/she shall
notify the applicant and transmit the reasons for the denial.  Denial of a
minor alteration by the Zoning Administrator may be appealed to Planning
Commission by the applicant, if a notice of appeal is filed with the Zoning
Administrator within 14 days of the date the development plan is denied in
writing.



   (E)   When the Zoning Administrator determines that a minor
alteration proposed in the Heritage Overlay District is not subject to
development plan review, according to the criteria outlined in Division (A)
above, such proposal shall be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator in
accordance with the procedures set forth in § 150.1207.



   (F)   All other requests for modifications that do not meet the
criteria outlined in this section shall be submitted for approval in
accordance with this Chapter.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05; Am. Ord. 16-2013, passed 11-6-13)



§ 150.1406  GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS.



   An application for general development plan review shall include a plan
for the entire area of the proposed project. The application along with the
application fee shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator. The
application shall include the map, plan, and supplementary documentation
itemized below. A sufficient number of copies of the following items, as
determined by the Zoning Administrator, shall be submitted with the
application.



   (A)   A vicinity map showing the relationship of the site to
existing development and including existing property lines, easements,
utilities, and street rights-of-way of the subject property and property
within 200 feet of the site, and zoning district boundaries.



   (B)   Verification of availability of all utilities, including
water, sanitary sewer, gas, electric etc.



   (C)   The general development plan shall be drawn to an appropriate
scale and shall indicate:



      (1)   The location of all existing structures and access
points.



      (2)   The general location of existing buildings, parking
areas and access drives on parcels within 200 feet of the site.



      (3)   The general location of all proposed construction
including buildings and structures, parking areas, and access points.



      (4)   The location of existing and proposed topography, water
courses, existing flood plains, major vegetation features, and wooded areas;



      (5)   The general layout of the proposed internal road system,
indicating the proposed vehicular right-of-way of all proposed public streets
and pedestrian circulation.



   (D)   A summary table showing total acres of the proposed
development, the number of acres devoted to each type of use including
streets and common open space, and the number of proposed dwelling units by
type;



   (E)   If the property is to be developed in phases, a proposed
development schedule shall be prepared and the plan shall identify the
separate phases of the project.



   (F)   Other documentation needed as deemed necessary by the Zoning
Administrator to evaluate the general concept of the proposed development.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.1407  FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS.



   An application for final development plan review shall be required for
each phase of development. The application and the application fee shall be
submitted to the Zoning Administrator. The application shall include the
maps, plans, designs and supplementary documents itemized below, unless
specific items are determined by the Zoning Administrator to be inapplicable
or unnecessary and are waived in writing by the Zoning Administrator. Upon
review by the Planning Commission, any information waived by the Zoning
Administrator may subsequently be required. A sufficient number of copies of
the maps, plans, designs and supplementary documents as determined by the
Zoning Administrator shall be submitted with the application.



   (A)   An accurate, legal description and survey prepared or
certified by a registered surveyor of the state;



   (B)   A vicinity map showing the relationship of the site to
existing development and including existing property lines, easements,
utilities and street rights-of-way of the subject property and property
within 200 feet of the site, and zoning district boundaries.



   (C)   Verification of availability of all utilities, including
water, sanitary sewer, gas, electric etc.



   (D)   The ownership interests of the subject property, including
liens and easements, and the nature of the developer's interest if not the
owner.



   (E)   A final development plan, prepared by a qualified professional
such as a licensed architect, surveyor, engineer or landscaped architect, and
drawn to an appropriate scale indicating the following:



      (1)   Use, location and height of existing and proposed
buildings and structures;



      (2)   Location of all public rights-of-way and private streets;



      (3)   Location and configuration of vehicular circulation
including off-street parking and loading areas; the arrangement of internal
and in-out traffic movement including access roads and drives; lane and other
pavement markings to direct and control parking and circulation; and the
location of signs related to parking and traffic control;



      (4)   Location of proposed and existing structures including
fences, walls, signs, and lighting;



      (5)   Location and layout of all proposed and existing outdoor
storage areas including storage of waste materials and location of trash
receptacles;



      (6)   Sanitary sewers, water and other utilities including
fire hydrants, as required, and proposed drainage and storm water management;



      (7)   Dimensions of all buildings, setbacks, parking areas,
drives and walkways;



      (8)   Location, size and character of any open space.



   (F)   Topographic maps showing existing and proposed grading
contours, water courses, existing flood plains, and major vegetation features
including existing trees with a caliper of four or more inches, wooded areas,
wetlands and other environmental features;



   (G)   Proposed landscaping and screening plans indicating the
preliminary description of the location and nature of existing and proposed
vegetation and landscaping, including species, size at planting and
separation, screening elements and any existing trees to be removed;



   (H)   Conceptual water management and sediment control plans in
accordance with the Hamilton County Storm Water Regulations or similar method
as approved by the City Engineer.



   (I)   Illumination plan, including, but not limited to, a
photometric plan which shows maximum foot candles at the surface, light pole
heights and locations, average foot candle calculations and location of house
side shields.



   (J)   Preliminary architectural plans for the proposed development
or use showing exterior elevations and building floor plans, and site
construction materials prepared and certified by a professional engineer,
architect, or surveyor.



   (K)   Signage plan, pursuant to Chapter 151.30.



   (L)   Summary table showing total acres of the proposed development,
the number of acres devoted to each type of use including streets and open
space, and the number of proposed dwelling units by type, building coverage,
pavement coverage and acreage devoted to open space;



   (M)   Subdivision plat, if appropriate;



   (N)   The substance of covenants, grants of easements, or other
restrictions which will be imposed upon the use of the land, buildings, and
structures, including proposed easements or grants for public utilities.



   (O)   A statement identifying any aspect of the plan in which the
applicant is requesting an equivalency waiver, pursuant to Chapter 150.14 or
for which a variance is required.



   (P)   Table of contents or other index indicating where each of the
plan submission requirements is located within the application package (page
number of narrative or drawing).



   (Q)   A list of all property owners lying within 300 feet of any
part of the property, including their addresses and permanent parcel number,
as shown on the current tax duplicate in the Office of the Hamilton County
Treasurer.



   (R)   Other information necessary for the evaluation of the final
development plan as deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.1408  DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW PROCEDURES.



   Development plans, both general and final, shall be reviewed and
distributed according to the following procedures.



   (A)   Review for Completeness. The Zoning Administrator shall review
the submitted applicationfor completeness and compliance with the applicable
submission requirements. If the application is deemed insufficient, the
Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant of the deficiencies and place
the application on hold until complete. When the application is determined
complete and all applicable fees have been paid, the Zoning Administrator
shall officially accept the application for consideration and place it on the
Planning Commission's agenda.



   (B)   Distribution of Plans. Within 10 days after determining that
an application is complete, the Zoning Administrator shall forward the
application to the following for review and comment. Any reports, comments,
or expert opinions shall be returned to the Zoning Administrator within 60
days from the date that the application is deemed complete.



      (1)   All applications shall be transmitted to the appropriate
City departments and professional consultants;



      (2)   Applications for listed landmark properties or involving
sites located in the Heritage Overlay District shall also be transmitted to
the:



         (a)   Landmarks Consultant, who shall then transmit his
or her comments directly to the Landmarks Commission prior to the Landmarks
Commission's review of the proposal.



         (b)   Landmarks Commission, who shall consider the
Landmarks Consultant's recommendations.



   (C)   Transmission to the Planning Commission. The Zoning
Administrator shall distribute the application for development plan review
and any reports prepared by the individuals in division (B) above to the
Planning Commission.



   (D)   Notification to Property Owners. Prior to the Planning
Commission's formal review of a development plan application, written notice
shall be given by first class mail to the applicant and the property owners
within 300 feet of the property on which the use is proposed. Such
notification shall be sent to the names and addresses of such owners
appearing on the County Auditor's current tax list. If the address appearing
on the tax list is that of a lending institution or other person or entity
clearly recognizable as not being the owner, then written notice shall be
mailed to such institution, person or entity at the listed address and to the
named owners at the street address of the property. Notices shall be made at
least 7 days prior to the date of the Planning Commission meeting. Failure of
delivery of such notice shall not invalidate action taken on such
application. The Planning Commission may continue or defer its consideration
and no further notice shall be required.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.1409  PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW OF A GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN.



   The Planning Commission shall review a development plan to determine if
such application complies with the review criteria set forth below. The
Planning Commission shall take into consideration the comments and
recommendation of staff, consultants and the Landmarks Commissions when
reviewing the application. In order to approve a general development plan,
the Planning Commission shall determine that:



   (A)   The plan is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and the
applicable regulations set forth in this Code.



   (B)   The appropriate use and value of property within and adjacent
to the area will be safeguarded.



   (C)   The development will result in a harmonious grouping of
buildings within the proposed development and in relationship to existing and
proposed uses on adjacent property.



   (D)   The development will have adequate open spaces that meet the
objectives of the Comprehensive Community Plan.



   (E)   The development will preserve and be sensitive to the natural
characteristics of the site in a manner that complies with the applicable
regulations set forth in this Code.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.1410  PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW OF A FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN.



   The Planning Commission shall review a final development plan to
determine if such application complies with the review criteria set forth
below. In order to approve a final development plan, the Planning Commission
shall determine that:



   (A)   The plan is consistent with any plan for the orderly
development of the City and, when applicable, conforms in all respects to the
approved or provisionally approved general development plan, provided
however, that the Planning Commission may authorize plans as specified §
150.1414.



   (B)   The appropriate use and value of property within and adjacent
to the area will be safeguarded.



   (C)   The development will result in a harmonious grouping of
buildings within the proposed development and in relationship to existing and
proposed uses on adjacent property.



   (D)   Adequate provision is made for safe and efficient pedestrian
and vehicular circulation within the site and to adjacent property.



   (E)   The development will have adequate public service and open
spaces.



   (F)   The development will preserve and be sensitive to the natural
characteristics of the site in a manner that complies with the applicable
regulations set forth in this Code.



   (G)   The development will provide adequate lighting for safe and
convenient use of the streets, walkways, driveways, and parking areas without
unnecessarily spilling or emitting light onto adjacent properties or the
general vicinity.



   (H)   The proposed signs:



      (1)   Are of an appropriate size, scale, and design in
relationship with the principal building, site, and surroundings; that the
base of ground-mounted signs are adequately landscaped;



      (2)   Adequately identify the use; and



      (3)   Are located so as to maintain safe and orderly
pedestrian and vehicular circulation.



   (I)   The landscape plan will adequately provide the following:



      (1)   Enhance the principal building and site;



      (2)   Maintain existing trees to the extent possible;



      (3)   Buffer adjacent incompatible uses;



      (4)   Break up large expanses of pavement with natural
material; and



      (5)   Provide appropriate plant materials considering the
ultimate mature size and shape of plants relative to the buildings and site,
and the climate of the area, including typical weather conditions.



   (J)   Adequate provision is made for storm drainage within and
through the site so as to maintain, as far as practicable, usual and normal
swales, water courses and drainage areas, and shall comply with the
applicable regulations in this Code and any other design criteria established
by the City or any other governmental entity which may have jurisdiction over
such matters. The final water management and sediment control plan is subject
to review and final approval by the City Engineer or consulting engineer.



   (K)   If the project is to be carried out in progressive stages,
each stage shall be so planned that the foregoing conditions are complied
with at the completion of each stage.



   (L)   The project complies with all other local, state and federal
laws and regulations.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.1411  REQUEST FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION.



   In their review of an application, the Planning Commission may request
that the applicant supply additional information that the Commission deems
necessary to adequately review and evaluate the proposed development.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.1412  SIMULTANEOUS PLAT APPROVAL.



   If the proposed development includes the subdivision of land, the
development shall be subject to the requirements of the plat approval process
in accordance with Chapter 156. Preliminary development plan approval and
subdivision plat approval may proceed simultaneously at the discretion of the
Planning Commission.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.1413  ACTION BY PLANNING COMMISSION.



   (A)   For a general or final development plan, the Planning
Commission shall either:



      (1)   Approve the development plan as submitted; or



      (2)   Approve the plan subject to specific conditions not
included in the plan as submitted, such as, but not limited to, improvements
to the yard layout, open space arrangement, on-site control of access to
streets or such features as fences, walls and plantings to further protect
and improve the proposed and surrounding developments; or



      (3)   Deny the development plan when the application does not
demonstrate that the required standards have been met. Such denial may be
appealed to Council by the applicant if a Notice of Appeal is filed with the
Planning Commission and the Clerk of Council within 14 days of the date the
applicant's development plan is denied in writing by the Planning Commission.
Such appeal shall be heard as provided in § 150.1415.



   (B)   If the Planning Commission fails to act on the application
within 120 days from the date the application was determined to be
administratively complete, or an extended period as may be agreed upon, then
the applicant may deem the development plan to be denied and such denial may
be appealed to Council by filing a written Notice of Appeal with the Planning
Commission and the Clerk of Council at anytime after the 120 day date, and
before a final decision on such development plan is made by the Planning
Commission.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.1414  EQUIVALENCY PROVISION.



   In reviewing the application, the Planning Commission may find that a
general or final development plan either adheres or is equivalent to the
requirements of this Zoning Code.



   (A)   The Planning Commission may consider elements of a general or
final development plan to be equivalent to a requirement if:



      (1)   The proposed general or final development plan
substantially complies with all specific requirements and with the purposes,
intent and basic objectives of the zoning district;



      (2)   Through imaginative and skillful design in the
arrangement of buildings, open space, streets, access drives and other
features, as disclosed by the application, the proposal results in a
development of equivalent or higher quality than that which could be achieved
through strict application of such standards and requirements; and



      (3)   The development, as proposed, shall have no adverse
impact upon the surrounding properties or upon the health, safety or general
welfare of the community.



   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to demonstrate
to the Planning Commission that the provisions of this section have been
satisfied. When evaluating the application with respect to this section, the
Planning Commission shall make any finding of equivalency in writing which
explains how and why the proposal has satisfied the above criteria. When
making such finding, the Commission may approve the proposed application,
including waivers from the numerical or dimensional standards herein, as if
the application were in strict compliance with the standards and requirements
in this Zoning Code. Any plan approval which includes an equivalency approved
by the Planning Commission must be reviewed and confirmed by Council before
finally approved for development.



   (C)   If the Planning Commission fails to find that an equivalency
waiver is appropriate, Planning Commission shall complete its review, after
which the applicant may apply for an appropriate variance from the Board of
Zoning Appeals. The 120-day period for development plan review, as required
in § 150.1413(B), shall be suspended during the Board of Zoning Appeals’
review of such variance request on a final development plan.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05; Am. Ord. 6-2010, passed 7-7-10)



§ 150.1415  ACTION BY COUNCIL.



   (A)   Council shall hold a public hearing on any appeal brought
before Council under § 150.1413(A) or (B), or to review and confirm a
development plan with equivalencies approved by the Planning Commission
pursuant to § 150.1414(B). Such public hearing shall be held within 30 days
of the date the appeal is appropriately filed with both the Planning
Commission and the Clerk of Council, or within 30 days of the Planning
Commission's written approval of the equivalencies as provided in §
150.1414(B).



   (B)   Notice of such public hearing shall be given by first class
mail to the applicant/appellant and to the property owners within 300 hundred
feet of the property to which the appeal relates, or to the property to which
the development plan relates for which such equivalencies were granted. Such
notification shall be sent to the names and addresses of such owners
appearing on the County Auditor's current tax list. If the address appearing
on the tax list is that of a lending institution or other person or entity
clearly recognizable as not being the owner, then written notice shall be
mailed to such institution, person, or entity at the listed address and to
the named owners at the street address of the property. Further notice shall
be given in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the City. Such
written notice shall be mailed, and such publication shall be made, at least
fourteen days before the date of said public hearing. All notices shall set
forth the time, place and nature of the public hearing. Failure of the
delivery of such notice shall not invalidate any action taken as a result of
such public hearing. The Council may continue or defer its consideration and
no further notice shall be required.



   (C)    Equivalencies Review. The purpose of Council's review of a
development plan which contains equivalencies approved by the Planning
Commission is to allow Council to confirm or deny the proposed equivalencies.
In doing so Council shall rely upon the written findings of the Planning
Commission granting such equivalency as required by § 150.1414(B) and such
additional evidence as has been previously presented to the Planning
Commission. Council shall accept no new evidence to support or oppose such
equivalencies. At the public hearing the applicant shall be given an
opportunity to make a statement in support of the equivalencies and Council
may take further public comment concerning the recommendation of the Planning
Commission and in support of or in opposition to the Planning Commission
recommendation and the evidence considered. Within 30 days of the public
hearing Council shall act upon the development plan according to the
following:



      (1)   Council, by a majority vote, may confirm the recommended
equivalency from the Planning Commission; or



      (2)   Council, by a majority vote, may remand the
recommendation back to the Planning Commission for further study and review
of items specified by Council. Any additional review must be completed by the
Planning Commission within 30 days of its remand, after which a report of the
Planning Commission's action shall be returned to Council. Council shall then
act upon the return of the remand within 30 days, or



      (3)   Council, by five concurring votes, may approve a
modification of the recommended equivalencies from the Planning Commission; or



      (4)   Council, by five concurring votes, may reject the
recommended equivalencies from the Planning Commission.



   Council's failure to act within 30 days of the public hearing or within
30 days of the return of the remand to Council from the Planning Commission;
whichever is later, shall be deemed a confirmation of the Planning
Commission's recommended equivalencies.



   (D)   Appeal Under § 150.1413(A)(3). At a public hearing, upon any
appeal brought before Council, under § 150.1413(A)(3), Council's review
shall be limited to a review of the written findings from the Planning
Commission denying such application and such other evidence as has been
previously submitted to the Planning Commission for their consideration.
Council shall accept no new evidence at such appeal hearing. At the hearing,
Council shall allow the Applicant/Appellant the opportunity to comment upon
the evidence and the decision of the Planning Commission and Council may take
further public comments either in support of or in opposition to the denial
by the Planning Commission and the evidence considered. Within 30 days of
Council's hearing on such appeal, Council shall act according to the
following:



      (1)   Council, by majority vote, may affirm the decision of
the Planning Commission denying the site plan; or



      (2)   Council, by majority vote, may remand the appeal back to
the Planning Commission for a further study and review of items specified by
Council. Any additional review by the Planning Commission must be completed
within 30 days of its remand, after which a report of the Planning
Commission's action shall be returned to Council. Council shall act upon the
return of the remand within 30 days; or,



      (3)   Council, by five concurring votes, may overrule the
denial by the Planning Commission approving the application as submitted or
with such additional modifications as Council may approve by five concurring
votes;



   Council's failure to act within 30 days of the public hearing, or
within 30 days of the return of the remand to Council from the Planning
Commission, whichever is later, shall be deemed a denial of the appeal of the
Planning Commission's decision.



   (E)   Appeal Under § 150.1413(B). At a public hearing upon an
appeal brought before Council under § 150.1413(B), Council's review shall be
limited to review of the evidence as has been previously submitted to the
Planning Commission for their consideration and from which no action was
taken by the Planning Commission in a timely manner. Council shall take no
new evidence at such appeal hearing. Within 30 days of Council's hearing on
such appeal, Council shall act according to the following:



      (1)   Council, by majority vote, may remand the appeal back to
the Planning Commission for a further study and review of items specified by
Council. Any additional review by the Planning Commission must be completed
within 30 days of its remand after which a report of the Planning
Commission's action shall be returned to Council. Council shall then act upon
the return of the remand within 30 days.



      (2)   Council, by five concurring votes, may approve the
development plan as submitted to the Planning Commission or as submitted to
the Planning Commission with such additional modifications as Council may
establish by five concurring votes. If the proposed plan includes any
equivalencies, Council must find support for such equivalencies consistent
with the standards set forth in § 150.1414(A)(1) - (A)(3). If Council fails
to approve the development plan by 5 concurring votes, the proposed plan is
then denied, unless Council by the affirmative vote of four or more members
refers the appeal back to the Planning Commission as provided in division (1)
above.



   Council's failure to act within 30 days of the public hearing or 30
days of the return of the remand to Council from the Planning Commission,
which ever is later, shall be deemed a denial of the proposed plan.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.1416  SIGNIFICANCE OF AN APPROVED DEVELOPMENT PLAN; PLAN REVISIONS.



   An approved development plan shall become for the proposed development
a binding commitment of the specific elements approved for development.



   (A)   The approved development plan may not be transferred by the
applicant to another person, corporation, or group of individuals or
corporations prior to the issuance of a building permit, without the written
approval of the Planning Commission. A request for such a transfer or change
of ownership shall be presented to the Planning Commission and granted only
if the new ownership entity satisfies the administrative, financial, legal
and all other performance guarantees approved with the original development
plan.



   (B)   After the approval of the development plans, the applicant
shall obtain a zoning certificate and building permit prior to construction.



   (C)   All construction and development under any building permit
shall be in accordance with the approved plan. Any departure from such plan
shall be cause for revocation of the Zoning Certificate.



   (D)   No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless all
facilities and improvements that are included on the approved plans are
provided.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.1417  EXPIRATION OF DEVELOPMENT PLAN APPROVAL.



   An approved development plan shall remain valid for a period of 12
months following the date of its approval. Two 6-month extensions may be
granted by the Zoning Administrator. Any further extension requires written
approval by the Planning Commission.



   (A)   General Development Plan. If, at the end of that time, a final
development plan has not been submitted to the Zoning Administrator, then
approval of the general development plan shall expire and shall be of no
effect unless resubmitted and re-approved in accordance with this Chapter.



   (B)   Final Development Plan. If, at the end of that time,
construction of the development has not begun, then approval of such final
development plan shall expire and shall be of no effect unless resubmitted
and re-approved in accordance with the procedures set forth in this Chapter.
Construction is deemed to have begun when all necessary excavation and piers
or footings of one or more principal buildings included in the plan have been
completed.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



CHAPTER 150.16:  CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS AND SIMILAR USES



Section



   150.1601   Purpose



   150.1602   Pre-application meeting encouraged



   150.1603   Submission of application



   150.1604   Conditional use application procedures



   150.1605   Review of conditional use permit application



   150.1606   Public hearing and notice by Planning Commission



   150.1607   Action by Planning Commission



   150.1608   Action by Council



   150.1609   Terms and duration of conditional use permit



   150.1610   Re-application



   150.1611   Similar uses



§ 150.1601  PURPOSE.



   When a proposed use is permitted in a zoning district as a conditional
use, as set forth in the district regulations, a conditional use permit is
required and the application for such conditional use permit shall be
submitted and reviewed according to the guidelines outlined in this chapter.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.1602  PRE-APPLICATION MEETING ENCOURAGED.



   The applicant is encouraged to meet with the Planning Commission or
Zoning Administrator, or his designee, prior to submitting an application for
a conditional use permit. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss early and
informally with the applicant the purpose and effect of these zoning
regulations and the criteria and standards contained within. However, no
action shall be taken at such a meeting and no discussions, opinion,
suggestions, or recommendations of the Planning Commission or Zoning
Administrator shall be relied upon by the applicant to indicate subsequent
approval or disapproval of the application.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.1603  SUBMISSION OF APPLICATION.



   The owner, or agent thereof, of property for which such conditional use
is proposed shall file with the Zoning Administrator an application for a
conditional use permit on the form provided for such purposes, which shall be
accompanied by payment of the required fee. The application for a conditional
use permit shall disclose all uses proposed for the development, their
location, extent, and characteristics and shall include the following:



   (A)   A development plan and associated documentation when required
in § 150.1402.



   (B)   A list of all property owners lying within 300 feet of any
part of the property on which the conditional use is proposed and the
president of the neighborhood association where the conditional use is
located, including their addresses and permanent parcel number, as shown on
the current tax duplicate in the Office of the Hamilton County Treasurer.



   (C)   A statement of need for the proposed use, its location, and
magnitude.



   (D)   A summary report identifying and evaluating the consequences
and effects of the proposed use on the surrounding properties and the
neighborhood at large.



   (E)   A statement indicating how the negative effects of the
proposed use will be mitigated and how all the conditions for approval set
forth in Chapter 151.20 for the proposed use will be met.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.1604  CONDITIONAL USE APPLICATION PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Review for Completeness. The Zoning Administrator shall review
the submitted application for completeness and compliance with the applicable
submission requirements. If the application is deemed insufficient, the
Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant of the deficiencies and place
the application on hold until complete. When the application is determined
complete and all applicable fees have been paid, the Zoning Administrator
shall officially accept the application for consideration of the action(s)
requested on the date such determination is made and place it on the Planning
Commission's agenda.



   (B)   Distribution of Plans. Within 10 days after determining that
the application is complete, the Zoning Administrator shall forward the
application to appropriate City departments and professional consultants for
review and comment. Any reports, comments, or expert opinions shall be
returned to the Zoning Administrator within 60 days from the date the
application is deemed complete.



   (C)   Transmission to the Planning Commission. The Zoning
Administrator shall distribute the application for conditional use permit and
any reports prepared by the individuals in division (B) above to the Planning
Commission, prior to the time of the Commission's review at their next
regularly scheduled meeting.



   (D)   Minor Alterations Reviewed by Zoning Administrator. When a
minor alteration is proposed to an existing conditionally permitted building
or structure or to the site arrangement of an existing conditionally
permitted building or structure, the Zoning Administrator may make a
determination that such a proposal is not subject to conditional use
approval. Such determination by the Zoning Administrator shall only be made
in compliance with the conditional use criteria and procedural requirements
for minor alterations set forth in § 150.1405.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.1605  REVIEW OF CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT APPLICATION.



   The Planning Commission shall review the proposed conditional use, as
presented on the submitted plans and specifications, to determine whether or
not the proposed use is appropriate and in keeping with the purpose and
intent of this Zoning Code.



   (A)   The Planning Commission shall review the development plan for
the proposed conditional use according to the development plan review
procedures and criteria set forth in §§ 150.1408 through 150.1410, as
applicable;



   (B)   The Planning Commission shall review the application to
determine if the establishment and operation of the proposed conditional use
complies with the general criteria established for all conditional uses and
the specific requirements established for that particular use, as set forth
in Chapter 151.20 of this Zoning Code; and



   (C)   The Planning Commission may require the applicant to submit
such additional information as deemed necessary, including the carrying out
of special studies and the provisions of expert advice.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.1606  PUBLIC HEARING AND NOTICE BY PLANNING COMMISSION.



   Prior to considering a proposed conditional use, the Planning
Commission shall hold a public hearing. Notice of such public hearing shall
be given by first class mail to the applicant and to the property owners
within 300 feet of the property on which the use is proposed. Such
notification shall be sent to the names and addresses of such owners
appearing on the County Auditor's current tax list. If the address appearing
on the tax list is that of a lending institution or other person or entity
clearly recognizable as not being the owner, then written notice shall be
mailed to such institution, person, or entity at the listed address and to
the named owners at the street address of the property. Further notice shall
be given in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the city. All
notices shall be made at least 14 days before the date of said public
hearing. All notices shall set forth the time and place of the public hearing
and the nature of the proposed conditional use. Failure of delivery of such
notice shall not invalidate action taken on such application. The Planning
Commission may continue or defer its consideration and no further notice
shall be required.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.1607  ACTION BY PLANNING COMMISSION.



   (A)   The Planning Commission shall take one of the following
actions:



      (1)   If the proposed conditional use is determined by the
Planning Commission to be appropriate and in conformance with the review
criteria outlined in Chapter 151.20, the Planning Commission shall make
specific findings of fact to support its recommendation. As part of the
recommendation, the Planning Commission may proscribe appropriate conditions,
stipulations, safeguards and limitations on the duration of the use as it may
deem necessary and in conformance with the intent and purposes of Chapter
151.20. The Planning Commission may approve the application for the
conditional use without approving the submitted development plan.



      (2)   If the proposed use is found not to comply with the
specifications of this Zoning Code, the Planning Commission shall deny the
application. The Planning Commission shall indicate in its records the
reason(s) for its action. The applicant may then bring an appeal on such
decision to the City Council pursuant to § 150.1608 if a Notice of Appeal is
filed with the Planning Commission and the Clerk of Council within 14 days of
the date the applicant's request is denied in writing by the Planning
Commission.



   (B)   If the Planning Commission fails to act within 120 days from
the date the application was deemed complete, or an extended period as may be
agreed upon, then the applicant may deem the application denied. The
applicant may then bring an appeal on such application to the City Council
pursuant to § 150.1608 by filing a Notice of Appeal with the Planning
Commission and Clerk of Council at anytime after the 120 days has passed and
before any decision by the Planning Commission.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.1608  ACTION BY COUNCIL.



   (A)   Council shall hold a public hearing to review and confirm a
conditionally permitted use accepted by the Planning Commission or upon any
appeal brought before Council under § 150.1607(A)(2) or (B). Such public
hearing shall be held within 30 days of the date the appeal is appropriately
filed with both the Planning Commission and the Clerk of Council or within 30
days of the Planning Commission's written approval of a conditionally
permitted use.



   (B)   Notice of such public hearing shall be given by first class
mail to the applicant/appellant and to the property owners within 300 feet of
the property to which the application applies. Such notification shall be
sent to the names and addresses of such owners appearing on the County
Auditor's current tax list. If the address appearing on the tax list is that
of a lending institution or other person or entity clearly recognizable as
not being the owner, then written notice shall be mailed to such institution,
person, or entity at the listed address and to the named owners at the street
address of the property. Further, notice shall be given in one or more
newspapers of general circulation in the City. Such written notice shall be
mailed and such publication shall be made at least 14 days before the date of
said public hearing. All notices shall set forth the time, place and nature
of the public hearing. Failure of the delivery of such notice shall not
invalidate any action taken as a result of such public hearing. Council may
continue or defer its consideration and no further notice shall be required.



   (C)   Council Confirmation. Following a recommendation for approval
by the Planning Commission, the application shall be submitted to Council for
confirmation. The purpose of Council's review shall be to review and confirm
or deny the recommendation of the Planning Commission. In doing so, Council
shall rely upon the findings of the Planning Commission and on such
additional evidence as has been previously presented to the Planning
Commission. Council shall accept no new evidence to support or oppose such
conditionally permitted use. At the public hearing the applicant shall be
given an opportunity to make a statement in support of the application and
Council may take further public comment concerning the recommendation of the
Planning Commission and in support of or in opposition to any evidence
previously presented to the Planning Commission. Within 30 days of the public
hearing Council shall act upon the application according to the following:



      (1)   Council, by a majority vote, may confirm the recommended
conditionally permitted use; or



      (2)   Council, by a majority vote, may refer the
recommendation back to the Planning Commission for further study and review
of items specified by Council. Any additional review must be completed by the
Planning Commission and returned to Council within 30 days of its remand or
if the Planning Commission shall fail to act within such 30 day period the
matter shall be returned to Council for final decision; or



      (3)   Council, by five concurring votes, may approve a
modification of the Planning Commission recommendation for the conditionally
permitted use. A modification shall include any additional conditions which
Council may wish to impose which were not originally imposed by the Planning
Commission; or



      (4)   Council, by five concurring votes, may reject the
recommended conditionally permitted use.



   Council's failure to act within 30 days of the public hearing, or 30
days following the return of the remand from the Planning Commission,
whichever is later, shall be deemed a confirmation of the Planning
Commission's recommended conditionally permitted use.



   (D)   Council Appeal. At a public hearing upon any appeal brought
before Council from § 150.1607(A)(2), Council shall be limited to a review
of the written findings from the Planning Commission denying such application
and such other evidence as has been previously submitted to the Planning
Commission for its consideration. If an appeal is brought to Council pursuant
to § 150.1607(B) as a result of the Planning Commission's failure to act in
a timely manner, Council shall only consider such evidence as has been
previously submitted to the Planning Commission for its consideration.
Council shall consider no new evidence under either appeal. Under either
appeal, Council shall allow the applicant/appellant the option to comment
upon the evidence and/or recommendation from the Planning Commission and
Council may take such additional comments from the public at such hearing
either in support of or in opposition to the decision of the Planning
Commission and any evidence previously presented. Within 30 days of Council's
hearing on such appeal, Council shall act according to the following:



      (1)   Upon an appeal brought pursuant to § 150.1607(A)(2),
Council by majority vote may affirm the decision of the Planning Commission
from which such appeal is taken.



      (2)   On an appeal brought pursuant to § 150.1607(A)(2) or
(B), Council by majority vote may remand the appeal back to the Planning
Commission for a further study and review of items specified by Council. Any
additional review must be completed by the Planning Commission within 30 days
of its remand. At the end of that thirty day period, whether or not a
decision has been made by the Planning Commission, the matter shall be
returned to Council with a report of any action by the Planning Commission
and Council shall then act within 30 days of such remand.



      (3)   On an appeal brought pursuant to § 150.1607(A)(2).
Council by five concurring votes may overrule the denial of the application
by the Planning Commission and approve the application as submitted or
approve the application with such additional modifications as Council may
decide are appropriate with such five concurring votes.



      (4)   On an appeal brought pursuant to § 150.1607(B), Council
by five concurring votes may approve the application as submitted to the
Planning Commission or as submitted to the Planning Commission with such
additional modifications as Council may decide are appropriate by five
concurring votes. If there are fewer than five votes to approve the
application as appealed, the application shall be considered denied unless
Council by the affirmative vote of four or more members elects to remand the
appeal back to the Planning Commission as provided in division (2) above.



   Failure of Council to act within 30 days of the public hearing on
appeal or within 30 days of the return of an application to Council following
a remand to the Planning Commission, whichever is later, shall be deemed to
be a denial of the appeal if such appeal is brought pursuant to §
150.1607(A)(2) or approval of the application as submitted if the appeal was
brought pursuant to § 150.1607(B).



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.1609  TERMS AND DURATION OF CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT.



   Following Council's confirmation of an application for a conditional
use permit, the Zoning Administrator shall issue a conditional use permit.



   (A)   The permit shall authorize a particular conditional use on a
specific parcel for which it was approved. The permit shall be valid only for
the use and the operation of such use as specified on the permit and may not
be transferred by the applicant to any other person or entity without written
approval of Planning Commission and City Council. The breach of any
condition, safeguard or requirement shall constitute a violation of this
Zoning Code.



   (B)   The conditional use permit shall expire one year from the date
of enactment unless the following occur:



      (1)   The final development plan is approved for uses that
require a final development plan;



      (2)   Substantial progress in the establishment of the use is
accomplished; or



      (3)   As otherwise specifically approved by the Planning
Commission.



   (C)   Other than a minor alteration, any expansion, enlargement, or
change in the operation of the conditional use that involves enlarging
buildings or structures, expanding impervious surfaces including parking
areas, or changing the use shall require approval of a separate conditional
use permit.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.1610  RE-APPLICATION.



   No re-application for a conditional use permit shall be accepted by the
Zoning Administrator until the expiration of one year after the denial,
unless the Planning Commission determines that there is good cause shown by
the applicant for re-application. A vote of five of the seven members is
required for this early re-application. A re-application shall comply with
all the requirements of this Chapter, including payment of the required fee.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.1611  SIMILAR USES.



   Within each zoning district established by the Zoning Code and
amendments thereto, uses of land or structures which are compatible with each
other are permitted in the district. To the extent that new types of uses are
created and are not addressed by this Zoning Code, this section provides the
procedure by which the Planning Commission may make a determination that a
new use is similar to a use permitted in a district.



   (A)   Determination. A proposed use may be permitted as a similar
use when the Planning Commission determines that such proposed use is in
compliance with the following provisions:



      (1)   The proposed use is not prohibited in any other district;



      (2)   The proposed use is not listed as a permitted building
or use in any other district;



      (3)   The proposed use conforms to and is consistent with the
Purpose statement of the proposed district more appropriately than in any
other district;



      (4)   The proposed use is of the same general character as the
permitted uses in the district to which it is proposed or is similar to a
specific use permitted in that district.



   (B)   Procedure. The Planning Commission shall review the proposed
use according to the conditional use procedures set forth in §§ 150.1602
through 150.1605, including the requirement for a public hearing.



   (C)   Action by Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall,
within 10 days after its hearing, forward a recommendation to City Council in
compliance with the procedures set forth in § 150.1607. The Planning
Commission shall recommend that Council confirm, confirm with modifications
or deny the application for a similar use determination and provide the
reasons for their decision.



   (D)   Action by Council. Council shall act upon such recommendation
pursuant to the procedures of § 150.1608 If Council confirms the proposed
similar use, then the similar use shall be added to those districts that
allow the principal or conditional use that is most similar Districts. If
Council, by a majority vote of its members, concurs with the recommendations
of the Planning Commission and confirms the proposed similar use, then the
similar use shall be added to those districts that allow the principal or
conditional use that is most similar, as identified in the recommendation.
Council shall complete their review within 60 days from the date the
application is forwarded from the Planning Commission.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



CHAPTER 150.18:  REGULATIONS FOR LANDMARK PROPERTIES



Section



   150.1801   Purpose



   150.1802   Designation of city landmark property



   150.1803   Certificate of approval required



   150.1804   Demolition or moving permit required



   150.1805   Review of proposed national register nominations



§ 150.1801  PURPOSE.



   Procedures set forth in this Chapter regulate certain sites, buildings,
structures, objects and works of art so as to allow a measure of protection
afforded by a thorough study of alternatives to incompatible alterations or
demolition before such acts are performed, so that the following objectives
are reached:



   (A)   To safeguard the architectural integrity of the city's listed
landmark properties.



   (B)   To safeguard the heritage of the city by preserving sites,
buildings, structures, objects and works of art that reflect elements of the
city's cultural social economic political or architectural heritage.



   (C)   To seek alternatives to demolition or incompatible alterations
to listed properties before such acts are performed.



   (D)   To afford the widest possible scope of continuing vitality
through private renewal and architectural creativity within appropriate
controls and standards.



   (E)   To contribute to the economic, recreational, cultural and
educational development of the City of Montgomery by:



      (1)   Protecting and enhancing the city's historic properties
for existing and prospective residents, tourists, and visitors.



      (2)   Stabilizing and improving property values.



      (3)   Fostering civic pride in the beauty and notable
accomplishments of the past.



      (4)   Promoting the use and preservation of historic and
archaeological sites and structures for the education and general welfare of
the people of Montgomery.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.1802  DESIGNATION OF CITY LANDMARK PROPERTY.



   All applications for designation of a city landmark must be made by, or
with the written concurrence of, the owner of the nominated property. In
considering the designation of any site, building, structure, object or work
of art as a city landmark property, the Landmarks Consultant, Landmarks
Commission and City Council shall review nominations or applications
according to the following.



   (A)   Review Criteria. The following criteria shall apply to each
property to qualify for designation. One or more of the following must apply
to the property.



      (1)   It has character, interest, or value as part of the
heritage of the city, the state, or the United States;



      (2)   It was the location of a significant historic event;



      (3)   It is identifiable with a person or persons who
significantly contributed to the historic development of the city;



      (4)   It exemplifies the cultural, economic, social,
archaeological or historic heritage of the city;



      (5)   It portrays the environment of a group of people in an
era of history characterized by a distinctive architectural style;



      (6)   It is the embodiment of distinguishing architectural
characteristics, type or specimen;



      (7)   It is identifiable as the work of an architect or master
builder whose individual work has influenced the development of the City;



      (8)   It is an embodiment of elements of architectural design,
detail, materials, or craftsmanship which represent a significant
architectural or technological innovation;



      (9)   Its unique location or singular physical characteristic
represents an established and familiar visual feature of a neighborhood,
community, or the City;



      (10)   It has yielded, or is likely to yield information
important to prehistoric or historic understanding.



   (B)   Public Hearing Required. Whenever the Landmarks Commission is
to consider the designation of a listed landmark property, or a national
register building, it shall hold a public hearing thereon and shall publish
notice of such hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the
municipality once a week for two consecutive weeks on the same day of the
week, the first of such publications to take place not less than 30 days
prior to the public hearing.



   (C)   Landmarks Commission Action. The Landmarks Commission shall
conduct the public hearing and shall provide a reasonable opportunity for all
interested parties to express their opinions. Within 30 days after the
hearing, the Landmarks Commission shall set forth in its decision findings of
fact which constitute the basis for its decision and shall transmit the
decision concerning the proposed designation or listing to Council.



   (D)   Confirmation by City Council. Within 45 days of the receipt of
the Landmarks Commission's decision, City Council shall review and consider
legislation designating the landmark as recommended by the Landmarks
Commission or as amended by Council.



   (E)   Decision Shown on Zoning Map. Upon the designation of a
landmark, the Montgomery Zoning Map shall be revised to indicate by an
appropriate symbol or device that the parcel so marked is subject to listed
landmark designation, and the Clerk of the Council shall send a certified
copy of the Resolution by registered mail to the record owner, and any person
known to have a legal or equitable interest in the property.



   (F)   Designations. City Council may designate landmarks without
limitation as to number or period when designation proceeds from an
application for the same.



   (G)   Certificate of Approval Required. An owner or other person,
having received written notice that a site is being considered for
designation as a landmark, shall make no alterations to the site until the
procedures for designation as a landmark as noted herein are completed.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.1803  CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL REQUIRED.



   No construction, reconstruction, alteration, or demolition, or partial
demolition of any listed landmark structure or architectural feature thereto,
shall be undertaken prior to obtaining a certificate of approval according to
the procedures outlined in § 150.1206. The redevelopment of vacant land that
previously was occupied by a designated landmark that has been demolished
must also obtain a certificate of approval according to the procedures
outlined in § 150.1206.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.1804  DEMOLITION OR MOVING PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   Whenever the owner of a city landmark property intends to
demolish or move a structure, he/she shall first apply for and secure a
demolition or moving permit and a certificate of approval.



   (B)   Subsequent to the application for demolition or moving, there
shall be a 270-day review period. During the review period the Landmarks
Commission shall research the history, architectural merit, or other relevant
characteristics of the property, review the public and private interests
inherent in its preservation, discuss the proposal with the applicant, and
explore possible alternates to demolition or moving. Should the applicant and
the Landmarks Commission arrive at a mutually acceptable agreement, all or
part of the 270-day review period may be waived by the Landmarks Commission.



   (C)   In order to grant approval for demolition or moving, the
Landmarks Commission shall determine that the building meets at least one of
the following criteria:



      (1)   Deemed a hazard. The building is a hazard to public
health or safety and repairs are unfeasible as determined by the city's
Building Inspector or his designee, who shall seek the advice of the
appropriate technical experts as needed.



      (2)   Rehabilitation not feasible. Rehabilitation of the
building is not feasible. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to
prove that rehabilitation of the building is not feasible. In reviewing the
feasibility of rehabilitation, the Landmarks Commission shall review the
applicant's proposed use and shall consider alternative uses for which the
building might be better suited.



      (3)   Detriment to community. The retention of the building
would not be in the interest of the community as a whole.



   (D)   In the event that the Landmarks Commission determines within
the 270-day review period that a certificate of approval shall not be issued,
it shall forthwith state in its record reasons for such determination, and
may include recommendations relative to the proposed demolition or moving.
The Landmarks Commission shall notify the applicant of such determination and
shall transmit its reasons for denial and recommendations for demolition or
moving, if any.



   (E)   The applicant may appeal the denial of the certificate of
approval to City Council. Council shall review the recommendation of the
Landmarks Consultant and the determination of the Landmarks Commission.
Council may, by five concurring votes, reverse or modify the decision of the
Landmarks Commission.



   (F)   While a structure is under consideration for demolition or
moving, it remains the owner's responsibility to maintain the building in a
reasonable fashion. Deterioration of a structure through simple negligence
shall not be permitted. At the direction of the City's Building Inspector,
the owner shall take action to ensure the property does not fall into
disrepair.



   (G)   The City Manager may grant a certificate of approval for
demolishing or moving in instances where there is an imminent threat to the
public health or safety. In such instances, the City Manager shall seek the
advice of appropriate technical experts as needed prior to issuing the
certificate of approval.



   (H)   When a certificate of approval is granted for reasons other
than public health or safety such approval shall not, unless waived, become
effective until three months after the date of the approval decision by the
Landmarks Commission in order to provide a period of time within which it may
be possible to relieve a hardship or to cause the property to be transferred
to another owner who will retain the building. The foregoing does not imply
approval of demolition or moving by the Building Inspector.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.1805  REVIEW OF PROPOSED NATIONAL REGISTER NOMINATIONS.



   The Landmarks Commission shall review proposed National Register
nominations for properties within its jurisdiction according to the Ohio
Certified Local Government guidelines summarized below:



   (A)   Within 60 days of notice from the Ohio Historic Preservation
Office (OHPO) the Landmarks Commission shall review the nomination to
determine its compliance with the review criteria listed in § 150.1802.
Following its review, the Landmarks Commission shall prepare a report
containing its recommendation. Attached to the report shall be a
recommendation from the Mayor regarding the eligibility of the nominated
property. Minimally, the report may be a letter, signed by both the Mayor and
the Chairperson of the Landmarks Commission, stating their respective
opinions regarding a property's eligibility for listing on the National
Register of Historic Places.



   (B)   A copy of the Landmarks Commission's report shall be available
for public inspection at a location within the City.



   (C)   The City may expedite the nomination process by submitting a
report with the nomination when it is first submitted to the OHPO. Public
participation requirements still apply.



   (D)   Upon written agreement between the City and the OHPO, the City
may elect to assume responsibility for notification of property owners and
the public throughout the nomination process. If the City assumes the
notification responsibilities, the OHPO will provide guidance regarding
public notification and the content and timing of the notification letters.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



CHAPTER 150.20:  ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES FOR APPEALS AND VARIANCES



Section



   150.2001   Appeals to the Board of Zoning Appeals



   150.2002   Initiation of appeal



   150.2003   Public hearing by the board



   150.2004   Notice of public hearing



   150.2005   Stay of proceedings



   150.2006   Review of appeal



   150.2007   Decision of the board



   150.2008   Issuance of permits and certificates



   150.2009   Re-application of appeal



   150.2010   Dimensional variances



   150.2011   Establishment of a use not otherwise permitted



§ 150.2001  APPEALS TO THE BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.



   Appeals to the Board of Zoning Appeals may be submitted by any person,
firm or corporation, or by any officer, board or department of the
Municipality, deeming himself or itself to be adversely affected by a
decision of the Zoning Administrator, or by any administrative officer
deciding matters relating to this Code.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.2002  INITIATION OF APPEAL.



   Applications for appeal shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator
and with the Board of Zoning Appeals within 20 days after the date of any
adverse order, requirement, decision, or determination. The application for
appeal shall include reference to the decision, the provision of this Code
from which the appeal is sought, reasons for the appeal and a list of all
property owners lying within 300 feet of any part of the property to which
such appeal relates, including their addresses and permanent parcel numbers
as shown on the current tax duplicate of the Office of the Hamilton County
Treasurer. The Zoning Administrator shall transmit to the Board of Zoning
Appeals all papers constituting the record upon which the action being
appealed was taken.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.2003  PUBLIC HEARING BY THE BOARD.



   When an application for appeal has been filed in proper form with the
Board of Zoning Appeals and the application fee has been paid, the Zoning
Administrator shall place the request upon the calendar for public hearing
before the Board of Zoning Appeals, which shall be conducted within 60 days.
The Board may recess such hearings from time to time, and, if the time and
place of the continued hearing is publicly announced at the time of the
adjournment, no further notice shall be required. Any interested person may
appear at the public hearing in person or by attorney.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.2004  NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING.



   Notice of such public hearing shall be given by first class mail to the
parties making the request for the appeal and to the property owners within
300 feet of the property to which such appeal relates. Such notification
shall be sent to the names and addresses of such owners appearing on the
County Auditor's current tax list. If the address appearing on the tax list
is that of a lending institution or other person or entity clearly
recognizable as not being the owner, then written notice shall be mailed to
such institution, person, or entity at the listed address and to the named
owners at the street address of the property. Further notice shall be given
in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the city. All notices
shall be made at least 14 days before the date of said public hearing. All
notices shall set forth the time, place and nature of the public hearing.
Failure of delivery of such notice shall not invalidate action taken on such
application. The Board may continue or defer its consideration and no further
notice shall be required.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.2005  STAY OF PROCEEDINGS.



   An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from, unless the Zoning Administrator shall certify to the Board of
Zoning Appeals after the notice of the appeal has been filed, that by reason
of facts stated in the permit, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or
property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed by other than a
restraining order granted by a court having lawful jurisdiction.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.2006  REVIEW OF APPEAL.



   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall review the appeal. To aid in their
review, the Board may transmit the application to appropriate administrative
departments and professional consultants for review and comment. Any reports,
comments or experts opinions shall be compiled by the Zoning Administrator
and transmitted to the Board prior to the time of the Board's review.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.2007  DECISION OF THE BOARD.



   Within the limits of the powers set forth in this Code, the Board of
Zoning Appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the
order, requirement, decision or determination being appealed, and to that end
shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and
it may direct the issuance of a permit or certificate.



   (A)   Any decision by the Board of Zoning Appeals requires the
concurrence of four or more members. The Board shall render a decision on the
appeal within 30 days from the date of the hearing unless an extended period
of time is mutually agreed upon by the applicant and the Board. If the Board
fails to act within such period of time, the appellant may determine the
appeal has been denied.



   (B)   The Board shall notify the appellant in writing of the
decision of the Board, which shall include the reasons for the action taken.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.2008  ISSUANCE OF PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES.



   Once the appellant has received the Board's decision, he may submit an
application for a zoning certificate or conditional use permit that complies
with the Board of Zoning Appeal's decision. A copy of the Board of Zoning
Appeal's decision shall be attached to the application.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.2009  RE-APPLICATION OF APPEAL.



   If the appeal is denied by the Board of Zoning Appeals, the Board need
not rehear the application within 6 months after the date of the decision
unless the Board determines there is just cause. A vote of five of the seven
members is required for reconsideration.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.2010  DIMENSIONAL VARIANCES.



   The Board of Zoning Appeals may authorize upon appeal in specific cases
of a dimensional or area variance from the terms of this Code as will not be
contrary to the public interest according to the following procedures:



   (A)   Definition. Dimensional or area variances shall be considered
those variances from a zoning regulation that establishes minimum or maximum
areas, heights, distances, separation volume or any other measurement, which
is expressed in terms of a geometric measurement.



   (B)   Application Requirements. An application for a dimensional
variance shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator for review by the Board
of Zoning Appeals upon the forms provided, and shall be accompanied by the
following requirements necessary to convey the reason(s) for the requested
variance:



      (1)   Name, address and phone number of applicant(s);



      (2)   Proof of ownership, legal interest or written authority;



      (3)   Description of property or portion thereof;



      (4)   Description or nature of variance requested;



      (5)   Narrative statements establishing and substantiating the
justification for the variance pursuant to division (C) below;



      (6)   Site plans, floor plans, elevations and other drawings
at a reasonable scale to convey the need for the variance;



      (7)   Payment of the application fee;



      (8)   A list of all property owners lying within 300 feet of
any part of the property on which the variance is proposed, including their
addresses and permanent parcel numbers;



      (9)   Any other documents deemed necessary by the Zoning
Administrator.



   (C)   Review for Completeness. Upon receipt of a written request for
a dimensional variance, the Zoning Administrator shall make a preliminary
determination whether such application provides the information necessary for
review and evaluation. If it is determined that such application does not
provide the information necessary for such review and evaluation, the Zoning
Administrator shall within 10 days so advise in writing the applicant of the
deficiencies and shall not further process the application until the
deficiencies are corrected. If the applicant fails to correct such
deficiencies within 20 days of the date of the written notice from the Zoning
Administrator or such an extension granted from the 20 days deadline, then
such appeal shall be dismissed as not being timely filed.



   (D)   Review by the Board. According to the procedures established
for appeals in §§ 150.2003 and 150.2004, the Board shall hold a public
hearing and give notice of the same. The Board shall review each application
for a dimensional variance to determine if it complies with the purpose and
intent of this Code and evidence demonstrates that the literal enforcement of
this Code will result in practical difficulty. The following factors shall be
considered and weighed by the Board to determine practical difficulty:



      (1)   Whether special conditions and circumstances exist which
are peculiar to the land or structure involved and which are not applicable
generally to other lands or structures in the same zoning district. Examples
of such special conditions or circumstances are exceptional irregularity,
narrowness, shallowness or steepness of the lot, or adjacency to
non-conforming and inharmonious uses, structures or conditions;



      (2)   Whether the property in question will yield a reasonable
return or whether there can be any beneficial use of the property without the
variance;



      (3)   Whether the variance is substantial and is the minimum
necessary to make possible the reasonable use of the land or structures;



      (4)   Whether the essential character of the neighborhood
would be substantially altered or whether adjoining properties would suffer
substantial detriment as a result of the variance;



      (5)   Whether the variance would adversely affect the delivery
of governmental services such as water, sewer, trash pickup;



      (6)   Whether the property owner purchased the property with
knowledge of the zoning restrictions;



      (7)   Whether special conditions or circumstances exist as a
result of actions of the owner;



      (8)   Whether the property owner's predicament feasibly can be
obviated through some method other than a variance;



      (9)   Whether the spirit and intent behind the zoning
requirement would be observed and substantial justice done by granting a
variance; and



      (10)   Whether the granting of the variance requested will
confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this
regulation to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district.



   (E)   Requests for Additional Information. The Board of Zoning
Appeals may request that the applicant supply additional information that the
Board deems necessary to review and evaluate the request for a variance.



   (F)   Additional Conditions and Safeguards. The Board may further
prescribe any conditions and safeguards that it deems necessary to ensure
that the objectives of the regulation(s) or provision(s) to which the
variance applies will be met.



   (G)   Action by the Board. The Board shall either approve, approve
with supplementary conditions as specified in Division (F) above, or
disapprove the request for dimensional variance. In no case shall the Board
of Zoning Appeals approve a variance that establishes a nonconforming use of
land, building or structure where one had not previously existed.



   (H)   Term and Extension of Variance. Dimensional or area variances
shall be non-assignable without the written approval of the Board of Zoning
Appeals and shall expire one year from the date of their enactment, unless
prior thereto, the applicant commences actual construction in accordance with
the granted variance or an extension of time has been granted by the Board of
Zoning Appeals. There shall be no modification of variances except by further
consideration of the Board. Once the time limit pursuant to this section has
expired, a request for a variance shall be considered to be a new application
for a variance and shall meet all requirements for application and review
pursuant to this section. Dimensional variances approved in conjunction with
a development plan, pursuant to § 150.1414(C), shall remain valid for a
one-year period in compliance with § 150.1416.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.2011  ESTABLISHMENT OF A USE NOT OTHERWISE PERMITTED.



   In the event a proposed use is not listed as a permitted or conditional
use in the district in which it is proposed, but is a permitted or
conditional use in another district, the Planning Commission and Council may
determine that instead of rezoning the parcel to the district in which the
use is permitted, it is in the public interest to authorize the establishment
of the use. The use of this provision, however, is not intended to be a
substitute for a zoning amendment or the establishment of an appropriate
conditional use. The establishment of such proposed use shall be limited to
single parcels or multiple parcels, the sum of which does not exceed
approximately one-half to three-fourths of an acre in size. The review and
approval of the establishment of such use on the specific parcel noted on the
application shall be conducted according to the conditional use procedures
and submission requirements set forth in Chapter 150.16, including
confirmation by Council and the right to appeal the decision from the Board
of Zoning Appeals to Council.



   (A)   In order to grant conditional use approval to a use that is
not specifically listed in the district, the Planning Commission and Council
shall determine that strict compliance with the terms of this Code will
result in unnecessary hardship to the applicant. The applicant shall
demonstrate such hardship, by clear and convincing evidence that all of the
following criteria are satisfied:



      (1)   The specific parcel cannot be put to any economically
viable use under any of the permitted or conditional uses listed in the
Schedule of Uses in the zoning district in which the property is located;



      (2)   The hardship stems from a condition that is unique to
the property at issue and not found in the same zone or district, therefore
the granting of the requested use is not likely to be requested by other
property owners;



      (3)   The hardship condition is not created by actions of the
applicant;



      (4)   The granting of the proposed use will not adversely
affect the rights of adjacent property owners or residents;



      (5)   The granting of the proposed use will not adversely
affect the public health, safety or general welfare;



      (6)   The proposed use will be consistent with the general
spirit and intent of the Code; and



      (7)   The proposed use sought is the minimum that will afford
relief to the applicant.



   (B)   The permit shall authorize the particular use on the specific
parcel for which it was approved. The operation of such use as specified on
the permit shall not be assigned to any other subsequent use or party by
virtue of ownership, lease or similar agreement. The breach of any condition,
safeguard or requirement shall constitute a violation of this Zoning Code.



   (C)   Approval of the proposed use shall not be deemed to authorize
such use on any other parcel in the district, except when approved for a
specific parcel according to this section.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



CHAPTER 150.22:  ZONING AMENDMENTS



Section



   150.2201   Authority for zoning amendments



   150.2202   Initiation of zoning amendments



   150.2203   Zoning amendments initiated by property owners(s)



   150.2204   Zoning amendments initiated by Planning Commission or
Council



   150.2205   Review and public notice by Planning Commission



   150.2206   Recommendation by the Planning Commission



   150.2207   Public hearing and notice by Council



   150.2208   Action by Council



§ 150.2201  AUTHORITY FOR ZONING AMENDMENTS.



   Whenever the public necessity, general welfare or good zoning practices
require, City Council may amend, revise, rearrange, renumber or recodify this
Zoning Code or amend, supplement, change or repeal the boundaries or
classification of property according to the procedures set forth in this
Chapter and subject to the procedures provided by law.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.2202  INITIATION OF ZONING AMENDMENTS.



   Amendments to the Zoning Code, either text or map, may be initiated in
one of the following ways:



   (A)   By the filing of an application to the Planning Commission by
at least one owner or lessee of property or developer with an option on such
property within the area proposed to be changed or affected by said amendment.



   (B)   By the adoption of a motion by the Planning Commission
recommending to City Council that the process be initiated to consider a
zoning amendment, with concurrence by Council.



   (C)   By motion of City Council to initiate the rezoning process.



   (D)   Upon a written recommendation by the Zoning Administrator to
the Planning Commission.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05; Am. Ord. 6-2006, passed 4-5-06)



§ 150.2203  ZONING AMENDMENTS INITIATED BY PROPERTY OWNER(S).



   An amendment initiated by at least one owner or lessee of property or
developer with an option on such property within the area proposed to be
changed or affected by said amendment shall be submitted and reviewed
according to the following:



   (A)   Submission Requirements. Applications for proposed amendments
shall contain at least the following information:



      (1)   The name, address and phone number of the applicant and
the property owner if other than the applicant;



      (2)   A statement of the reason(s) for the proposed amendment;



      (3)   A statement on the ways in which the proposed amendment
relates to the Comprehensive Plan;



      (4)   The payment of the application fee;



      (5)   Amendments to the Zoning Map adopted as part of this
Zoning Code shall contain the following additional information:



         (a)   Legal description of the parcel(s) to be rezoned,
drawn by a registered surveyor;



         (b)   Present use and zoning district;



         (c)   Proposed use and zoning district;



         (d)   A vicinity map at a scale approved by the Zoning
Administrator showing property lines, thoroughfares, existing and proposed
zoning, and such other items as the Zoning Administrator may require;



         (e)   A list of all property owners lying within 300
feet of any part of the property on which the zoning amendment is requested,
including their addresses and permanent parcel number as shown upon the
County Auditor's current tax list;



         (f)   Existing topography at two-foot contour intervals
of the property to be rezoned and extending at least 300 feet outside the
proposed site, and including property lines, easements, street
rights-of-ways, existing structures, trees and landscaping features existing
thereon;



   (B)   Referral to Planning Commission. After the filing of a
completed application by an owner, lessee of property or developer with an
option on such property, the Zoning Administrator shall transmit the
application to the Planning Commission to begin the review process set forth
in §§ 150.2205 through 150.2208.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.2204  ZONING AMENDMENTS INITIATED BY PLANNING COMMISSION OR COUNCIL.



   After recommendation by the Planning Commission and concurrence by City
Council or by motion of City Council to initiate the process, the proposed
amendment shall be reviewed and considered by the Planning Commission and
Council according to the process set forth in §§ 150.2205 through 150.2208.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.2205  REVIEW AND PUBLIC NOTICE BY  PLANNING COMMISSION.



   (A)   Upon the receipt of an application, resolution, or upon the
passage of a motion of the Planning Commission and concurrence by Council,
Planning Commission shall set a meeting date for reviewing the proposed
amendment.



   (B)   Whenever the Planning Commission is to consider a map
amendment that proposes to rezone 10 or fewer parcels as listed on the tax
duplicate, notice shall be given according to the following:



      (1)   Written notification shall be given by first class mail
to the applicant and to all owners of property within 300 feet of the
property proposed to be rezoned or redistricted.



      (2)   Notices shall be given at least seven days prior to the
date of the meeting.



      (3)   Notices shall include the time and place of the meeting
and a summary of the proposed amendment.



      (4)   Failure of delivery of such notice shall not invalidate
any recommendation of the Planning Commission or any subsequently enacted
ordinance.



   (C)   The Planning Commission may continue or defer its
consideration and no further notice shall be required.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.2206  RECOMMENDATION BY THE PLANNING COMMISSION.



   (A)   After the conclusion of the public hearing required in §
150.2205, the Planning Commission shall recommend one of the following to
City Council:



      (1)   That the amendment be granted as requested,



      (2)   That the amendment be granted as modified by the
Planning Commission, or



      (3)   That the amendment be denied.



   (B)   If the Planning Commission does not make a recommendation on
the proposed amendment within 90 days from the submittal of a complete
application or referral by City Council or an extended period as may be
agreed upon by the applicant, it may be deemed that the recommendation of the
Planning Commission is that the amendment be denied and Council shall act
thereon according to § 150.2207. Upon either a motion by Council or at the
request of the applicant, such motion by Council or request by the applicant
must be filed with the secretary of the Planning Commission before any
recommendation is made by the Planning Commission.



   (C)   The Secretary of the Planning Commission shall file with the
Clerk of Council a written report of the Planning Commission's recommendation
and findings.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.2207  PUBLIC HEARING AND NOTICE BY COUNCIL.



   Upon receipt of the recommendation from the Planning Commission,
Council shall set a time within 60 days for a public hearing on the proposed
amendment.



   (A)   Notice of the public hearing shall be given by Council
according to the following:



      (1)   Notice of the proposed amendment shall be published once
a week for two consecutive weeks on the same day of the week, the first of
which shall be published at least 30 days prior to the date of the required
hearing, in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the city.



      (2)   Whenever a proposed map amendment proposes to rezone 10
or fewer parcels as listed on the tax duplicate, written notice of the
hearing shall be given to the applicant and to all owners of property that
are within 300 feet of the property proposed to be rezoned or redistricted.
Notification shall be sent to the names and addresses of such owners
appearing on the County Auditor's current tax list. Such list shall be
furnished by the city law director's office. If the address appearing on the
tax list is that of a lending institution or other person or entity clearly
recognizable as not being the owner, then written notice shall be mailed to
such institution, person, or entity at the listed address and to the named
owners at the street address of the property. Notices shall be sent by first
class mail at least 30 days prior to the public hearing.



      (3)   Notices shall include the time and place of the public
hearing, a summary of the proposed amendment and a statement that opportunity
to be heard will be afforded to any person interested. Failure of delivery of
such notice shall not invalidate any such amendment.



   (B)   During the 30 days prior to the public hearing, the text of
the proposed amendment, maps or plans, if applicable, and the maps, plans and
reports that constitute the recommendation of the Planning Commission shall
be on file for public examination in the office of the Zoning Administrator.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.2208  ACTION BY COUNCIL.



   After the conclusion of the public hearing required in § 150.2207,
Council shall consider the proposed amendment according to the following:



   (A)   Council's action shall either:



      (1)   Adopt the recommendation of the Planning Commission;



      (2)   Deny the recommendation of the Planning Commission; or



      (3)   Adopt some modification thereof.



   (B)   Required vote for adoption.



      (1)   If Council votes to uphold the recommendation of the
Planning Commission, the proposed amendment shall be adopted when approved by
a majority vote of the membership of Council.



      (2)   If Council votes to overrule or depart from the
recommendation of the Planning Commission, the proposed action shall be
adopted when approved by not less than five concurring votes of the
membership of Council.



   (C)   Any such proposal may be amended prior to the voting thereon
by Council without further notice or postponement if such amendment to the
proposal is germane to the subject matter thereof and is in accordance with
the recommendation of the Planning Commission. Council approval, with
modification of the recommendation of the Planning Commission, shall not be
considered as overruling or departing from the Planning Commission's
recommendation and requires a simple majority to approve.



   (D)    If City Council fails to act within 120 days of the public
hearing, or an extended period as may be agreed upon, then the applicant may
deem the zoning amendment denied.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



CHAPTER 150.30:  ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES



Section



   150.3001   Enforcement by Zoning Administrator



   150.3002   Construction and use shall comply with regulations



   150.3003   Violations



   150.3004   Complaints regarding violations



   150.3005   Violation considered a nuisance



   150.3006   Inspection of property



   150.3007   Stop work order



   150.3008   Notice of Violation



   150.3009   Remedies



   150.3010   Penalties



§ 150.3001  ENFORCEMENT BY ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.



   The provisions of this Zoning Code shall be administered and enforced
by the Zoning Administrator.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.3002  CONSTRUCTION AND USE SHALL COMPLY WITH REGULATIONS.



   All buildings and structures and uses of land, buildings and structures
shall be located, erected constructed reconstructed enlarged, changed,
maintained, demolished or partially demolished, or used according to the
regulations and provisions set forth in this Zoning Code and any amendments
thereto. Zoning certificates issued by the Zoning Administrator on the basis
of approved plans and applications authorize only the use and arrangement set
forth in such approved plans and applications, or amendments thereto. Use,
arrangement construction or demolition contrary to that authorized shall be
deemed a punishable violation of this Zoning Code.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.3003  VIOLATIONS.



   It shall be unlawful to:



   (A)   Use or occupy any land or place; build, erect, alter,
demolish, remodel, restore, or rebuild thereon any building or structure;
permit any building or structure to remain on such land; or use, occupy, or
operate such building or structure, in any way or for any use or purpose
which is not permitted by the provisions of this Zoning Code; or



   (B)   Use or occupy any parcel of land; use or occupy a new
building; or enlarge, substitute, or otherwise change the use, occupancy, or
configuration of any land or building, without having received a zoning
certificate, conditional use permit, certificate of approval or demolition
permit, or certificate of occupancy indicating compliance with the provisions
of this Zoning Code from the Zoning Administrator; or



   (C)   Aid, assist, or participate with any person in placing,
building, erecting, altering, remodeling, restoring, rebuilding, or
demolishing any building or structure or part of a building or structure
which is not permitted by the provisions of this Zoning Code; or



   (D)   Violate or fail to perform any condition, stipulation or
safeguard set forth in any certificate issued pursuant to this Zoning Code,
or continue to use or occupy the premises or building as previously
authorized by such certificate beyond the duration limit therein stated; or



   (E)   Continue construction, demolition, renovation, or improvements
contrary to a Stop Work Order or Notice of Violation; or



   (F)   Knowingly make any materially false statement of fact in an
application to the Zoning Administrator for a zoning certificate, conditional
use permit, certificate of occupancy, demolition permit, or in the plans or
specifications submitted to the Zoning Administrator in relation to such
application; or



   (G)   Violate any provision of this Zoning Code, or any other
section of Title XV of the Montgomery Code of Ordinances.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.3004  COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATIONS.



   Whenever a violation of this Zoning Code occurs, or is alleged to have
occurred, any person may file a complaint. Such written complaints shall
fully state the causes and basis of the complaint and shall be filed with the
Zoning Administrator.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.3005  VIOLATION CONSIDERED A NUISANCE.



   Any building erected, altered, moved, demolished or partially
demolished or converted, or any use of land or premises carried on in
violation of any provision of this Zoning Code may be declared to be a
nuisance. Any building or land use activity considered to be a possible
violation of any provision of this Zoning Code that is observed by any City
official shall be reported to the Zoning Administrator.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.3006  INSPECTION OF PROPERTY.



   The Zoning Administrator shall inspect any building or structure
erected, altered, moved, demolished or partially demolished or converted, or
any use of land or premises carried on in alleged violation of any of the
provisions of this Zoning Code.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.3007  STOP WORK ORDER.



   Subsequent to a determination that construction work or demolition work
is being done contrary to this Zoning Code, the Zoning Administrator, or his
or her designee, shall issue a stop work order and post it on the premises
involved. Removal of a stop work order, except by the order of the Zoning
Administrator or designated agent, shall constitute a punishable violation of
this Zoning Code.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.3008  NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   Upon finding a violation, the Zoning Administrator shall order, in
writing, the owner, agent, occupant or operator of such building or premises
to correct, within a stated reasonable time, all conditions that are found to
be in violation of this Zoning Code. After such a notice is served, no work,
except to correct the violation or comply with the notice shall proceed on
any building or premises included in the violation.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.3009  REMEDIES.



   (A)   The Zoning Administrator may issue a revocation notice to
revoke a permit or administrative approval that was issued contrary to this
Zoning Code or based upon false information or misrepresentation in the
application.



   (B)   In case any building or structure is or is proposed to be
located, demolished, partially demolished, erected, constructed,
reconstructed, enlarged changed, maintained, or used, or any land is or is
proposed to be used in violation of any regulations, provision, amendment or
supplement of this Zoning Code, the City Council, the Law Director, or the
Zoning Administrator or any adjacent property owner who would be specifically
damaged by such violation may, in addition to other remedies provided by law,
institute injunction, mandamus, abatement, or any other appropriate action or
proceeding to prevent, enjoin, abate, or remove such unlawful location,
erection, construction, reconstruction, enlargement, change maintenance or
use.



   (C)   In addition to any criminal penalties provided under §
150.3010, any person who violates § 150.1804 or any similar section of the
Code governing the moving, demolition, or partial demolition of a city
designated landmark property without appropriate permit shall be required to
repair or restore any such property to return it to its former location
and/or conditions, or such person shall forfeit and pay to the city civil
penalties equal to the greater of the fair market value of any such landmark
property or portion of a landmark property which was demolished, partially
demolished, destroyed, or moved in violation of § 150.1804, or similar
section, or $10,000.  These civil penalties shall represent compensation to
the Montgomery community for the loss of the landmark treasures the community
has worked to preserve and protect. The monies shall be deposited to the
Montgomery Historic Trust Fund and the monies shall be used for the purposes
of that fund which include preservation of historic landmarks and community
education. This section may be enforced in a civil action initiated by the
Law Director at the request of City Council.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 150.3010  PENALTIES.



   Failure to correct the conditions in violation with the provisions of
this Zoning Code, as ordered by the Zoning Administrator, shall constitute a
misdemeanor. Upon conviction of such violations, the responsible person or
party shall be fined no more than $1,000 or imprisoned for not more than 180
days or both. Each day such violation continues shall be deemed a separate
offense. Any other person who commits, participates in or assists in the
continuation of said violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense
and suffer the penalties provided.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



CHAPTER 151.01:  ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS AND MAP



Section



   151.0101   Establishment of Districts



   151.0102   Zoning districts map



   151.0103   Interpretation of district boundaries



   151.0104   Annexed land



   151.0105   Continuation of existing planned development overlays



§ 151.0101  ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS.



   For the purpose of this Zoning Code, the City of Montgomery is hereby
divided into districts enumerated below, each being of such number, shape,
kind and area and of such common unity of purpose and adaptability of use
that are deemed most suitable to carry out the purposes of the city.



 

Title
 
Symbols




RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
 


Single-Family Residential
 
A


Single-Family Residential
 
B


Single and Two-Family Residential
 
C


Multi-Family Residential
 
D-2


Multi-Family Residential
 
D-3


BUSINESS DISTRICTS
 


Office
 
O


Office Commercial
 
OC


Limited Business
 
L-B


General Business
 
G-B


Old Montgomery
 
OM


    Core Area
 


    Outer Area
 


Old Montgomery Gateway
 
OMG


Heritage Overlay
 
H-O




 



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05; Am. Ord. 2-2014, passed 3-5-14)



§ 151.0102  ZONING DISTRICTS MAP.



   Those districts established in § 151.0101 are bounded and defined as
shown on a map entitled "Zoning District Map of Montgomery, Ohio". Such map
with all the notations, references and other pertinent material shown thereon
is hereby incorporated by reference and declared to be a part of the Zoning
Code, thereby having the same force and effect as if fully described in
writing. The Zoning Map shall be maintained in the office of the Zoning
Administrator.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.0103  INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.



   Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the
aforesaid districts as shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall
apply:



   (A)   Where Boundaries Approximately Follow Streets, Alleys or
Highways. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following
the center line or street line of streets, the center line or alley line of
alleys, or the center line or right-of-way lines of highways, such lines
shall be construed to be such district boundaries.



   (B)   Where Boundaries Parallel Street Lines, Alley Lines or Highway
Right-of-Way Lines. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are
approximately parallel to the center line or street line of streets, the
center line or alley line of alleys, or the center line or right-of-way lines
of highways, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel
thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the Map. If no
distance is given, such dimensions shall be determined by the use of the
scale shown on the Zoning Map.



   (C)   Where Boundaries Approximately Follow Lot Lines. Where
district boundaries are indicated as approximately following lot lines, such
lot lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.



   (D)   Vacation of Public Ways. Whenever any street, alley or other
public way is vacated in a manner authorized by law, the zoning district
adjoining each side of such street, alley or public way shall be
automatically extended to the center of such vacation and all areas included
in the vacation shall then and henceforth be subject to all regulations of
the extended district.



   (E)   Resolving Disputes. All uncertainties and disputes concerning
the exact location of zoning district boundaries shall be resolved by the
Board of Zoning Appeals.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.0104  ANNEXED LAND.



   All land that may hereafter be annexed to the City of Montgomery, the
township zoning regulations existing at the time of annexation shall continue
to govern the former township land until an amendment to the City of
Montgomery Zoning Map is adopted in conformance with the procedures of this
Zoning Code.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.0105  CONTINUATION OF EXISTING PLANNED DEVELOPMENT OVERLAYS.



   (A)   In addition to the Heritage District Overlay (§ 151.14),
there are within the city five planned unit development overlay adopted under
the following ordinances and/or resolutions:



      (1)   Montgomery Station: Ordinance 19, 1983 and Ordinance 4,
1996.



      (2)   Coventry Court: Ordinance 6, 1986 and Ordinance 5, 1996.



      (3)   Mayfair Apartments: Ordinance 21, 1980 and Ordinance 3,
1989.



      (4)   Orchard Club: Office - Resolution R-28,1990; Residential
- Resolution R-7, 1993.



      (5)   Woodgate Subdivision: Resolution R-49, 1992.



   (B)   These developments have continued to be maintained in
accordance with the development standards and site plans under which they
originally were approved. A proposed modification to one of these previously
approved plans shall be treated as the equivalent of the submission of a
Final Development Plan subject to the review and appeal procedures of Chapter
150.14.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



CHAPTER 151.10:  RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS



Section



   151.1001   Purpose



   151.1002   Use regulations



   151.1003   Schedule of permitted uses



   151.1004   Lot requirements for standard single-family detached
dwellings and two-family dwellings



   151.1005   Yard requirements for standard single-family detached
dwellings and two-family dwellings



   151.1006   Lot requirements for single-family detached cluster
developments, single-family attached dwellings and multi-family dwellings



   151.1007   Site development requirements for single-family detached
clusters, single-family attached dwellings or multi-family dwellings



   151.1008   Height regulations



   151.1009   Accessory use regulations



   151.1010   Regulations for home occupations



   151.1011   Family day care home, type "B"



   151.1012   Public parks



   151.1013   Residential facilities



§ 151.1001  PURPOSE.



   Single-Family and Multi-Family Residential Districts (A, B, C, D-2, and
D-3) and their regulations are established in order to achieve, among others,
the following purposes  (Note: The D-1 District was deleted during the
update of the Montgomery Zoning Code in 2000):



   (A)   To regulate the bulk and location of dwellings and accessory
buildings or structures to obtain proper privacy and useable open spaces on
each lot appropriate for the various districts;



   (B)   To provide for proper location of institutions and other
community facilities so as to increase the general convenience, safety and
amenities within the community;



   (C)   To protect the desirable characteristics and promote the
stability of existing residential development;



   (D)   To regulate the density and distribution of population in
accordance with the Comprehensive Community Plan to avoid congestion and
provide adequate public services.



(Ord. 6-2010, passed 7-7-10)



§ 151.1002  USE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Uses Permitted by Right.  A use listed in Schedule 151.1003
shall be permitted by right as a principal use in a district when denoted by
the letter "P" provided that all requirements of other city ordinances and
this Zoning Code have been met;



   (B)   Conditional Uses.  A use listed in Schedule 151.1003 shall be
permitted as a conditional use in a district when denoted by the letter "C",
provided the Planning Commission and/or Council make the determination that
the requirements of Chapter 151.20 have been met, according to the procedures
set forth in Chapter 150.16.



   (C)   Accessory Uses. An accessory use that is clearly incidental
and subordinate to a use listed in Schedule 151.1003 shall be permitted
provided that the requirements of all other city ordinances and this Zoning
Code have been met. Accessory uses are further regulated in § 151.1009 and
as listed below.



      (1)   Dish-type satellite signal receiving stations.



      (2)   Family day care home, "type B" in compliance with §
151.1011.



      (3)   Fences, walls, landscape features in compliance with
Chapter 151.34.



      (4)   Home occupations in compliance with § 151.1010.



      (5)   Private garages and off-street parking areas in
compliance with Chapter 151.32.



      (6)   Signs in compliance with Chapter 151.30.



      (7)   Swimming pools, tennis courts, sports courts, basketball
courts and other recreational and play equipment uses.



      (8)   Utility/storage sheds.



   (D)   Use Not Listed in Schedule.  Any use not specifically listed
as either a permitted principal or conditional use shall be a prohibited use
in these zoning districts and shall only be permitted upon amendment of this
Code and/or the zoning map as provided in Chapter 150.22 or upon a finding
that a use is substantially similar as provided in § 150.1611.



(Ord. 6-2010, passed 7-7-10)



§ 151.1003  SCHEDULE OF PERMITTED USES.



 

Land Use Category
 
A
Single- Family District
 
B
Single- Family District
 
C
Single and Two-Family District
 
D-2
Multi- Family District
 
D-3
Multi- Family District




(A)   Residential
 


   (1)   Single-family detached dwellings
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


   (2)   Single-family detached cluster dwellings
 
 
 
 
P
 
P


   (3)   Single-family attached dwellings
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P


   (4)   Two-family dwellings
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P


   (5)   Multi-family dwellings
 
 
 
 
P
 
P


   (6)   Residential Care Facility Category I
 
P(b)
 
P(b)
 
P(b)
 
P(b)
 
P(b)


   (7)   Residential Care Facility Category II
 
 
 
 
P(b)
 
P(b)


   (8)   Foster home
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


   (9)   Keeping of rabbits or chicken/hens for personal use (6 or
fewer chickens/hens)
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 


(B)   Community Facilities
 


   (1)   Places of worship
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C


   (2)   Cemeteries
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C


   (3)   Day care within churches, schools
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C


   (4)   Public utility substations
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C


   (5)   Libraries, museums
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C


   (6)   Retirement villages
 
 
 
 
C
 
C


   (7)   Schools, public & private
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C


   (8)   Public safety facilities
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C


(C)   Entertainment - Recreation
 


   (1)   Public parks(a)
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


   (2)   Golf courses
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C


   (3)   Clubs, lodges or other assembly halls
 
 
 
 
C
 
C


(D)   Other
 


   Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
 
See Chapter 151.36


P = Permitted Use   C = Conditional Use
(a)  See also § 151.1012
(b)  See also § 151.1013




 



(Ord. 6-2010, passed 7-7-10; Am. Ord. 19-2014, passed 12-3-14)



§ 151.1004  LOT REQUIREMENTS FOR STANDARD SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLINGS
AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLINGS.



   Lots created for single-family detached dwellings in any residential
district and two-family dwellings where permitted shall comply with the area
and dimension requirements specified in Schedule 151.1004 for the district in
which the lot is located.



   (A)   Minimum Lot Area.  The area of a lot that may be used for the
purposes of a dwelling unit shall not be less than the area set forth in
Schedule 151.1004 except as otherwise permitted in division (D) below.



   (B)   Minimum Lot Width. The width of a lot, measured at the
building line, shall not be less than the width set forth in Schedule
151.1004.



   (C)   Minimum Lot Frontage. The minimum lot frontage shall be the
same as the minimum lot width except for lots on cul-de-sacs as set forth in
Schedule 151.1004 and as otherwise permitted in division (D) below.



   (D)   Exceptions for Panhandle Lots.



      (1)   The minimum lot frontage required for panhandle lots
shall be 20 feet measured at the public street right-of-way which provides
access to the lot.



      (2)   Panhandle lots can only be created, however, when the
lot area is 150% of the permitted minimum lot area of the district or 100% of
the area of the front lot of which the panhandle lot is located immediately
behind, whichever is larger in size. If the lot is located behind more than
one lot, the new lot must be 150% of the permitted minimum area or 100% of
the area of all the lot area that it is located behind, whichever is greater,
provided, however, that no lot need exceed 200% of the permitted minimum area.



      (3)   In calculating the area of the panhandle lot for
purposes of determining whether it meets the minimum area requirements, if
the panhandle or portion of the lot providing access to the street
right-of-way is less than 35 feet in width at any point of the panhandle, the
area of the panhandle shall not be included in the lot area calculations.



      (4)   The principal dwelling of a panhandle lot shall not be
constructed closer to the side and rear lot lines than 150% of the respective
minimum side and rear yard setback requirements established in Schedule
151.1005, and shall be a minimum of 50 feet from the front lot line.  For
the purposes of this division (D), the front lot line shall be that portion
of the property line nearest and perpendicular to the access strip or
panhandle of the lot. The rear lot line is the lot line opposite and parallel
to the front lot line.



      (5)   Adequate screening may be required for the panhandle lot
if the Zoning Administrator determines that the proposed dwelling, parking
area, driveway or accessory structures infringes on the privacy and enjoyment
of adjoining residential properties. In such case, appropriate landscaping
shall be provided as determined by the Zoning Administrator.



   (E)   One Dwelling per Lot. There shall not be more than one
dwelling constructed on a lot, except as otherwise regulated in § 151.1006
for single-family clusters, attached single-family or multi-family
developments.



 


Schedule 151.1004
Lot Requirements For Standard Single-family Detached Dwellings And Two-family
Dwellings


Zone standards


 

R-A

 

R-B
 

R-C

 

D-2

 

D-3






Minimum lot area (square feet)

 

20,000

 

15,000

 

12,000

 

7,400

 

6,250




Minimum lot area (square feet) Two-family

 

–

 

–

 

12,000

 

10,000

 

8,500




(2)   Minimum lot width at building line (feet)

 





   (a)   Single-family

 

80

 

70

 

65

 

60

 

60




   (b)   Two-family

 

–

 

–

 

65

 

65

 

65




(3)   Minimum lot frontage for lots on cul-de-sacs (feet)

 





   (a)   Single-family

 

50

 

45

 

45

 

40

 

40




   (b)   Two-family

 

–

 

–

 

45

 

40

 

40





 



(Ord. 6-2010, passed 7-7-10; Am. Ord. 19-2014, passed 12-3-14)



§ 151.1005  YARD REQUIREMENTS FOR STANDARD SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLINGS
AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLINGS.



   Single-family detached dwellings and two-family dwellings shall be
located on a lot in a manner that maintains the minimum front, side and rear
yards specified in Schedule 151.1005 for the district in which the lot is
located.



   (A)   Front Yard.  Each lot shall maintain a front yard in
compliance with Schedule 151.1005, except as otherwise permitted in division
(B) below.



   (B)   Front Yards on Built-up Blocks.  If 40% or more of the
frontage on the same side of the street between two intersecting streets is
improved with buildings that were lawfully constructed before the effective
date of this Zoning Code, but which could not now be constructed under the
terms of this Code because they do not meet the required front yard setback,
then new buildings may project into the front setback established for that
district up to the average front yard setback of the nearest four lots
located on the same side of the street of the proposed lot.



   (C)   Side Yards.  Except for corner lots, each lot shall have and
maintain two side yards in compliance with Schedule 151.1005.



   (D)   Rear Yards.  Each lot shall maintain a rear yard as specified
in Schedule 151.1005.



 


Schedule 151.1005
Yard Requirements For Standard Single-family Detached Dwellings And
Two-family Dwellings
(In Feet)





 

A

 

B

 

C

 

D-2

 

D-3






(1)   Front Yard

 





   (a)    Single-family

 

50(a)

 

50(a)

 

50(a)

 

50(a)

 

50(a)




   (b)    Two-family

 

–

 

–

 

50(a)

 

50(a)

 

50(a)




(2)   Side Yard

 





   (a)   Single-family

 

15

 

12

 

10

 

8

 

8




   (b)   Two-family

 

–

 

–

 

10

 

10

 

10




(3)   Rear Yard

 





   (a)   Single-family

 

35

 

30

 

30

 

25

 

25




   (b)   Two-family

 

–

 

–

 

30

 

30

 

30




Notes to Schedule 151.1005:
(a)   Except as otherwise provided in § 151.1005(B)





 



(Ord. 6-2010, passed 7-7-10)



§ 151.1006  LOT REQUIREMENTS FOR SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED CLUSTER
DEVELOPMENTS, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED DWELLINGS AND MULTI-FAMILY DWELLINGS.



   Land area divided and developed for single-family detached clusters,
single-family attached dwellings or multi-family dwellings in the D-2, D-3
and OMG Districts shall comply with the following regulations:



   (A)   Minimum Development Area.  The gross area of a tract of land
shall not be less than that set forth in Schedule 151.1006.  The entire
tract of land to be developed shall be considered one zoning lot.



   (B)   Maximum Density.



      (1)   The density of a residential development shall not
exceed the number of dwelling units per acre set forth in Schedule 151.1006
for the district in which the development is located.



      (2)   The total number of dwelling units permitted shall be
calculated by multiplying the total development area, exclusive of public
rights-of-way existing at the time the development plan is submitted, by the
number of dwelling units permitted per acre.



   (C)   Maximum Coverage. The maximum coverage of the lot, including
all areas covered by buildings, vehicular drives and parking areas shall not
exceed the percentage of total area of the development project set forth in
Schedule 151.1006.



   (D)   Maximum Number of Attached Single-Family Units. A building
comprised of attached single-family units shall not exceed the number of
units set forth in Schedule 151.1006.



   (E)   Minimum Lot Frontage.  Each zoning lot shall abut upon a
public street for not less than the distance set forth in Schedule
151.1006.  On corner and through lots, each frontage must meet this
requirement.



 


Schedule 151.1006
Lot Requirements For Single-family Detached Cluster Developments,
Single-family Attached Dwellings And Multi-family Dwellings





 

D-2

 

D-3

 

OM-Outer

 

OMG






(Minimum Development Area (acres)

 

2

 

1

 

.75

 

.75




Maximum Density

 

5 dwelling units per acre

 

6 dwelling units per acre

 

10 dwelling units per acre

 

12 dwelling units per acre




Maximum Impervious Surface Coverage

 

60%

 

60%

 

80%

 

80%




Maximum Number of Attached Single-Family Units per Building (a)

 

4

 

6

 

-

 

-




Minimum Lot Frontage (feet)

 

100

 

100

 

90

 

-




Notes to Schedule 151.1006:
(a)   The limitation on the number of units per building does not apply to
apartments.





 



   (F)   Supplemental Requirements for Single-Family Detached Cluster
Developments.



      (1)   Privacy for individual principal buildings shall be
maintained through the use of landscaping and screening.



      (2)   Street lighting and street signs shall be adequate for
safety and security.



      (3)   Additional development requirements formulated to
achieve the objectives of this section may be established at the time the
general development plan is reviewed. Any such development requirements
adopted with such plan shall become binding land use requirements for the
proposed development.



(Ord. 6-2010, passed 7-7-10; Am. Ord. 16-2013, passed 11-6-13)



§ 151.1007  SITE DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED
CLUSTERS, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED DWELLINGS OR MULTI-FAMILY DWELLINGS.



   The following regulations are established to regulate the design and
development of single-family detached clusters, single-family attached
dwellings or multi-family dwellings in the D-2 or D-3 district.



   (A)   Setback from Existing Rights-of-Way.  The setback of a
principal or accessory building and off-street parking areas from an existing
public right-of-way shall not be less than the distances set forth in
Schedule 151.1007 and Schedule 151.1009(D).



   (B)   Setback from Project Boundary.  The setback of a principal or
accessory building and off-street parking areas from any project boundary
that is not an existing public right-of-way shall not be less than the
distances set forth in Schedule 151.1007.



   (C)   Building Spacing.  The minimum distance between buildings on
the same site, shall not be less than the distance set forth in Schedule
151.1007.  The following definitions shall apply to terms used in this
section:



      (1)   Main Wall.  The wall of a building which contains the
primary windows of any living, family or dining room.



      (2)   End Wall.  The walls, other than a main wall of a
building, which may be blank or contain windows not considered to be primary
windows.



   (D)   Building Arrangement. Single-family detached clusters,
single-family attached dwellings or multi-family dwellings may be arranged in
a group and need not directly front onto a street.



 


Schedule 151.1007
Site Development Regulations for Single-Family Detached Clusters,
Single-Family Attached Dwellings or Multi-Family Dwellings





 

D-2

 

D-3

 

OM Outer






(1)   Minimum principal building setback from public street right-of-way

 

35 feet

 

35 feet

 

10 feet




(2)   Minimum parking setback from public street right-of-way

 

20 feet

 

20 feet

 

10 feet




(3)   Minimum principal building setback from:

 


 


 





   (a)   Project boundary line when adjacent to residential districts

 

30 feet

 

30 feet

 

15 feet




   (b)   Project boundary line when adjacent to non-residential
districts

 

15 feet

 

15 feet

 

15 feet




(4)   Distance between buildings within the same project boundary

 


 


 





   (a)   Main wall of one principal building facing a main wall of
another principal building

 

40

 

40

 

—




   (b)   Main wall of one principal building facing an end wall of
another principal building

 

30

 

30

 

—




   (c)   End wall of one principal building facing an end wall of
another principal building

 

20

 

20

 

—





 



(Ord. 6-2010, passed 7-7-10)



§ 151.1008  HEIGHT REGULATIONS.



   All buildings and structures in the residential districts shall comply
with the following:



   (A)   Principal buildings shall not exceed two and one-half stories
or 35 feet, whichever is less, except for multi-family dwellings in the D-3
District, which shall not exceed three stories or 45 feet.



   (B)   For a residence being constructed on a lot where the previous
house was demolished, the top of the foundation of the new residence shall
not be set higher than 12 inches above the top of the foundation of the
previous residence unless it is determined by the City Engineer that the
foundation needs to be raised to insure proper drainage.



   (C)   Accessory buildings and structures shall not exceed a height
of 15 feet, except as otherwise permitted in §§ 150.0204(B) and 151.1009.



(Ord. 6-2010, passed 7-7-10)



§ 151.1009  ACCESSORY USE REGULATIONS.



   Accessory uses, buildings and structures permitted in any residential
district shall conform to the location, coverage and maintenance standards
contained in this section. No accessory building or use shall be established
on a lot unless a principal building or use has first been established and
constructed on the lot in conformance with all applicable provisions of this
Zoning Code.



   (A)   Measurement Requirements.



      (1)   The setback requirements for an accessory building or
structure shall be measured from the property line to the outer most edge of
any paved or fixed surface attached to, surrounding, or supporting such
building or structure, such as a poured base or wood boundaries surrounding a
play set or an aboveground pool.



      (2)   The coverage area of an accessory structure shall be
measured from the outer most point of any paved or fixed surface upon which
the building or structure rests, or the outer most projection of any support
structure for the building or structure, or the outer most edge of any paved,
wood or other fixed surface attached to or surrounding such building or
structure.



   (B)   Minimum Yard Requirements for Detached Accessory Buildings or
Structures on Lots with Standard Detached Single-Family Dwellings and
Two-Family Dwellings. A detached accessory building or structure permitted on
lots with standard detached single-family dwellings and two-family dwellings
in the residential districts shall be located as set forth in § 151.1009(B)
and as otherwise provided for in this section.



 


Schedule 151.1009(B)
Minimum Yard Requirements For Detached Accessory Buildings or Structures on
Lots With Standard Detached Single-Family Dwellings and Two-Family Dwellings




Permitted Structure, Building

 

Yard in which Permitted

 

Minimum Distance (in feet) from:




Front Lot Line

 

Side Lot Line

 

Rear Lot Line






(1)   Accessory buildings, 200 sq. ft. and under (a), (l)

 

Side, Rear

 

–

 

5

 

5




(2)   Accessory buildings over 200 sq. ft. (a)

 

Side, Rear

 

–

 

(b)

 

(b)




(3)   Pole buildings

 

Not Permitted

 


 


 





(4)   Driveways

 

Front, Side, and Rear

 

NA

 

5 (c), (d)

 

5




(5)   Accessory off-street parking area

 

Front, Side and Rear

 

25(d) (h)

 

5

 

5




(6)   Fences, walls

 

Side and Rear

 

(e)

 

None(f)

 

None(f)




(7)   Swimming pools

 

Rear

 

–

 

10

 

10




(8)   Fire pits(i), outdoor fireplaces & kitchens

 

Side, Rear

 

–

 

10

 

10




(9)   Outdoor boiler, stove or furnace

 

Not Permitted

 


 


 





(10)   Yard Structures

 

Side, Rear

 

(g)

 

5

 

5




(11)   Doghouses, chicken coops, rabbit hutches, beehives and other animal
shelters (j)

 

Side, Rear

 

–

 

15

 

15




(12)   Temporary storage units (k)

 

Front, Side and Rear

 

10' from right-of-way line

 

5

 

5




Notes to Schedule 151.1009(B):
(a)   Shall have a 10-foot setback from the principal building.
(b)   Shall comply with the side yard requirements for principal buildings
set forth in Schedule 151.1005.
(c)   Except where part of a legally established shared access easement.
(d)   See also § 151.1009(F)
(e)   See § 151.1009(I) for fences and walls in the front yard.
(f)   Applies only to fences/walls up to 6 feet high.  See § 151.1009(I).
(g)   See § 151.1009(J) for permitted structures in the front yard.
(h)   Or right-of-way, if front property line extends to the centerline of
the road.
(i)   Shall have a 25-foot setback from any combustible structure, unless
in an approved container.  Fire pits in an approved container shall maintain
a 15-foot setback from any combustible structure.
(j)   Shall not be visible from the public street on which such
residential property fronts, and such structure must be appropriately
screened from abutting properties with landscaping, a fence or wall
constructed and maintained according to the Code.  Whether such structure is
permanently affixed, portable or mobile it shall not exceed six feet in
height and it shall cover an area no greater than 80 square feet.
(k)   See also § 151.1009(K).
(l)   Accessory buildings, 200 sq. ft. and under, shall maintain a
rear-yard setback equal to the side yard requirements for principal buildings
set forth in Schedule 151.1005 when the lot is directly in front of a
pan-handle lot.
NA = Not Applicable





 



   (C)   Permitted Attached Structures in Front, Side, and Rear
Yards.  The attached accessory structures outlined in Schedule 151.1009(C)
are permitted to extend into the required yards so established by the yard
requirements set forth in Schedules 151.1005 and 151.1007, provided that all
other applicable provisions of the Zoning Code are met.



 


Schedule 151.1009(C)
Permitted Attached Structures in Required Front, Side and Rear Yards




Attached Projections into Yards

 

Yard in Which Permitted

 

Maximum Projection into Required Yards






(1)   Building wing wall not greater than 5 feet

 

Side

 

10 feet, provided it is a minimum of 5 feet from the side property line




(2)   Skylights, sills, fireplaces, bay windows, gutters, belt courses,
cornices, and other ornamental and architectural features

 

Front, Side, Corner Side, Rear

 

1½ feet




(3)   Deck or patio (Terraces, uncovered porches, platforms, and
ornamental features) also HVAC units.

 

Side, Rear

 

Provided it is a minimum of 10 feet from the side or rear property line




(4)   Open or lattice-enclosed fire escapes, fire-proof outside stairways,
and balconies opening upon fire towers

 

Side, Rear

 

5 feet




(5)   Unenclosed or covered porch, one story high, or paved terrace

 

Front

 

10 feet




(6)   Pellet Stove

 

Rear

 

–





 



   (D)   Minimum Distance Requirements for Accessory Uses of
Single-Family Detached Cluster Developments, Single-Family Attached Dwellings
and Multi-Family Dwellings.  The minimum distances from any accessory
building or use to certain walls of principal buildings, streets and
boundaries of the development area of single-family detached cluster
developments, single-family attached dwellings and multi-family dwellings
shall be not less than that set forth in § 151.1009(D) below.



 


Schedule 151.1009(D)
Minimum Distances for Accessory Uses of Single-Family Detached Cluster
Developments, Single-Family Attached Dwellings and Multi-Family Dwellings



Accessory Building or Use
 
To Wall of Principal Buildings (in feet)
 
To the ROW of a Public Street (in feet)
 
To Side and Rear Lot Lines Abutting District


Main
 
End
 
A, B, C Districts
 
All other Districts (including D-2 and D-3) OM-Outer




(1)   Accessory building
 
20
 
10
 
35
 
30
 
15


(2)   Parking area
 
20
 
10
 
35
 
20
 
10


(3)   Driveway
 
20
 
10
 
35(a)
 
10
 
5


(4)   Project walk
 
15(b)
 
5
 
0
 
10
 
5


(5)   Active recreation areas, including pool and tennis court
 
30
 
15
 
40
 
20
 
10


Notes to Schedule 151.1009(D):
(a)   Except as required to access the public street.
(b)   A project walk may be less than 15 feet, but not less than five
feet, from a main wall if all windows have sills at least 8 feet above the
finished grade.




 



   (E)   Maximum Area and Rear Yard Coverage of Accessory Buildings and
Structures on Lots with Standard Detached Single-Family Dwellings and
Two-Family Dwellings.  The maximum area and rear yard coverage of accessory
buildings and structures on lots with standard detached single-family
dwellings and two-family dwellings shall comply with the following
requirements:



      (1)   The maximum footprint for a detached garage or other
accessory building shall be 576 square feet.



      (2)   The maximum coverage area for all accessory buildings
and structures, including pavement for driveways, patios and/or pools and
decks shall not exceed 30% of the rear yard.



   (F)   Additional Regulations for Parking Areas, Driveways and
Vehicles.  Open, off-street parking areas, driveways and vehicles shall
comply with the following:



      (1)   Accessory off-street parking spaces: Accessory
off-street parking areas shall be provided in compliance with the parking
requirements set forth in Chapter 151.32, which shall be located on the same
lot as the dwelling served. The maximum impervious surface coverage in the
front yard on residential lots with a width of 70 feet or greater, and
panhandle lots, is 35%.  On lots with a width of 50'-70', the impervious
surface coverage in the front yard is limited to 40%.  On irregular shaped
lots with reduced frontage at the end of a cul-de-sac, the impervious surface
coverage in the front yard is increased to 50%. Accessory off-street parking
spaces must be accessed from a driveway and not directly from a public
right-of-way.



      (2)   The repainting, rebuilding, overhauling or dismantling
of a vehicle or the storage of tires, motor, or auto body parts, in an open
yard, is prohibited on a residential lot.



      (3)   The parking of a disabled vehicle within a residential
district for a period of more than two weeks shall be prohibited, except that
the vehicle may be stored in an enclosed garage or other accessory building,
provided that no business shall be conducted in connection therewith while
the vehicle is parked or stored. For the purposes of this division, a
disabled vehicle shall be defined as a non-operable vehicle in its current
condition or a vehicle with expired or invalid license plates.



      (4)   Driveways.  The driveway for a single or two-family
dwelling, behind the street right-of-way shall be not less than eight feet
nor more than 20 feet in width and a minimum distance of five feet from the
side lot line, except where two or more properties share a common drive
through a joint access easement, in which case, no setback is required
between the properties sharing the easement. In the street right-of-way,
driveways for single or two-family dwellings shall be not less than eight
feet in width and a minimum distance of two feet from the side lot line. 
Driveways for single or two-family dwellings may be permitted to have
triangular flares on either side of the driveway measuring three feet in
width by seven feet, if deemed appropriate by the Public Works Director or
his designee (See Figure 1).  Residential access drives must also be in
conformance with Chapter 94 of the Montgomery Codified Ordinances.







Figure 1: Triangular Driveway Flare



   (G)   Dish-type Satellite Signal Receiving Stations.  Dish-type
satellite signal receiving stations may be permitted as accessory structures
and may be located as specified in the Zoning Code, subject to regulations
established in this section. For the purpose of this section, non-residential
installations shall include elementary and secondary schools, and places of
worship.



      (1)   Location and setbacks.



         (a)   Stations shall be located only in the rear yard of
the lot as defined in the Zoning Code, and behind the principal dwelling or
structure located on the same lot. When necessary, in order to get reception,
stations may be mounted on or attached to the dwelling or building; however,
in the case of a residential building installation, the dish antenna may not
exceed one meter in diameter.



         (b)   Stations shall be located in conformance with the
setback requirements for accessory structures set forth in this chapter. 
Nonresidential installations must maintain a minimum of five feet from the
side and rear property lines when abutting non-residential districts. When
abutting a residential district, a nonresidential installation must provide a
setback equal to that required for the residential zoning district that it
abuts. Setback requirements apply to any guy anchorage or similar device.



         (c)   Stations shall not be linked to receivers which
are not located on the same lot as the station.



         (d)   Not more than one station shall be located on any
lot.



      (2)   Height and diameter.



         (a)   Residential installations shall not exceed 13 feet
in height. Nonresidential installations shall not exceed 15 feet in height.
The height is determined by measuring the distance from the ground to the
highest point of the antenna when turned perpendicular to the ground.



         (b)   The maximum diameter of any dish antenna shall not
exceed four meters for nonresidential installations, or two meters for
residential installations.



      (3)   The station shall be placed on a base sufficient to
safely support the unit in a secure, wind resistant manner and shall be
adequately grounded.



      (4)   Permit required.



         (a)   A permit must be obtained prior to the
installation of a dish antenna having a diameter of one meter or more. The
permit application must include construction drawings showing the method of
installation, a site plan showing the proposed antenna, principal building
and their respective setbacks, sectional drawings showing the antenna height
and diameter, and a landscaping plan showing screening of the antenna from
neighbors. The screening may rely upon existing and/or proposed vegetation.
Any vegetation utilized for screening purposes must be maintained in a
condition that achieves the goal of the screening.



         (b)   Dish antennas having a diameter less than one
meter may be erected in compliance with these regulations without obtaining a
permit.



   (H)   Swimming Pools.  Private swimming pools for the exclusive use
of residents of the premises may be located in any residential district
provided they comply with the locational and coverage requirements of
accessory structures set forth in this chapter and the supplemental
regulations set forth below.



      (1)   All swimming pools, together with adjacent walkways,
shall be completely enclosed by a wall or fence having a minimum height of
four feet.



      (2)   For aboveground pools, the height of the pool, from the
surrounding grade to the top of the pool wall, may be used as credit to meet
the four-foot fence height requirement so long as the pool has a removable
ladder or other operational device approved by the building code.



      (3)   All fences and other pool enclosures shall be equipped
with suitable locking devices to prevent unauthorized access.



      (4)   The construction and operation of a pool shall meet all
other applicable city regulations.



   (I)   Fences and Walls.  Fences and walls in the residential
districts shall comply with the following:



      (1)   Front Yards. Fences and walls over two feet high may not
be located in any part of the front yard, except in the front yard of a
panhandle lot. Wrought iron fences up to four feet in height may be permitted
in the front yard in the Heritage District. Retaining walls required to
maintain a grade, may also be permitted by the Zoning Administrator. Wrought
iron fences up to four feet in height may be permitted in the front yard in
the Heritage District.



      (2)   Side and Rear Yards. Fences and walls in the side or
rear yard shall not exceed 6.25 feet in height above the average natural
grade and may be located in any part of the side or rear yard.



      (3)   Construction, Maintenance and Repair.  Fences shall be
of chain link, picket, split rail, sapling, louver or other commonly used
design, and if painted, shall be one color. Electric or barbed wires fences
are prohibited. Fences and walls shall be maintained in good repair at all
times by the owner and/or occupant of the lot on which they are located. The
smooth finished side of the fence or wall shall be the side of the fence that
faces outward from the yard being fenced.



      (4)   No Permit Required. No permit is required for fences
6.25 feet or less in height, provided that all applicable regulations of this
chapter are complied with. Fences or walls higher than 6.25 feet are
considered structures and must meet the height and setback requirements for
other accessory structures. These structures require a building and zoning
permit.



   (J)   Yard Structures.  In the residential districts, yard
structures shall comply with the location and setback requirements for
accessory structures set forth in division (B) of this section, except as
otherwise regulated below:



      (1)   Yard structures that are not installed on a paved or
hard surface shall be exempt from the rear yard coverage requirements set
forth in division (E) of this section, provided they cover an area of less
than 80 square feet. If the yard structure utilizes a paved or similar hard
surface, it shall be subject to the rear yard coverage requirements set forth
in division (E) of this section.



      (2)   Basketball hoops shall be permitted in the front or side
yard, provided they do not require a paved surface in addition to an existing
driveway or are mounted to a garage. The basketball hoop must be setback at
least five feet from the side property line and ten feet from the
right-of-way line.  If located in the rear yard, the maximum rear yard
coverage requirements set forth in division (E) of this section are
applicable if any additional paved surface is utilized.



      (3)   Low-intensity residential lighting including porch
lights, lawn lights and light poles/fixtures not to exceed eight feet in
height are permitted in any yard provided that if any such light creates a
glare perceptible to persons operating motor vehicles on public ways, the
luminaire shall be redirected or its light output controlled as necessary to
eliminate such conditions.  Light poles/fixtures shall be of a commonly used
material and design.



   (K)   Temporary Storage Containers.  A temporary storage container
may be utilized as a temporary accessory use when in compliance with the
following standards:



      (1)   A temporary storage container may be located as a
temporary accessory use on property within the city for a period not
exceeding 30 days per calendar year in duration from time of delivery to time
of removal.



      (2)   The owner of the property on which the temporary storage
container is located, or the agent of such owner using such container, shall
obtain a permit, at no cost, from the Zoning Administrator no later than the
first day such container is placed on site.



      (3)   A temporary storage container shall be located on a
paved surface.



      (4)   No more than one temporary storage container may be
located on a specific site at any one time.



      (5)   A temporary storage container may not exceed eight feet,
six inches in height, ten feet in width or 20 feet in length.



      (6)   A temporary storage container shall be located a minimum
of ten feet from the right-of-way line and a minimum of five feet from side
or rear of property lines.



      (7)   A temporary storage container shall be secured in a
manner that does not endanger the safety of persons or property in the
vicinity of the temporary storage container and it shall be secured and
enclosed in such a manner as to not permit waste, litter or debris.



      (8)   The standards for a temporary storage container may be
varied on a case by case basis upon petition to the Zoning Administrator for
good cause shown.  If the Zoning Administrator should deny any such variance
to the standards, then the applicant may appeal such denial consistent with
Chapter 150.20 of the Land Usage Code.  No such appeal, however, shall stay
the enforcement of this section of the Code.



(Ord. 13-2009, passed 12-2-09; Ord. 6-2010, passed 7-7-10; Am. Ord. 6-2011,
passed 4-6-11; Am. Ord. 16-2013, passed 11-6-13)



§ 151.1010  REGULATIONS FOR HOME OCCUPATIONS.



   The purpose of this section is to set forth regulations, which control
the establishment and operation of home occupations. The intent of these
regulations is to control the nonresidential use of a residential dwelling
unit so that the nonresidential use is limited to an accessory use, and shall
not in any way adversely affect the uses permitted in the residential
district of which they are a part. Compliance with these regulations should
result in all home occupations being located and conducted in such a manner
that their existence is not detectable in any manner from the outside of the
dwelling unit.



   (A)   Not more than one person other than a person residing on the
premises shall be employed in a home occupation.



   (B)   A home occupation shall occupy no more than 25% of the floor
area of the dwelling and shall be clearly incidental and secondary in
importance to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes.



   (C)   Any merchandise that is sold from the premises shall be
produced on the premises.



   (D)   The business activity, including the storage of equipment,
supplies or any apparatus used in the home occupation shall be conducted
entirely within the dwelling unit and no use of a garage, an accessory
building or an outdoor area shall be permitted.



   (E)   There shall not be any change in the outside appearance of the
building or premises, or other visible exterior change related to the home
occupation. Structural modifications such as a separate business entrance,
colors, materials, or the construction of accessory structures not currently
permitted are prohibited.



   (F)   No equipment or process shall be permitted or used in such
home occupation that creates a nuisance by reason of generating any noise,
vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference, or which is
determined unsafe.



   (G)   No signs shall be permitted on the lot that designates
employment or home occupations.



   (H)   Traffic.



      (1)   Employee parking shall be located off the street with
the applicable front, side and rear yard requirements maintained.



      (2)   The conduct of a home occupation shall not reduce or
render unusable areas provided for required off-street parking areas for the
dwelling unit



      (3)   Traffic generated by a home occupation shall not exceed
the average daily volume normally expected for a residence in a residential
neighborhood, which for the purpose of this section equals up to ten round
trips per day.



      (4)   Deliveries for the business are limited to an average of
once per day. Delivery by a truck with more than two axles is prohibited.



   (I)   All persons wishing to conduct a home occupation shall apply
for an accessory use permit, as required in Chapter 150.12.



(Ord. 6-2010, passed 7-7-10; Am. Ord. 19-2014, passed 12-3-14)



§ 151.1011  FAMILY DAY CARE HOME, TYPE "B".



   This Zoning Code recognizes that the availability of safe and
affordable, good-quality child day care is important to the well being of
parents and children. Furthermore, it is the purpose of this section to
regulate the operation of child day care in a manner that preserves the
residential character of neighborhoods. According to R.C. §  5104.054, any
type B family day-care home, whether certified or not certified by the County
Director of Human Services, shall be considered to be a residential use of
property for purposes of zoning and shall be a permitted use in all zoning
districts in which residential uses are permitted. A type "B" family day-care
home is a permanent residence of the provider where child care is provided
for one to six children and where no more than three children are under two
years of age. For the purpose of this definition, any children under six
years of age who are related to the provider and who are on the premises of
the day-care home shall be counted. Type "B" family day-care homes are a
permitted accessory use in residential districts, and do not require a zoning
certificate.



(Ord. 6-2010, passed 7-7-10; Am. Ord. 19-2014, passed 12-3-14)



§ 151.1012  PUBLIC PARKS.



   The purpose of this section is to set forth regulations which control
the establishment and operation of public parks in residential districts.



   (A)   Parking.  Off-street parking shall be in accordance with
Chapter 151.32; however, setbacks for parking for public parks shall be as
established below.  Parking for public parks shall be located a minimum of
five feet from any street right-of-way. Parking for public parks shall be
located a minimum of five feet from any side or rear lot line when adjoining
a non-residential district. Parking shall maintain a minimum setback of 20
feet when adjoining a residential district or use. The area within the
parking setback shall be landscaped in accordance with Chapter 151.34.



   (B)   Buildings.  The height of buildings in public parks shall not
exceed three stories, up to a maximum of 45 feet, except as permitted in §
151.0204(B). Public offices shall be permitted in all public parks, which are
in excess of five acres.  Structures shall have a minimum setback of 50 feet
from any street right-of-way and a minimum setback of 20 feet from the side
and rear property lines.



   (C)   Accessory uses. Limited retail sales and services that are
customarily accessory and incidental to the main recreational uses shall be
permitted as part of the public park. Included as such retail and service
uses are refreshment stands, souvenir stands, concession stands, vendor
booths and other similar uses. Permanent structures shall meet all required
setbacks as established in § 151.1012(B). Temporary structures shall meet
the minimum setback requirements for parking lots as established in §
151.1012(A).



   (D)   Signage.  Ground mounted identification signs for public
parks shall be permitted in compliance with the criteria set forth for ground
mounted residential development identification signs in § 151.3012(A).



(Ord. 19-2014, passed 12-3-14)



§ 151.1013  RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES.



   Residential Facility Category I will be a permitted use in all
residential districts. Category II will be a permitted use in the D-2 and D-3
Districts, both of which shall be subject to the additional requirements
acknowledged below:



   (A)   The facility shall be appropriately licensed by the State of
Ohio at the time the Certificate of Occupancy is granted.



   (B)   The owner/operator will provide to the city a copy of the
Evacuation Plan which the operator is required to file with the Department of
Mental Health and Addiction Services, or its successor agency, which
Evacuation Plan shall be supplemented at any time it is amended with the
Department.



   (C)   The owner/operator will provide a key, a Knox Box or similar
security system permitting emergency personnel access to the residential
facility in the event of an emergency necessitating immediate access.



   (D)   The owner/operator shall file with the city the name of a
manager with responsibility for the residential facility which shall be
updated in a timely manner whenever the manager or substitute manager is
appointed.



   (E)   The owner/operator shall provide the city with a 24-hour
contact number in the event of an emergency. To the extent permitted by law,
such information shall remain confidential and not subject to public
disclosure.



   (F)   As permitted by R.C. § 5119.341(D), to prevent the excess
concentration of licensed residential facilities within the community, no
residential facility shall be located closer than 750 feet from where another
residential facility is located within the city.



(Ord. 19-2014, passed 12-3-14)



CHAPTER 151.12:  BUSINESS DISTRICT REGULATIONS



Section



   151.1201   Purpose



   151.1202   Use regulations



   151.1203   Schedule of permitted uses



   151.1204   Lot requirements



   151.1205   Building setback requirements



   151.1206   Height and bulk regulations



   151.1207   Off-street parking setback requirements



   151.1208   Regulations for permanent outdoor display and sales



   151.1209   Regulations for temporary or seasonal outdoor sales and
displays



   151.1210   Outdoor dining



   151.1211   Accessory use regulations



   151.1212   Landscaping and screening requirements



   151.1213   Performance standards



   151.1214   Supplemental regulations for drive-through facilities and
freestanding automated teller machines



   151.1215   Supplemental regulations for specialty and general retail
uses in an Office Commercial District



   151.1216   Supplemental regulations for the Bethesda North Hospital
property



   151.1217   Development plan review



   151.1218   Procedure to establish a Community Entertainment District



§ 151.1201  PURPOSE.



   The Business Districts (O, OC, L-B, G-B, OMG and OM) and their
regulations are established in order to achieve, among others, the following
purposes:



   (A)   To provide in appropriate and convenient locations, sufficient
areas for business activities for the exchange of goods and services;



   (B)   To protect residential neighborhoods adjacent to business uses
by restricting the types of establishments, particularly at the common
boundaries, that would create congestion, noise or other objectionable
influences;



   (C)   To protect and stabilize both residential and nonresidential
developments from congestion by requiring off-street parking facilities;



   (D)   To provide Office Districts (O) and Office Commercial
Districts (OC) to create an environment that is conducive to well-located and
designed offices building sites to accommodate all types of offices and
limited business service activities;



   (E)   To provide Limited Business Districts (L-B) to accommodate
small-scale limited retail, office uses and uses confined primarily to indoor
activities with residentially sensitive scale and character;



   (F)   To provide General Business Districts (G-B) with parcels of
sufficient size, allowing for a broader range of commercial uses and services
than those specified in the L-B District, including more intensive automotive
and outdoor uses;



   (G)   To provide an Old Montgomery District (OM) that preserves the
historic fabric of the downtown area by maintaining retail and office uses
along the primary street frontages, reducing the parking requirements and
allowing for buildings to be located closer to the street. To further achieve
these objectives, the District has been divided into the "core area" and
"outer area". In the core area, development standards are established to
maintain the traditional character and arrangement of lots along the
Montgomery Road corridor; in the outer area, slightly more generous standards
have been established for adjacent lots surrounding the corridor where
existing lot arrangements are more flexible; and



   (H)   To provide an Old Montgomery Gateway District (OMG) to
accommodate retail, office and mixed use developments that strengthen the
current historic district and create a cohesive development pattern and
density in the OMG and OM Districts.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05; Am. Ord. 12-2008, passed 9-3-08; Am. Ord.
2-2014, passed 3-5-14)



§ 151.1202  USE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Uses Permitted by Right.  A use listed in Schedule 151.1203
shall be permitted by right as a principal use in a district when denoted by
the letter "P" provided that all requirements of other city ordinances and
this Zoning Code have been met;



   (B)   Conditional Uses.  A use listed in Schedule 151.1203 shall be
permitted as a conditional use in a district when denoted by the letter "C",
provided the Planning Commission and/or Council make the determination that
the requirements of Chapter 151.20 have been met according to the procedures
set forth in Chapter 150.16;



   (C)   Accessory Uses.  A use listed in Schedule 151.1203 shall be
permitted as an accessory use in a district when denoted by the letter "A".
Such use shall be permitted as a subordinate building or use when it is
clearly incidental to and located on the same lot as the principal building
or use. Accessory uses are further regulated in subsequent sections of this
Zoning Code.



   (D)   Use Not Listed in Schedule.  Although a use may be indicated
as a permitted principal, conditional or accessory use in a particular
district, it shall not be approved on a parcel unless it can be located
thereon in full compliance with all of the standards and other regulations of
this Zoning Code applicable to the specific use and parcel in question. Any
use not specifically listed as either a permitted principal or conditional
use shall be a prohibited use in these zoning districts and shall only be
permitted upon amendment of this Code and/or the Zoning Map as provided in
Chapter 150.22 or upon a finding that a use is substantially similar as
provided in § 150.1611.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05; Am. Ord. 2-2014, passed 3-5-14)



§ 151.1203  SCHEDULE OF PERMITTED USES.



 


Land Use Category

 
Office District O
 
Office Commercial District OC
 
Limited Business District LB
 
General Business District G-B
 
Old Montgomery Gateway District OMG
 
Old Montgomery District OM




(A)   Residential
 




   (1)    Single-family attached dwellings
 


 


 


 


 

P

 

P



   (2)    Two-family dwellings
 


 


 


 


 

P

 

P(a)



   (3)    Multi-family dwellings
 


 


 

P(e )

 

P(e)

 

P

 

P(a)



   (4)    Retirement villages
 

C

 

C

 


 


 


 




   (5)   Bed and Breakfasts
 


 


 


 


 

C

 

C



   (6)    Residential uses as conversions from retail and office uses
 


 


 


 


 


 

P(a)



   (7)    Residential units on upper floor of a commercial/office
building
 


 

P

 


 


 

P

 

P



   (8)    Mixed Use Developments
 


 

P

 

C

 

C

 

P

 

P(a)



(B)   Community Facilities
 




   (1)    Places of worship
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C



   (2)    Daycare within churches, schools
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



   (3)   Day care center (child and adult)
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



   (4)    Public utility substations
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 


 




   (5)    Libraries, museums
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



   (6)    Public offices
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



   (7)    Public safety facilities
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



   (8)    Public service facilities
 


 


 


 

C

 


 




   (9)    Schools, public & private
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C



(C)   Medical Facilities
 




   (1)    Hospitals
 

C( d)

 

C( d)

 


 

C

 


 




   (2)    Nursing Homes
 

C

 

C

 


 

C

 


 




(D)   Office and Professional Services
 




   (1)    Administrative, executive and professional offices including
the management of commercial businesses, and religious institutions
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



   (2)    Banks and other financial institutions
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



   (3)    Public offices
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



   (4)    Medical offices of physicians, dentists, health and allied
services and clinics
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



(E)   Retail
 




   (1)    Bakery, confectionery (retail/storefront operation only)
 


 


 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



   (2)    Greenhouses
 


 


 


 

P

 


 




   (3)    Freestanding automated teller machines
 


 

P

 

A

 

A

 

A

 




   (4)    Drive-through facility in association with a permitted use
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

C

 

C



   (5)    Retail, specialty including jewelry store, clothing boutique,
vitamin store and other similar uses
 


 

P(f)

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



   (6)    Retail, general including furniture store, grocery, drug
store and other similar uses
 


 

A( g)

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



(F)   Eating Establishments
 




   (1)    Restaurants
 


 


 


 


 


 




      (a)    Table Service
 


 


 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



      (b)    Counter Service
 


 


 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



   (2)    Taverns, bars, cocktail lounges
 


 


 


 

P

 

P

 

P



   (3)    Outdoor dining
 


 


 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



(G)   Services
 




   (1)    Animal boarding facility
 


 


 

C

 

C

 


 




   (2)    Animal grooming facility (excluding open kennels or open runs)
 


 


 

P

 

P

 


 

P



   (3)    Animal hospital or clinic; grooming facility (excluding open
kennels or open runs)
 


 


 

P

 

P

 


 

P



   (4)    Barber and beauty shops
 


 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



   (5)   Dry cleaning / laundry pickup station
 


 


 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



   (6)    Funeral home, mortuaries
 

P

 

P

 


 

P

 


 




   (7)    Motels, hotels
 


 


 


 

P

 


 

P(a)



   (8)    Studios for instruction
 


 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



   (9)   Shoe repair, tailoring
 


 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



   (10)    Construction and Mechanical Services
 


 


 


 

P

 


 




(H)   Automotive/ Transportation
 




   (1)    Parking as principal use (lot or garage)
 


 


 


 

P

 

P

 

C



   (2)    Automobile, truck, trailer sales and rental
 


 


 


 

C

 


 




   (3)   Car wash
 


 


 


 

C

 


 




   (4)    Gasoline station
 


 


 


 

C

 


 




   (5)    Vehicle maintenance and repair facility
 


 


 


 

C

 


 




(I)   Entertainme nt/Recreation
 




   (1)    Indoor recreation such as bowling lanes, tennis, handball
courts
 


 


 


 

P

 


 

P



   (2)    Theaters
 


 


 


 

P

 

P

 

P



   (3)    Public and private parks
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



   (4)    Clubs, lodges or other assembly halls
 

P

 

P

 


 

P

 


 

P(a)



   (5)    Outdoor recreation including miniature golf courses, swimming
pools and other similar uses
 


 


 


 

C

 


 




(J)   Trade Businesses/Services
 




   Repair and service shop for such items as bicycles; typewriters; keys
and locks; electrical, radio and television appliances in completely enclosed
buildings
 


 


 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



(K)   Other
 




   (1)    Outdoor displays
 


 


 

P(f)

 

P(f)

 

P(f)

 

P(f)



   (2)    Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
 

See Chapter 151.36



(L)   Accessory
 




   (1)    Restaurants and pharmacies in connection with a principal use
when conducted and entered only from within the principal building
 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 




   (2)   Off- street parking and loading areas
 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A



   (3)    Fences, walls, landscape features
 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A



   (4)    Trash receptacles
 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A



   (5)    Signs
 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A



   (6)    Outdoor recreation, including basketball courts, swimming
pools and other similar uses in association with an approved multi-family
development
 

A

 

A

 


 


 

A

 

A



(M)   Sexually Oriented Businesses
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

P(g)

 
 
 
 


Notes to Schedule 151.1203:

(a)   Permitted in the “outer area” only. See City Zoning Map for
boundaries of outer area.

(b)   Uses above the first floor.

(c)   Uses on the first floor.

(d)   Except as permitted by right per § 151.1215.

(e)   Only as part of a Mixed Use Development.

(f)   Permitted subject to supplemental regulations of § 151.1209.

(g)   See sexually oriented business regulations in Chapter 151.18.

P = Use Permitted by Right   C = Conditional Use      A = Accessory
Use




 



(Am. Ord. 6-2006, passed 4-5-06; Am. Ord. 7-2006, passed 4-19-06; Am. Ord.
12-2008, passed 9-3-08; Am. Ord. 16-2013, passed 11-6-13; Am. Ord. 2- 2014,
passed 3-5-14; Am. Ord. 19-2014, passed 12-3- 14; Am. Ord. 2-2017, passed
1-4-17)



§ 151.1204  LOT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The minimum lot requirements for uses in the O, OC, L-B, G-B,
OMG and OM Districts are specified in Schedule 151.1204(A).



 

Schedule 151.1204(A)
Lot Requirements


 

Office District O

 

Office Commercial District OC

 

Limited Business LB

 

General Business GB

 

Old Montgomery Gateway District OMG

 

Old Montgomery District OM(a)




Core Area

 

Outer Area





(1)    Minimum Lot Size
 

15,000 sq . ft.

 

15,000 sq. ft.

 

15,000 sq. ft.

 

15,000 sq. ft.

 

10,000 sq. ft.

 

None

 

None



(2)    Minimum Lot Width
 

75 ft.

 

75 ft.

 

75 ft.

 

75 ft.

 

40 ft.

 

None

 

None



(3)    Mandatory Building Width
 

–

 

–

 

–

 

–

 

60% f lot width(c)

 

70 % of lot width(b)

 

None



(4)    Maximum Impervious Surface Coverage
 

–

 

–

 

60 % of lot area

 

–

 

–

 

–

 

–



Notes to Schedule 151.1204(A):

(a)   See City Zoning Map for boundaries of core area vs. outer area.

(b)   See also § 151.1204(B).

(c)   See also § 151.1509(A)(1).




 



   (B)   Lot Frontage Requirements in the Core Area of the Old
Montgomery District. Each lot shall have a minimum of 70% of the linear
length of the lot frontage devoted to a building, or a building and wall in
combination, as specified below:



      (1)   The length of lot frontage utilized in the calculation
shall not include the width of access drives.



      (2)   When the length of the building frontage equals less
than 70% of the linear length of the lot frontage, a wall shall be required
as specified below so that the length of the building and wall, in
combination, equal a minimum of 70% of the linear length of such lot frontage.



         (a)   Walls shall be constructed of solid masonry and
shall have a height not less than 3 feet, not including ornamentation or
other features.



         (b)   Walls shall be located no farther from the public
right-of-way than the building setback line established in § 151.1205(B).



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05; Am. Ord. 12-2008, passed 9-3-08; Am. Ord.
16-2013, passed 11-6-13; Am. Ord. 2-2014, passed 3-5-14)



§ 151.1205  BUILDING SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Every building shall be located on a lot in compliance with
the setback requirements set forth in Schedule 151.1205(A).



 


Schedule 151.1205(A)
Building Setback Requirements



 
Office District
O
 
Office Commercial District
OC
 
Limited Retail
LB
 
General Business District
G-B
 
Old Montgomery Gateway District OMG (c)
 
Old Montgomery District OM (a)


Core Area
 
Outer Area




(1)   Front Yard
 
30 ft.
 
30 ft.
 
30 ft.
 
30 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
0 ft.
 
10 ft.


(2)   Side Yard
 
10 ft.(c)
 
10 ft.(b)
 
10 ft.(c)
 
10 ft.(c)
 
5 ft.
 
0 ft.
 
5 ft.


(3)   Rear Yard
 
15 ft.
 
15 ft.
 
15 ft.
 
15 ft.
 
15 ft.
 
0 ft.
 
15 ft.


(4)   Side/Rear Yards When Adjoining a Residential District or Use
 
45 ft.
 
45 ft.
 
45 ft.
 
45 ft.
 
15 ft. side (b)
45 ft. rear for commercial structures
10 ft. rear (b) for residential structures
 
15 ft.
 
15 ft.


Notes to Schedule 151.1205:
(a)   See City Zoning Map for boundaries of core area vs. outer area.
(b)   Or ½ of the building height, whichever is greater.
(c)   See also § 151.1508




 



   (B)   Front Yards of Built-Up Blocks. In an O, OC, L-B, or G-B
District, whenever a vacant lot is proposed for development and there are
existing buildings (other than those of an accessory use) on adjacent lots
that do not meet the minimum setback requirements, the minimum front setback
for the vacant lot shall be the mean distance of setback of all buildings
within 200 feet of the proposed structure along the block front. However, in
no instance shall a building be placed nearer to the front lot line than 15
feet.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05; Am. Ord. 12-2008, passed 9-3-08; Am. Ord.
16-2013, passed 11-6-13; Am. Ord. 2-2014, passed 3-5-14)



§ 151.1206  HEIGHT AND BULK REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The height of buildings and structures in the O, OC, G-B and
L-B Districts shall not exceed three stories, up to a maximum of 45 feet,
except as permitted in § 150.0204(B).



   (B)   The height of buildings in the Heritage Overlay District shall
comply with the requirements set forth in § 151.1405.



   (C)   The height of the buildings in the OMG District shall comply
with the requirements set forth in § 151.1513.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05; Am. Ord. 12-2008, passed 9-3-08; Am. Ord.
2-2014, passed 3-5-14)



§ 151.1207  OFF-STREET PARKING SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.



   Off-street parking areas shall conform to the regulations of Chapter
151.32 and to the parking requirements specified in Schedule 151.1207.
Off-street parking shall be located in compliance with the minimum setbacks,
measured from the street right-of-way or property line, as specified within
Schedule 151.1207 unless otherwise noted.



   (A)   The area within the parking setback shall be landscaped in
accordance with Chapter 151.34.



   (B)   Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in compliance with
Chapter 151.32.



 

Schedule 151.1207
Off-street Parking Setback Requirements


 

Office District
O

 

Office Commercial District
OC

 

Limited Retail
LB

 

General Business
G-B

 

Old Montgomery




OM(a)

 

OMG




Core Area

 

Outer Area

 

Gateway





(1)   Setback from street right-of-way
 

50 ft.(b)(e)

 

50 ft.(b)(e)

 

20 ft.(b)

 

20 ft.(b)

 

(c)

 

12 ft.

 

20 ft.(b)



(2)   Setback from side or rear lot line
 




   (a)   When the lot line adjoins a nonresidential district
 

10 ft.

 

10 ft.

 

10 ft.

 

5 ft.

 

Side- (d)
Rear-
0

 

3 ft.

 

5 ft.



   (b)   When the lot line adjoins a residential district or use.
 

20 ft.

 

20 ft.

 

20 ft.

 

20 ft.

 

Side- (d)
Rear-
5 ft.

 

10 ft.

 

20 ft.



Notes to Schedule 151.1207:

(a)   See City Zoning Map for boundaries of core area vs. outer area.

(b)   When the front yard abuts or faces a residential district, no
parking may be located in the front yard.

(c)   Not permitted in the front yard. On corner lots, parking may be
permitted in the front yard abutting any street other than Montgomery Road,
with a minimum 5-foot peripheral landscape strip, provided that no parking is
located between the building line and the front lot line along Montgomery
Road.

(d)   Not permitted in side yard.

(e)   The setback for parking when the principal building is set closer
than 50' from the right-of-way shall be equal to the setback of the building.




 



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05; Am. Ord. 7-2006, passed 4-19-06; Am. Ord.
2-2014, passed 3-5-14)



§ 151.1208  REGULATIONS FOR PERMANENT OUTDOOR DISPLAY AND SALES.



   Outdoor display of merchandise for sale shall comply with the following:



   (A)   Areas devoted to outdoor display shall comply with all parking
lot setbacks and yard regulations for the district in which they are located,
as set forth in this chapter.



   (B)   The outdoor display area shall not be located in areas
intended for traffic circulation or pedestrian access as identified on the
site plan.



   (C)   The area of the lot devoted to outdoor display shall not
exceed 20% of the ground floor area of the principal building. This
restriction does not apply to auto dealerships or plant nurseries.



   (D)   One informational sign per product(s) identifying the
product(s) on permanent outdoor display shall be permitted; however, such
signs shall not exceed one square foot in size.  The sign message is limited
to identifying what the product is and the sale price.  The sign must be
located on or next to the product it identifies and oriented for pedestrians
on the site.  As an alternative, a business may display a single sign up to
six square feet to list all of the products for sale when there are four or
more different types of products on display.  The sign must be oriented
toward customers at the display and not off site.  Permanent outdoor display
signs may be either fixed message or hand-decorated, must meet the
requirements of § 151.3016, and can not be illuminated.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05; Am. Ord. 16-2008, passed 11-5-08; Am. Ord.
16-2013, passed 11-6-13)



§ 151.1209  REGULATIONS FOR TEMPORARY OR SEASONAL OUTDOOR SALES AND
DISPLAYS.



   Temporary outdoor sales and displays associated with an established
commercial/retail use or community markets, community events, programs and
festivals, shall be permitted in compliance with the following regulations:



   (A)   Temporary outdoor sales and displays of for-profit merchandise
offered by or through an existing business use approved in the community are
permitted as a use in the district where located so long as such temporary
outdoor sale or display is approved as provided herein. 



      (1)   Such sales associated with a commercial/retail use which
do not exceed three consecutive days and which are held no more frequently
than four times per calendar year may be approved by the Zoning Administrator
upon application.  All other applications for approval require review and
approval by the Planning Commission. 



      (2)   All applications for outdoor sales must demonstrate that
the principal use on the lot will continue to meet all parking requirements
during the periods for such sales, there will be no impact upon interior
traffic circulation and there will be no significant increase in lighting and
noise.



      (3)   Such outdoor display areas must maintain setbacks
equivalent to setbacks for the parking areas of that district. 



      (4)   The area of the lot devoted to outdoor display shall not
exceed 20% of the ground floor area of the principal building. 



      (5)   No additional signage is permitted for such sale and/or
display with the exception that temporary signage may be erected consistent
with § 151.3015(E), Special Event Signs.



   (B)   Community markets are defined as the temporary outdoor sale
and display of goods operated by a not-for-profit or service organization
supporting the Montgomery community.  Community markets are such sales or
displays operated by such organization which exceed more than three
consecutive days or which are held more frequently than four times per year.



      (1)   Such community markets may be located in a residential
district so long as they are sited on a conditionally permitted use site, and
may be located in business districts consistent with these regulations.



      (2)   The location and operation of such community markets
must be approved in advance by the Planning Commission and application
approval shall demonstrate that there is adequate parking available to
accommodate the event and the approved use of the site.  Agreements with
adjoining property owners for additional parking may be permitted for limited
periods of time. 



      (3)   The area of the lot devoted to the community market
shall not exceed 20% of the ground floor area of the principal building, or
if such community market is operated on a vacant lot, no more than 50% of the
lot may be used for the sale or display of merchandise. 



      (4)   The application shall set forth the hours of operation
and provide sufficient additional detail concerning required licensing,
location and installation of utilities, property maintenance, on-site
signage, traffic circulation and safety, and such other information as is
required by the Zoning Administrator to determine the effect and impact of
the proposed market on the community and surrounding properties. 



      (5)   Signage shall be permitted for a community market
consistent with § 151.3015(E), Special Event Signs.



   (C)   Community events such as festivals, concerts, arts and craft
shows, and similar events which are operated by a public entity or
not-for-profit organization supporting the Montgomery community, are events
which do not exceed three consecutive days nor occur more than four times per
year.  Such community events may be approved by the Zoning Administrator on
appropriate application.  The area of the lot devoted to the community event
is not limited provided there is adequate parking available to accommodate
the event and the approved use of the site.  Agreements of the adjoining
property owners for additional parking may be permitted for limited periods
of time.  The Zoning Administrator may require such additional information
in an application as is necessary to determine what impact, if any, the event
will have on surrounding property owners and the community including
information concerning the duration of the event, hours of operation,
licensing security and property maintenance, parking and traffic circulation,
access for emergency vehicles, noise, light and signage.  Off-site signage
for a community event is permitted consistent with § 151.3015(I).



(Ord. 16-2008, passed 11-5-08; Am. Ord. 6-2010, passed 7-7-10; Am. Ord.
5-2011, passed 4-6-11)



§ 151.1210  OUTDOOR DINING.



   Outdoor dining shall comply with the following regulations:



   (A)   Outdoor dining shall only be permitted as an accessory use to
an indoor restaurant. Outdoor seating shall not obstruct a public
right-of-way or sidewalk nor any entrance or exit to the restaurant, except
as provided in division (H) below.



   (B)   Outdoor dining areas must meet the setback requirements for
principal buildings.



   (C)   The number of seats permitted outdoors shall be no greater
than 30% of the number of seats inside the restaurant.



   (D)   The outdoor dining area shall be limited to seating only and
shall not include table bussing facilities or cooking facilities.



   (E)   Permanently installed sound systems that are used for low
level background music and as part of a television system may be permitted by
the Planning Commission when the dining area is located at least 100 feet
from a single-family residential district. Any sound system to provide
entertainment on a temporary basis must be portable and must be removed at
the end of each business day. All outdoor dining activities, including any
entertainment, are subject to the city's noise ordinance and related
limitations thereto.



   (F)   Outdoor heaters in the dining area may be permitted only
pursuant to appropriate health and fire codes enforced in the City of
Montgomery.



   (G)   No separate advertising is permitted for the outdoor dining
area, including any advertisement for the business or any supplier to the
business on any umbrellas, awning or other structure attending to the outdoor
dining facilities.



   (H)   The property owner shall be responsible to keep the outdoor
dining area free and clear of all garbage, trash and other debris and shall
provide an appropriate trash receptacle within the outdoor dining area for
the deposit of refuse and litter. Such trash receptacle shall be emptied on a
regular basis and shall be moved indoors at the end of each business day.



   (I)   Any outdoor dining located upon a public sidewalk or within
the public right-of-way requires a separate annual permit from the City
Manager which must be accompanied by sufficient surety or insurance to
protect and indemnify the city from any third party claims.



(Ord. 6-2010, passed 7-7-10)



§ 151.1211  ACCESSORY USE REGULATIONS.



   Accessory uses permitted in any O, OC, L-B, G-B, OMG or OM District
shall conform to the regulations of this section.



   (A)   Accessory Buildings.  Accessory buildings shall conform to
all lot and yard regulations and development plan review and approval
requirements for principal buildings of the zoning district in which the
parcel or lot is located.



   (B)   Fences and Walls.  Fences and walls may be erected in
compliance with the requirements set forth in Chapter 151.34.



   (C)   Signs.  Signs shall conform to the regulations specified in
Chapter 151.30.



   (D)   Temporary Storage Containers.  Temporary storage containers
are considered to be an accessory use within all Business Districts and shall
be regulated consistent with the same regulatory standards set forth within
§ 151.1009.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05; Am. Ord. 6-2011, passed 4-6-11; Am. Ord.
2-2014, passed 3-5-14)



§ 151.1212  LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING REQUIREMENTS.



   Visual screening and landscape buffers shall be provided for all lots
in nonresidential districts in accordance with the provisions set forth in
Chapter 151.34.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.1213  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   All uses shall comply with the following performance standards.



   (A)   Trash Receptacles.  All solid waste products, including empty
packing boxes, that result from any permitted principal, conditional or
accessory use shall either be disposed of, stored in buildings, or completely
enclosed in containers. Such building, container or dumpster shall be located
in a side or rear yard and in 'O' and 'OC’ districts shall comply with the
minimum parking setbacks established in Schedule 151.1207. Additionally, such
building, container, or dumpster must also maintain a minimum 20' setback
from any property line which abuts a residential use. All enclosures shall be
screened in accordance with provisions set forth in Chapter 151.34.



   (B)   Lighting.  All lighting shall be so arranged as to direct
light away from adjacent parcels and streets and shall not be of excessive
brightness or cause a glare hazardous to motorists or reasonably
objectionable to adjacent property owners.  See also § 151.3212(C).
Exterior lighting should be limited to what is needed to illuminate parking,
pedestrian, and other activity areas for safety and security. Additional
lighting mounted on a building may be used to illuminate points of ingress
and egress as required by building codes. Planning Commission, through the
site plan review process, may also permit limited exterior lighting on
buildings to highlight architectural features. Lighting under canopies and
awnings is permitted when it covers a sidewalk or entrance. However, the
awning or canopy must be opaque and the intent of the lighting is not to
illuminate the entire canopy or awning. These standards are in addition to
the requirements of § 151.3212(C) for parking areas.



   (C)   Enclosure.  All uses and operations, except off-street
parking and loading facilities, shall be performed wholly within enclosed
buildings, unless specifically permitted otherwise.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05; Am. Ord. 2-2014, passed 3-5-14)



§ 151.1214  SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS FOR DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES AND
FREESTANDING AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINES.



   (A)   Drive-through facilities in association with a permitted use
shall comply with the following:



      (1)   Such facilities shall be located in an area least
disruptive to pedestrian or vehicular traffic.



      (2)   Any proposed loud speaker system must be pre-approved as
part of the development plan.



      (3)   All access drives shall be located as far as practicable
from an existing intersection in order to minimize congestion and constricted
turning movements.



      (4)   The Planning Commission may impose restrictions on the
hours of operation in order to minimize the impact on surrounding properties.



   (B)   Freestanding automated teller machines in association with a
permitted use shall comply with the following:



      (1)   No separate signage is permitted for an ATM other than
directional signs located on the lot of the principal use.  Additionally,
there may be advertising on the ATM to identify the ATM brand, but limited to
no more than two square feet on each of two fronts.



      (2)   Such ATM facilities shall be located in an area least
disruptive to pedestrian or vehicular traffic.



      (3)   If an ATM is accessible as a drive-up machine, then
there shall be an identifiable and dedicated traffic lane located on the lot
of the principal use with sufficient room to allow one motor vehicle to
access each machine and such additional space within the identified and
dedicated traffic lane to allow two waiting motor vehicles for each machine
to stand on the lot without interfering with other vehicular traffic.



      (4)   Any separate lighting for the ATM must comply with §
151.1213(B) and shall be the minimum necessary to provide adequate security
for the use of the ATM.



      (5)   No external loud speaker system is permitted with such
ATM.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05; Am. Ord. 12-2008, passed 9-3-08; Am. Ord.
2-2014, passed 3-5-14)



§ 151.1215  SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS FOR SPECIALTY AND GENERAL RETAIL USES
IN AN OFFICE COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.



   The following supplemental conditions are required for retail uses when
located in an ‘OC’ Office Commercial District:



   (A)   Specialty retail uses shall comply with the following:



      (1)   The maximum gross square footage shall not exceed 5,000
square feet.



      (2)   The sign regulations for the Office District will apply
to all uses regardless of whether they are retail or service uses.



      (3)   Temporary and permanent outdoor displays are prohibited.



      (4)   Parking will be required per the standards in Schedule
151.3204.



   (B)   General retail uses shall comply with the following:



      (1)   The maximum gross square footage shall not exceed 5,000
square feet or 20% of the total square footage of the principle and accessory
use, whichever is less.



      (2)   There will be no additional exterior signage.



      (3)   Access to the accessory use will be through one shared
entrance with the principle use.



      (4)   The hours of operation of the accessory use will
coincide with the hours of the permitted use.



(Ord. 2-2014, passed 3-5-14)



§ 151.1216  DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW.



   (A)   History. The Bethesda North Hospital Property (hereinafter
Bethesda site, see Appendix A) was first zoned in 1967 as a planned
development under Ordinance 5-67, which acknowledged the permitted site uses
related to hospital operations with additional site restrictions concerning
height of buildings, setback and green belt requirements, access
restrictions, and fence restrictions. In 1998 Council adopted the planned
development overlay process for all planned developments in the community.
This ordinance established a procedure to convert planned development
districts, such as the hospital district created in 1967 and amended in 1995,
to the planned development overlay process. The conversion required Council,
when the property owner applied for any substantive modification to the
planned development, to rezone the property to one of the conventional zoning
districts (at that time Districts A through E) while imposing upon the
particular property the planned development overlay restrictions. In 1995 the
hospital development restrictions were modified in part by Ordinance 21-1995,
and the hospital entered into an agreement with neighboring residential
properties on the south property line providing certain protective covenants
and restrictions between the hospital and these property owners.



   (B)   Purpose. With this history in mind, the purpose of this
section as codified is to establish the underlying conventional zoning
district for the Bethesda site (the "O" Office District) while recognizing
the historically permitted uses from the 1967 ordinance, as modified by the
1995 ordinance, as overlay development restrictions for the Bethesda site and
to incorporate future development of the site into the Development Plan
Review Process as set forth in Chapter 150.14. These specific development
standards have been established in the past to ensure maintenance and growth
of the existing hospital and healthcare facilities on the subject property in
a manner compatible with surrounding residential neighborhoods. It is
intended that these standards be incorporated in this section and
supplemented by development standards applicable to other properties within
the "O" District. In the event that the standards set forth below specific to
the Bethesda site conflict with the development standards outlined in this
Chapter, the regulations of this section shall supercede.



   (C)   Principally Permitted Uses and Accessory Permitted Uses for
the Bethesda Site.



      (1)   Principally Permitted Uses. Hospital and related
healthcare facilities including extended care facilities, medical office and
outpatient service facilities, and medical and nursing education and research
facilities.



      (2)   Accessory Permitted Uses.



         (a)   Residential uses for hospital personnel or housing
exclusively for persons temporarily visiting patients.



         (b)   Pharmacies and other retail facilities servicing
the hospital when located in a building in which the primary use is a
principally permitted use.



         (c)   Places of worship.



         (d)   Parking for the hospital site.



      (3)   Other Uses. Any additional permitted and accessory uses
within the "O" Office District are recognized for the Bethesda site. Any
conditionally permitted uses from the "O" Office District which have not been
recognized herein as permitted or accessory uses for the Bethesda site shall
remain conditionally permitted for the site and must be considered pursuant
to Chapter 150.16. By way of an example, and not by way of limitation, the
"O" Office District recognizes hospitals as a conditionally permitted use.
The 1967 ordinance, as modified by the 1995 ordinance and adopted herein as
§ 151.1216(C), recognizes Hospitals as a permitted use for the site.
Therefore, any site development within the defined Hospital use does not
require a review under Chapter 150.16 for development expansion, but as a
permitted use any development expansion within the Hospital use requires
Chapter 150.14, Development Plan Approval.



   (D)   Height, Setback and Open Space Requirements. The following
height limitations, building and setbacks and open space requirements shall
govern the development and use of the property:



      (1)   Height Requirements. No building shall be erected to a
height greater than permitted in Schedule 151.1215(D).



 

Schedule 151.1215(D)
Maximum Building Height per Story


Distance to South Boundary of Property
 
Maximum Building Height (12 feet/Story)




150 feet to 250 feet
 
2 Story (24 feet)


More than 250 feet to 300 feet
 
3 Story (36 feet)


More than 300 feet to 350 feet
 
4 Story (48 feet)


More than 350 feet to 450 feet
 
5 Story (60 feet)


More than 450 feet to 550 feet
 
6 Story (72 feet)


More than 550 feet to 650 feet
 
7 Story (84 feet)


More than 650 feet
 
8 Story (96 feet)




 



      (2)   Building and Parking Setback Requirements. Structures
shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from the north, east and west
boundaries of the property. Structures in excess of 60 feet in height shall
be setback an additional 1 foot for each foot by which the building exceeds
60 feet. Surface parking may be constructed to within 25 feet of the north,
east and west boundaries.



      (3)   Greenbelt. Along the south line of the property to a
depth of 150 feet there shall be a greenbelt which shall include berming and
planting as follows:



         (a)   Along the south line of the property, commencing
150 feet west of Parcel 149, Page 9, of Hamilton County Auditor's Book 603,
to a depth of 150 feet there shall be a greenbelt maintained and planted with
trees and shrubbery, which shall extend to the easternmost property line of
Parcel 140, Book 9, Hamilton County Auditor's Plat Book 603. Within the
greenbelt, east and west berms shall be maintained with a 1 to 3 slope, a
minimum of 8 feet in height, and shall substantially screen the adjacent
residential properties from the parking areas and other developments on the
subject property and the light and glare therefrom.



         (b)   The west berm shall be established along the south
property line behind Parcels 145 through 149. The berm's center line shall be
54 feet north of the south line of the property beginning at a point
approximately midway between the east and west property lines of Parcel 145
at the edge of the existing tree cover, and continuing westward behind Parcel
148. At the western edge of Parcel 148, the centerline shall bear 30 degrees
northwest until it intersects a berm center line running parallel to the
south property line and 100 feet north of the property line behind Parcel
149. The berm's centerline shall proceed at 52 degrees southwest to intersect
the property line of Parcel 149.



         (c)   In the area where no tree cover exists adjacent to
the dead end of Pendery Drive, the east berm shall be constructed
approximately 80 feet inside the property line and shall extend 100 linear
feet. After planting, the east berm shall be maintained in a natural state.



         (d)   Those areas within the greenbelt in which no berm
is required shall remain covered with existing trees and other vegetation,
provided that the existing wooded area is maintained to a depth of 150 feet
from the south property line. For those residents whose properties abut the
existing wooded area, the owner of the subject property shall offer to plant
Eastern Hemlocks within the wooded area, recognizing that the planting of
each tree may require some clearing. The maximum number of trees shall be 15
trees per 100 linear feet of property line. These trees shall have a minimum
height of 5 feet. For this purpose, an adjacent homeowner will be determined
by an extension of the eastern and westernmost property lines of each
resident's property.



         (e)   Plantings shall be installed and maintained on the
earth berms, which shall meet the following minimum standards. The majority
of the following required plant materials are to be located within the top
one-third portion of the berm, on the side facing the residential property.



            1.   Every 100 linear feet shall contain at least
5 deciduous trees. These trees shall have an average height of 15 feet at the
time of planting. Recommended plants are Maple, Ash, Linden, and Oak or their
equal.



            2.   Every 100 linear feet of the earth berm shall
contain at least 10 conifer trees. Each tree shall be a minimum of 10 feet in
height at the time of planting. Recommended plants are White Pine, Austrian
Pine and Norway Spruce or their equal.



            3.   Shrubs and ground cover shall be located and
maintained on the earth berm at a density of 20 shrubs per 100 linear feet of
berm, which shrubs shall be a minimum of 3 feet in height.



            4.   The number of trees required shall be
calculated by dividing the actual length of the berm by 100, multiplying by
the number of trees required per 100 feet and rounding off to the next
highest integer.



         (f)   All required trees and plants shall be maintained
in a healthy condition and replaced with a similar type or its equal if
damaged or destroyed. Further, the greenbelt area shall be maintained in good
order and kept free of debris. The construction of any earth berm shall not
adversely impact private property by obstructing water runoff. The berm must
include a swale on each side leading to storm sewer drains or an alternative
equal or better drainage system.



            1.   Compliance. For the first 6 years following
the installation of the berms, no construction shall take place within 250
feet of the southern line of the property. After 6 years from the
construction of the berms, the greenbelt shall be maintained within 150 feet
of the southern line of the property.



            2.   Tree Replacement. No trees within the
greenbelt shall be removed except as may be necessary to work being performed
on recorded easements or to remove dangerous or diseased trees. Any trees
removed for any reason shall be replaced within 90 days, where possible, with
the same or similar species and shall at the time of planting, conform to the
planting sizes specified in division (D)(3)(e) above.



            3.   Construction Criteria within 250 Feet of
Property Line. The setbacks from district lines shall be maintained as
contained in divisions (C)(1) and (C)(2) of this section. Any construction
within 250 feet north from the corner of Radabaugh Drive and Montgomery Road
shall be done in an architectural style that shall reflect the transition
from the residential uses along Radabaugh to the larger structures located
further north on the property.



            4.   Access. All development shall be such that no
entrance or exit, public or private, shall be to or from any public
right-of-way other than Montgomery Road.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.1217  PROCEDURE TO ESTABLISH A COMMUNITY ENTERTAINMENT DISTRICT.



   All uses in a nonresidential district shall be permitted only after
development plans have been reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission
according to the procedures set forth in Chapter 150.14.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.1218  PROCEDURE TO ESTABLISH A COMMUNITY ENTERTAINMENT DISTRICT.



   (A)   (1)   At the time the application for establishment of a
Community Entertainment District is received by the Mayor as required by R.C.
§ 4301.80, the applicant shall pay to the city a handling and processing fee
of $2,500 and an additional deposit of $500, which deposit shall cover all
publication costs as required by division (B) of this section.



      (2)   Such application, in addition to other statutory
requirements, shall include a certification from the developer that the
proposed improvements and construction in the area to be designated as a
Community Entertainment District will equal or exceed $70,000,000.  Such
application shall identify the properties in question to be located within
the district identifying such properties by the County Auditor's parcel
numbers or with an accompanying survey.



      (3)   On request of the applicant to the office of the City
Manager, and with the concurrence of the Community Development Director, the
processing fee and/or publication costs may be waived if it is determined
that creating the district will support economic development within the
community and such application is for the benefit of the greater Montgomery
community, and such benefit is not confined to the proposed developments. 
Under such circumstances the City Manager may waive the processing fee and
the requirement of any additional deposit for publication of notice.



   (B)   Within 30 days after the City Manager receives the application
to create a Community Entertainment District, and the Mayor's recommendations
related to the application, City Council, by notice published once a week for
two consecutive weeks in at least one newspaper of general circulation within
the city, the city shall notify the public that the application is on file at
the office of the Clerk of Council, and such application is available for
inspection by the public during regular business hours.  The notice shall
also indicate the date and time of any public hearing, before City Council,
required by Ohio law to review the application.



(Ord. 11-2008, passed 9-3-08; Am. Ord. 4-2013, passed 2-6-13)



CHAPTER 151.13:  PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS AND INTERIM DEVELOPMENT CONTROL
DISTRICTS



Section



Planned Unit Developments



   151.1301   Purpose



   151.1302   District designation and applicability



   151.1303   Permitted uses



   151.1304   General standards and conditions



   151.1305   Review criteria



   151.1306   Application review and approval process



   151.1307   Final PUD development plan review and approval process



   151.1308   Appeal of Planning Commission action



   151.1309   Significance of an approved PUD final development plan



   151.1310   Expiration of PUD development plan approval



   151.1311   Modifications to an approved PUD final development plan



   151.1312   Appeal of decisions on modifications



Interim Development Control Districts



   151.1313   Purpose



   151.1314   Applicability and zoning map designator



   151.1315   Establishment of IDC Overlay Districts



   151.1316   IDC application review guidelines



   151.1317   Three-month IDC Overlay Districts



   151.1318   One-year IDC Overlay Districts



   151.1319   Extension of IDC Overlay Districts



   151.1320   Applications subject to review



   151.1321   Review



   151.1322   Procedure for review of permit applications



PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS



§ 151.1301  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of the Planned Unit Development ("PUD") Regulations is to
encourage and allow more creative and efficient design of land developments
than is possible under subdivision and district zoning requirements. The PUD
Overlay District is intended to allow substantial flexibility in planning and
design. This flexibility often accrues in the form of relief from compliance
with conventional subdivision regulations and zoning ordinance site and
design requirements. This flexibility should result in a development that is
more compatible and harmonious with the natural environment, surrounding land
uses, and the goals, objectives, and policies of the community. An intrinsic
premise upon which approval of a PUD plan is conditioned is that while
greater density or more lenient siting requirements may be granted, the PUD
should contain features not normally required of traditional developments.



(Ord. 4-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.1302  DISTRICT DESIGNATION AND APPLICABILITY.



   The PUD District is an overlay of alternative regulations, including
procedures and standards that are applicable to all land within the
jurisdiction of these regulations in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. The PUD Overlay District is established on the official zoning map
in accordance with Chapter 151.01 following the zoning amendment process
outlined in the Land Usage Code. This overlay district enables individual
property owners to request approval on their property in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. Each PUD District is delineated on the zoning map
with a specific reference number identifying each separate district.



(Ord. 4-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.1303  PERMITTED USES.



   The uses permitted in a planned unit development overlay must be either
permitted by right or conditionally permitted in the underlying zoning
district. Residential uses are permitted in the LB and GB Districts as part
of a mixed use development pursuant to the regulation in Chapter 151.20.
Office and commercial uses may be permitted in a residential district only as
an accessory use intended to provide services to meet the needs of the PUD
residents. In these instances, office and commercial use are restricted to 5%
of the gross square footage of the entire PUD and the area (building
footprint and outdoor use) shall not be more than 3% of the gross land area
of the PUD.



(Ord. 4-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.1304  GENERAL STANDARDS AND CONDITIONS.



   Applications for Planned Unit Developments must meet the following
minimum standards:



   (A)   The minimum land area for a PUD is two acres;



   (B)   The site area of the proposed PUD must be under single
ownership and/or unified control;



   (C)   The PUD must be generally consistent with the City of
Montgomery Comprehensive Plan.



   (D)   Project perimeter setbacks must be equal to or greater than
the setbacks required in underlying zoning district, including buffer
requirements.



(Ord. 4-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.1305  REVIEW CRITERIA.



   In order to receive approval of a Planned Unit Development Overlay
designation, the applicant must demonstrate that the following principles are
met:



   (A)   Compatibility with surrounding land uses. The proposed uses in
the Planned Unit Development are consistent with the current or proposed
underlying zoning and are compatible with the uses on abutting properties and
the area in general. The uses must be of a type and so located as to cause no
undue detrimental impact on surrounding properties.



   (B)   Density. The residential density of the Planned Unit
Development should not exceed 150% of the residential density requirements of
the underlying district. The residential density in a mixed use development
in the OM Outer, LB, or GB District shall be established by the City of
Montgomery as part of the PUD approval. Any increase in density should be
related to a corresponding increase in the amount of open space provided, and
should not result in a significant increase in impervious surface coverage
from what would normally be expected under standard zoning.



   (C)   Open space. The Planned Unit Development shall provide for the
reservation, within the tract to be developed, of a significant amount land
area as common public open space. This may include such areas as pedestrian
corridors between different uses, public gathering places, park land, or
sensitive environmental areas. This common open space shall be conveyed to a
legally established property owner association or trust, unless it is
determined by the city that it should be publicly dedicated. The area shall
be in such a composition and configuration as to be desirable as a gathering
space or passage way, and should not consist of isolated or fragmented pieces
of land that provide no public use or benefit. In general, PUD site plans
should demonstrate a minimum of 20% of gross land area as open space,
exclusive of private streets, parking areas, sidewalks that are an integral
part of a specific use, or the required perimeter setbacks. Not more than 50%
of the open space may be designated for storm water detention or retention
basins.



(Ord. 4-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.1306  APPLICATION REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCESS.



   (A)   Pre-application process. Prior to preparing or submitting a
complete application for a PUD Overlay approval, an applicant should meet
with the Community Development Director or other administering official to
present the concept of the proposed development and to discuss the procedures
and standards for development plan approval. The intent of this conference is
to facilitate the filing and consideration of an innovative development plan
and complete application and to outline for the applicant the review process
and general PUD standards. No representation made by the Community
Development Director or Administrative Official during such conference or at
any other time shall be binding upon the city with respect to the application
subsequently submitted.



   (B)   PUD application and general development plan submittal.  An
applicant for a PUD Overlay shall file an application on a form or forms
provided by the city. The application shall include all of the information
required for a general development plan identified in Chapter 150.14 plus the
following additional information:



      (1)   A project narrative explaining the basis for the request
for PUD designation.



      (2)   A summary table comparing the proposed residential
dwelling unit density of the development to the underlying or proposed
underlying zoning density regulations.



      (3)   A summary table analyzing the amount of common open
space proposed with a designation that allows individual areas to be
identified on the site plan and designates which land, if any, is intended to
be publicly dedicated. Land that is to remain in private ownership controlled
by a property association or trust should be identified and the proposed
covenants outlined.



      (4)   Identification of what rights of way is to be dedicated
and if private streets or alleys are proposed.



      (5)   A summary table outlining what other variances from
subdivision and zoning regulations are being requested (i.e.: building
height, lot width, setbacks, sidewalk or road construction standards, etc.)



      (6)   Evidence of legal control of the property to be
designated for the PUD.



      (7) The proposed schedule of site development, construction of
structures and associated facilities. If the PUD is a large tract of land
that will be developed in multiple sections, the proposed schedule should
reflect the anticipated timing for submittal of final development plans for
each section.



      (8)   Proposed general lighting plan for streets, parking
areas and outside activity and/or storage areas.



      (9)   Preliminary landscape plan, with particular emphasis on
perimeter buffer landscaping, park and open space landscaping, and parking
area landscaping.



      (10)   Preliminary storm water detention plan as part of a
finish grading plan.



      (11)   PUD application fee as established by City Council.



   (C)   Staff review and notification procedures. The PUD application
and general development plan will be reviewed in accordance with the review
procedures for general and final development plans outlined in Chapter 150.14.



   (D)   Planning Commission review of a PUD general development plan.
The Planning Commission shall review a PUD application and general
development plan to determine if such application complies with the review
criteria set forth below. The Planning Commission shall take into
consideration the comments and recommendations of staff, consultants, and
testimony at the public meeting when reviewing the application. In order to
approve a PUD application and general development plan, the Planning
Commission shall apply the following general standards:



      (1)   The application is consistent with the standards for
general development plans outlined in Chapter 150.14.



      (2)   The proposed development is served adequately and
efficiently by essential public facilities and services including road
systems, water, sewer, gas, and electric services.



      (3)   Internal streets and thoroughfares proposed are suitable
and adequate to carry anticipated traffic and there is adequate and
appropriate ingress and egress to public thoroughfares adjacent to the
development.



      (4)   Internal circulation allows efficient pedestrian access
within the development.



      (5)   The phasing plan of the development is appropriate and
the development can be substantially completed within the period of time
specified in the schedule submitted by the applicant.



      (6)   Proposed modifications of the standard regulations of
the subdivision or zoning code are warranted by the innovative design of the
development plan and are not simply for the convenience or economic benefit
of the applicant.



      (7)   Proposed modification of any subdivision or zoning
regulation has been compensated for by an increase in other site amenities
that exceed the minimum requirements established for standard developments.



      (8)   Adequate provision has been made for the ownership and
on-going maintenance of designated public open spaces and buffer zones, as
well as any private drives, pedestrian walkways, or storm water management
facilities.



      (9)   The proposed open space and improvements to be publicly
dedicated are appropriate for public acceptance and are of such construction
and configuration that they do not create an undue burden to access or
maintain.



      (10)   The proposal provides adequate lighting to provide
security throughout the development while still being consistent with the
lighting standards of §§ 151.1213 and 151.3212 or successor sections of the
Land Usage Code.



      (11)   The proposed development provides a desirable
landscaping plan for interior parking areas, common areas, and perimeter
buffer zones.



      (12)   The storm water management plan is desirable and
sufficient to meet city regulations related to both storm water quantity and
quality.



   (E)   Action by Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall
act on an application for PUD and general development plan approval in
accordance with the provisions for amendments to the zoning code specified in
Chapter 150.22. The Commission shall present a written findings of fact
outlining the basis of their recommendation.



   (F)   Public hearing and notice by Council.  Upon receipt of the
recommendation from Planning Commission, Council shall set a time within 60
days for a public hearing on the proposed amendment. Notice of the public
hearing shall be provided according to the requirements for zoning amendments.



   (G)   Action by Council.  At the conclusion of the public hearing,
Council shall consider the evidence provided at the hearing along with the
comments and recommendations of staff and the written findings of fact of the
Planning Commission and shall act on the application in accordance with the
requirements of Chapter 150.22 for zoning amendments.



   (H)   Effect of Council PUD application and general plan approval. 



      (1)   The approval of a PUD application and general
development plan represents approval of a change in the zoning map of the
City of Montgomery. Thirty days following the approval by Council of a PUD
application and general development plan approval, the city shall cause the
zoning map to be amended to represent the PUD approval and provide a
designation and number on the zoning map for the PUD. The general development
plan is adopted as part of the zoning amendment and becomes part of the
ordinance adopting the PUD.



      (2)   The approved development plan may not be transferred by
the applicant to another person, corporation, or group of individuals or
corporations prior to the issuance of a building permit, without the written
approval of the City Council which shall be done by resolution. A request for
such a transfer or change of ownership shall be presented to the Planning
Commission for recommendation to Council and granted by Council only if the
new ownership entity satisfies the administrative, financial, legal and all
other performance guarantees approved with the original PUD application. The
ordinance approving such PUD and general development plan shall acknowledge
this procedure for assignment of the PUD rights.



   (I)   Expiration of PUD and general development plan approval.  An
approved PUD application and general development plan shall remain valid for
a period of 12 months following the effective date of its approval. This
period may be extended for up to six months by the Planning Commission, after
demonstration of just cause by the applicant. If at the end of that time, a
final development plan has not been submitted, then the PUD application and
general development plan shall expire and shall be of no effect unless
resubmitted and approved in accordance with the previous provisions of this
chapter. The ordinance approving such PUD and general development plan shall
acknowledge this termination procedure.



(Ord. 4-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.1307 FINAL PUD DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCESS.



   After the effective date of the approval of the PUD application and
general development plan, the applicant may submit a final development plan
for the total development or for sections as outlined in the approved phasing
plan of the general development plan. A final development plan must be
consistent with the general development plan and must be submitted within 12
months to the Community Development Director or other authorized official.



   (A)   Submittal requirements for final PUD development plan. An
applicant for PUD final development plan approval shall file an application
on a form provided by the city. The application shall include all the
information required for a final development plan identified in Chapter
150.14 plus the following additional information:



      (1)   A project narrative describing how the final development
plan is consistent with approved general development plan.



      (2)   A summary table confirming the proposed residential
dwelling unit density is consistent with the approved PUD application and
general development plan.



      (3)   A summary table depicting precisely the amount of common
open space proposed with a designation that allows individual areas to be
identified on the site plan and designates which land, if any is intended to
be publicly dedicated. Land that is to remain in private ownership controlled
by a property owner association or trust should be identified. Draft
covenants for the property owners association or other authority must be
submitted.



      (4)   A summary table identifying the precise amount and
nature of any modifications from subdivision and zoning regulations that were
approved as part of the general development plan approval.



      (5)   Final development plan fee as established by Council.



   (B)   Staff review and notification procedures.  The final
development plan will be reviewed in accordance with the review procedures
for general and final development plans outlined in Chapter 150.14.



   (C)   Planning Commission review of final PUD development plan. 
Planning Commission shall review the final PUD development plan to determine
if it is consistent with the approved PUD application and general development
plan. The Commission shall review the application based on the design and
conditions attached to the approved PUD application and general development
plan and make written findings of fact as to whether the final development
plan and conditions are consistent with the approved general development plan
and associated conditions.



   (D)   Action by Planning Commission.  The Planning Commission shall
act on the PUD final development plan application in accordance with the
procedures outlined in Chapter 150.14.



(Ord. 4-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.1308  APPEAL OF PLANNING COMMISSION ACTION.



   A denial of the PUD final development plan can be appealed to Council
pursuant to the procedures outlined for appeals of other final development
plans in Chapter 150.14.



(Ord. 4-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.1309  SIGNIFICANCE OF AN APPROVED PUD FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN.



   An approved PUD final development plan shall become for the proposed
development a binding commitment of the specific elements approved for the
development. If the PUD includes the subdivision of land, a final plat must
be prepared and submitted to Planning Commission for signature in accordance
with the platting provisions for subdivisions in Chapter 156.02. A final
record plat must be submitted for at least the first section of the
development within 18 months of the approval of the final development plan.



(Ord. 4-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.1310  EXPIRATION OF PUD DEVELOPMENT PLAN APPROVAL.



   (A)   An approved PUD final development plan that does not require a
final plat shall remain valid for a period of 12 months following the
effective date of its approval. This period may be extended for up to six
months by the Planning Commission, after demonstration of good cause by the
applicant. If at the end of that time a building permit has not been issued,
then the PUD application general development plan and final development plan
shall expire and be of no effect unless resubmitted and approved in
accordance with the previous provisions of this chapter. If the building
permit expires without construction having been started, the PUD application
and subsequent plans shall expire and must be resubmitted and approved in
accordance with this chapter. Construction is deemed to have begun when all
necessary excavation and piers or footings of one or more principal buildings
included in the plan have been completed.



   (B)   An approved PUD that does require a final plat due to
subdivision of the property shall remain valid for a period of six months
following the recording of the final plat. If after that time bonds have not
been secured and construction begun on required public improvements, then the
PUD application, and subsequent plans shall expire and will require
resubmittal and approval in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
Building permits must be issued within six months of approval of a final plat
that does not require construction of public improvements, or six months
following the beginning of construction of public improvements.



(Ord. 4-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.1311  MODIFICATIONS TO AN APPROVED PUD FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN.



   Modifications to an approved PUD final development plan may be
considered to be minor modifications, significant modifications, or major
modifications.



   (A)   Minor modifications. The Community Development Director or
other authorized official may authorize minor modifications to a PUD final
development site plan. Minor modifications shall be the minimum necessary to
overcome a particular difficulty or to achieve a more functional and
desirable use of the property than was initially anticipated. These
modifications have become necessary because of field conditions, detailed
engineering data, topography or critical design criteria. Minor modifications
may include adjusting the size and location of drainage ways, sewers,
circulation elements, retaining walls, or similar features and to substitute,
without reducing, landscape materials. Minor modifications may also include
structural dimensional changes provided they do not increase building heights
by more than ten feet, floor area by more than 5%, decrease the number of
parking spaces by more than 10%, or allow buildings closer to the property
lines. No minor modification shall result in a violation of any subdivision
or zoning requirement or any variance from these requirements granted by a
condition of the PUD approval. The Community Development Director or other
authorized official may deem any request for a minor modification to be a
significant modification and refer the request to the Planning Commission for
determination under the provisions set forth below.



   (B)   Significant modifications. The Planning Commission may
authorize modifications to the PUD final development plan provided that the
modifications are consistent with the approved PUD and general development
plan approved by Council. The applicant shall submit significant
modifications for Planning Commission consideration pursuant to the
procedures for final development plan approval outlined in this chapter. If
the Planning Commission determines that the proposed modification is not
consistent with the approved PUD and general development plan, they will deny
the modification and direct the applicant to submit a revised general
development plan to Council.



   (C)   Major modification. Council may approve major modifications to
a previously approved PUD application and general development plan. Any
modification that does not meet the standards for a minor or significant
modification shall be considered a major modification and require approval by
Council according to the procedures outlined herein for initial approval of a
general development plan.



(Ord. 4-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.1312  APPEAL OF DECISIONS ON MODIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Appeal of decision of Community Development Director or other
authorized official.  Any party aggrieved by the administrative decision of
Community Development Director or other authorized official may appeal the
decision to the Planning Commission. The appeal must be filed within 14 days
of the date of the written decision. The Planning Commission will hear the
appeal within 30 days of receipt of the appeal.



   (B)   Appeal of decision of Planning Commission.  Any party
aggrieved by the administrative decision of the Planning Commission may
appeal the decision to City Council pursuant to the procedures outlined in
Chapter 150.14.



(Ord. 4-2005, passed 3-23-05)



INTERIM DEVELOPMENT CONTROL DISTRICTS



§ 151.1313  PURPOSE.



   An Interim Development Control (IDC) Overlay District is intended to
temporarily regulate the establishment of uses, construction of new buildings
and demolition or alteration of existing structures in areas where the
adoption of amendments to the Land Usage Code have been proposed in a
comprehensive plan, community plan, urban design plan or urban renewal plan.



(Ord. 2-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.1314  APPLICABILITY AND ZONING MAP DESIGNATOR.



   An IDC Overlay District may be applied to any district or part of a
district within the city. It is adopted as an amendment to the zoning map.
This Overlay District shall be shown on the zoning map by an IDC designator
applied to the base district designation. Where inconsistencies exist between
the IDC Overlay District regulations and other provisions of the Land Usage
Code or the Municipal Code, the IDC Overlay District regulations shall apply.



(Ord. 2-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.1315  ESTABLISHMENT OF IDC OVERLAY DISTRICTS.



   Council may establish an IDC Overlay District on finding that:



   (A)   Proposed amendments. Map amendments to the Land Usage Code
have been proposed in a comprehensive plan, urban design or urban renewal
plan, or community plan presented to the City Planning Commission, or zoning
text amendments are being considered by the City Planning Commission.



   (B)   Study and review. The proposed amendments may substantially
affect permitted uses and or development standards in the area of
consideration and will require the study and review by the City Planning
Commission, City Administration and Council prior to adoption.



   (C)   Public interest. The protection of the public interest
requires that interim development controls be imposed during the period of
study and review by the City Planning Commission so as not to impair the
substance and purpose of the planning under consideration.



(Ord. 2-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.1316  IDC APPLICATION REVIEW GUIDELINES.



   The ordinance to adopt an IDC Overlay District must:



   (A)   Applications subject to review. Specify which of the following
permit applications are to be reviewed by the City Planning Commission. The
applications may include:



      (1)   Permits for new construction, demolition of existing
structures, exterior alterations or additions to existing structures and
changes in use.



      (2)   Permits for signs.



      (3)   Permits for site improvements.



      (4)   Permits for the construction or reconstruction of
streets or sidewalks.



      (5)   Subdivision improvement plans.



      (6)   Excavation and fill permits.



      (7)   Certificate of approval.



   (B)   Application review guidelines. Adopt application review
guidelines for each application subject to review to provide the City
Planning Commission with criteria for the exercise of its authority, as
granted in this chapter.



   (C)   Administrative review. Designate the city department, or
official responsible for conducting the administrative review of these
applications. Council may also provide a standard for review and approval of
minor alterations within the proposed district, which minor alterations shall
not be subject to the Planning Commission review process outlined herein.



(Ord. 2-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.1317  THREE-MONTH IDC OVERLAY DISTRICTS.



   Council by resolution may establish IDC Overlay Districts to remain in
effect for three months without prior notice, advertisement or public
hearing. The Zoning Administrator has the duty to give notice of the
establishment of the district within 14 days of the establishment of an IDC
Overlay District, by placing an advertisement in a newspaper of general
circulation and sending ordinary mail notice to the owners of record of all
parcels of property within the overlay district as such ownership is listed
in the tax records of the Hamilton County Auditor. Failure of delivery of
such notice shall not invalidate any action taken by Council.



(Ord. 2-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.1318  ONE-YEAR IDC OVERLAY DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Authority. Upon a recommendation from the Planning Commission,
Council by ordinance may establish IDC Overlay Districts to remain in effect
for one year, or extend IDC Overlay Districts established pursuant to Section
5 for nine additional months. Such recommendation from the Planning
Commission may arise from a public meeting of the Commission. The Planning
Commission is not required to provide advanced published notice or ordinary
mail notice before taking such action. Any notice of the Planning
Commission's intended action shall be the notice ordinarily required for any
public meeting of the Commission.



   (B)   Procedure. To establish an IDC for a period of one year or to
extend a three month designation for an additional nine months, Council shall
hold a public hearing to review the recommendation of the Planning
Commission. Notice of the date, time, place and purpose of such hearing shall
be published in an advertisement in a newspaper in general circulation within
the city once a week for two consecutive weeks on the same day of the week,
the first of which shall be published at least 14 days in advance of the date
of the required hearing. Notice of the date, time, place and purpose of the
hearing shall also be sent by ordinary mail at least 14 days in advance of
the required hearing to the owners of record of all parcels within the
overlay district in question as such ownership appears in the records of the
Hamilton County Auditor, and such notice may be contained within the notice
implementing the Overlay District as required by § 151.1317. The failure of
delivery of such notice shall not invalidate any action taken by Council.



   (C)   Council findings. At the public hearing to extend or implement
the Overlay District, Council must find that:



      (1)   Ongoing study. The City Planning Commission is studying
proposed Land Usage Code or map amendments that would affect the area within
the IDC District;



      (2)   Study completion. The study is not yet completed, but
may reasonably be expected to be completed and Land Usage Code amendments
enacted within the year; and



      (3)   Inconsistent uses. There is a prospect of changes in
use, construction of new structures or alteration or demolition of existing
structures that would be inconsistent with preliminary objectives or findings
for the area approved by the City Planning Commission.



   (D)   Council action. After the public hearing if Council finds that
there is justification to either establish or extend an IDC district, Council
may enact legislation to complete such designation, which ordinance by
Charter may not be passed as an emergency. Provided, however, at Council's
election, according to its rules, such ordinance may be read at one
presentation with a suspension of the rules.



(Ord. 2-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.1319  EXTENSION OF IDC OVERLAY DISTRICTS.



   Council may extend the duration of an IDC Overlay District by an
additional six months, provided that an IDC Overlay District may not remain
in effect for more than two years from the date it was first established.
Notice of a proposed extension is to be given and a public hearing held in
accordance with § 151.1318 above. Council may only adopt an IDC Overlay
District extension after receiving an affirmative recommendation from the
City Planning Commission and finding that the following three standards are
met:



   (A)   Complex study. The study of the proposed amendment to the Land
Usage Code or map that would affect the allowable land uses or site
development standards within the IDC Overlay District has proven to be
extraordinarily complex by reason of unusual geographic, physical or social
conditions in the district;



   (B)   Study incomplete. The City Planning Commission has not yet
completed the consideration of the proposed Land Usage Code amendments or map
changes that would affect the allowable land uses and/or development
standards within the IDC Overlay District; and



   (C)   Inconsistent uses. There is a prospect of change in use,
construction of new structures or alteration or demolition of existing
structures that would be inconsistent with preliminary objectives or findings
for the area approved by the City Planning Commission.



(Ord. 2-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.1320  APPLICATIONS SUBJECT TO REVIEW.



   The City Planning Commission has the duty to review applications in an
established IDC Overlay District as specified in the legislation that enacted
the IDC Overlay District. A permit made subject to review pursuant to the
legislation establishing the IDC District may not be issued unless approved
by the City Planning Commission and/ or Council pursuant to the procedures
and standards for interim review set forth within the establishing
legislation.



(Ord. 2-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.1321  REVIEW.



   (A)   Standards for review. The administrative reviewer appointed
pursuant to § 151.1316(C) has the duty to prepare an advisory report that
evaluates whether the proposed work is in compliance with the application
review guidelines adopted. The administrative reviewer has the duty to file
the report with the City Planning Commission within 30 days of the date of
receipt of a completed application.



   (B)   Procedure for review. The City Planning Commission may approve
applications in an established IDC Overlay District if the proposed work is
in compliance with the application review guidelines adopted pursuant to the
establishing legislation as required by § 151.1316(B) herein on finding that:



      (1)   Proposed work permitted by current and proposed zoning.
The proposed use is permitted or conditionally permitted in the base
district, the use conforms to all standards and performance criteria of the
Land Usage Code and does not conflict with any proposed amendment to the Land
Usage Code then under consideration by the City Planning Commission or
Council.



      (2)   Proposed development compatibility. The proposed
development is compatible with the predominant or prevailing land use,
building and structure patterns in the surrounding neighborhood and community.



      (3)    No detrimental effect to the public. The proposed
development is not detrimental to the public peace, health, safety or general
welfare.



      (4)   No adverse effect on adjoining properties. The Planning
Commission shall consider the impact such development shall have upon
adjoining properties to assure that such development shall:



         (a)   Not adversely impact access to police and fire
protection, public facilities and services, and light and air.



         (b)   Not adversely impact traffic conditions in the
area to have a negative effect on ingress, egress and accessibility of
adjoining properties to public roadways or public transportation.



         (c)   Not adversely impact the ability to develop and
use adjacent land, structures and buildings.



(Ord. 2-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.1322  PROCEDURE FOR REVIEW OF PERMIT APPLICATIONS.



   After receiving an advisory report from the administrative reviewer,
the City Planning Commission has a duty to consider applications for permits
according to the following procedure:



   (A)   Public hearing. The City Planning Commission has a duty to
hold a public hearing on an application within 30 days of receiving the
advisory report prepared pursuant to § 151.1321 herein. Notice of such
hearing shall be sent to the applicant and the owners of record of all
properties situated within 300 feet of the proposed development site.
Additional notice shall be provided by advertisement in a newspaper of
general circulation within the community. Such notice of hearing shall be
mailed, and newspaper notice shall be published, no less than 14 days in
advance of the scheduled hearing.



   (B)   Exceptions from the underlying zone district regulations. The
City Planning Commission may grant exceptions from the underlying zone
district regulations other than those relating to use, when the exceptions
are consistent with the application review guidelines adopted pursuant to
§§ 151.1316 and 151.1321 herein.



   (C)   Decision of the City Planning Commission. The City Planning
Commission has a duty to make a decision on the application within 14 days of
the close of the public hearing. It is recognized that the Planning
Commission may not complete its public hearing at one meeting and the 14-day
period shall begin to run once the Planning Commission has closed
consideration of the application and taken the issue under advisement. In any
event, if the Planning Commission fails to act upon the application within
120 days from the date the application was received by the Community
Development Department and determined to be administratively complete, the
applicant may deem the application to have been denied and take the
appropriate steps to appeal such denial as set forth herein. The application
may be approved subject to conditions necessary to insure that the
development plan is lawful and in the public interest. If the application is
disapproved, the reasons must be stated in writing as findings of fact. The
City Planning Commission has a duty to approve an application that maximizes
both the public interest and private benefits generally.



   (D)   City Council review. If the underlying district regulations
qualify the proposed use as a conditionally permitted use, then Council shall
review the final decision of the Planning Commission upon such interim
development application consistent with the standards for conditionally
permitted use review under Chapters 150.16 and 151.20 of the Land Usage Code.
If the Planning Commission grants exceptions to the underlying zoning
district regulations as authorized by division (B) above, then the Planning
Commission decision shall be reviewed by City Council as if such exception
were granted as an equivalency pursuant to the procedures of Chapter 150.14
of the Land Usage Code. If the application is denied by the Planning
Commission, the applicant may file a notice of appeal within 14 days of the
written decision by the Planning Commission, which notice of appeal shall be
filed with both the Secretary of the Planning Commission and the Clerk of
Council. Such matter shall then be reviewed on appeal similar to the
procedures outlined for an appeal of the denial of a site plan pursuant to
Chapter 150.14 of the Land Usage Code.



(Ord. 2-2005, passed 3-23-05)



CHAPTER 151.14:  HERITAGE OVERLAY DISTRICT REGULATIONS



Section



   151.1401   Purpose



   151.1402   Application of the district



   151.1403   Use regulations



   151.1404   Development standards



   151.1405   Design review criteria



   151.1406   Review procedures



   151.1407   Regulations for street furniture/furnishings



§ 151.1401  PURPOSE.



   The Heritage Overlay (H-O) District is established in order to set
specific design criteria for both rehabilitation and new construction
projects within the Heritage Overlay District in Montgomery.  Therefore the
purposes of this chapter are to:



   (A)   Guide development in the Heritage Overlay District to protect
the valuable historic and architectural resources and 19th century character
of the City of Montgomery.



   (B)   Ensure that new development and/or redevelopment respects the
city's historic qualities and resources through compatible design.



   (C)   Provide the basis for consistent and objective decision making
by providing criteria and a review process to be used by the Zoning
Administrator, Landmarks Commission, Planning Commission and City Council
when evaluating proposed development.



   (D)   Provide standards for property owners, architects and
contractors to aid in the preparation of appropriate plans.



   (E)   Increase public awareness of the value of the historic
resources and appropriate design.



(Ord. 5-2010, passed 7-7-10)



§ 151.1402  APPLICATION OF THE DISTRICT.



   The Heritage Overlay District shall be in addition to and shall overlay
all other zoning districts where the H-O is established.  Therefore, any
parcel of land lying in the H-O District shall also lie in one or more zoning
districts provided for in this Zoning Code.  The Heritage Overlay District
shall be established in accordance with the required procedures for a zoning
map amendment pursuant to Chapter 150.22.  The boundaries of the Heritage
Overlay District shall be indicated on the zoning map and the district
designation of H-O shall be superimposed over the existing zoning
designations.



(Ord. 5-2010, passed 7-7-10)



§ 151.1403  USE REGULATIONS.



   The uses permitted in the Heritage Overlay District shall be governed
by the permitted uses established in the underlying zoning districts.



(Ord. 5-2010, passed 7-7-10)



§ 151.1404  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   All lots, buildings, and structures in the Heritage Overlay District
shall comply with the Secretary of the Interior Standards for Rehabilitation.
When preservation work is done which involves a modification to a landmark or
contributing structure, the work shall be approached using the principle of
reversibility. All lots, buildings and structures must also comply with the
standards set forth in the underlying zoning districts except as otherwise
specifically modified in this chapter.  In the event of a conflict between
regulations of the H-O District and the underlying district, the regulations
of this chapter shall supercede.



(Ord. 5-2010, passed 7-7-10)



§ 151.1405  DESIGN REVIEW CRITERIA.



   The following design review criteria are in addition to the specific
regulations and requirements set forth in the underlying zoning districts. 
All proposals in the Heritage Overlay District shall comply with the
following design review criteria.  Further, the design review criteria are
applicable to all landmark properties as defined in Chapter 150.03 wherever
located in Montgomery and are applicable to the landmark itself, the
underlying real property, and any improvements thereon:



   (A)   Design Review Criterion # 1 BUILDING HEIGHT, SHAPE, SCALE. 
Ensure that building height, shape and scale are appropriate to the District,
the era and the architecture of the building.



      (1)   Minimum building height shall be two stories for the
front elevation(s) facing a street.  Maximum height shall be determined by
the existing skyline of adjoining buildings and/or across the street, and in
no case shall exceed 25 feet as measured from the grade line to the gutter. 
Additional stories may be permissible for the rear or side elevations when
lower grade lines allow, but in no case shall exceed 40 feet as measured from
grade line to gutter.



      (2)   A building's vertical and horizontal dimensions shall be
in proportion to each other without over emphasis of either dimension. 
Horizontally long buildings shall be broken up, through the use of recesses
or setback variations, to cause the elevation to appear as a series of
proportionally correct masses.



      (3)   Overall building mass must be in appropriate proportion
to adjoining buildings, the lot upon which the building is intended, as well
as other similar buildings in the district.



      (4)    For new construction, the top of the exposed foundation
shall, to the extent possible, be set within 10% of the average height of the
foundation of the building on either side.



   (B)   Design Review Criterion # 2 ROOFLINE, CONTOUR, CORNICE. 
Ensure that roofline, contour and cornice are appropriate to the District,
the era and the architecture of the building.



      (1)   The roof of a primary structure shall be gabled and/or a
shed roof.  On a two-story building, a flat roof with a gabled appearance
may be permitted.



      (2)   For a gabled roof, the height of the gable shall not be
less that one-quarter of the building height as measured from the grade line
to the gutter.  The roof of an attached shed may have a lower pitch than the
roof over the main structure.



      (3)   For new construction, the cornice shall be strong, well
articulated and well proportioned.



   (C)   Design Review Criterion #3 WINDOWS, DOORS.  Ensure the rhythm
and character of windows and doors are appropriate to the District, the era
and the architecture of the building.



      (1)   The shape and configuration of windows and doors shall
be based on historic and traditional design.  Window panes shall be divided
into smaller panes; 6-over-6 and 2-over-2 double-hung sashes are typical. The
first and second story openings shall have a strong relationship to one
another.  Alterations to window or door size or shape may be permitted on
landmark buildings only to the extent that such a change would bring about
greater historical accuracy.



      (2)   Window and door openings shall occupy about 25% to 30%
of the front elevation of a residential building.



      (3)   Window emphasis shall generally be vertical with the
height of a window being approximately two times its width.  The spacing
between windows in historic structures is usually between one and two times
the width of the window.  If spacing is less than one times the width,
shutters shall not be used.  Shutters shall be constructed of wood and be
proportioned as if they would cover the entire window opening if closed. 
They shall be operable or mounted on hinges.



      (4)   (a)   Windows may be fixed or operable window
openings in masonry buildings shall be configured with traditional
components: sill, lintel, and trim.



         (b)   Windows shall be glazed in clear glass rather than
tinted glass. Narrow-line windows are prohibited.  Snap on grills or grill
in airspace are prohibited.  All-windows shall be made of wood.



      (5)   In addition, the following criteria apply:



         (a)   Landmark property.  Windows shall be repaired
when possible.  When replacement is necessary, the replacement shall be an
all-wood window.  If the original window was divided into smaller panes,
then the replacement must mimic that pattern and it shall have true divided
lights.  If the new window is replacing a window that was not original to
the building, the new replacement shall match the original window.  On
additions, simulated divided light sashes may be used.



         (b)   Contributing property. Windows shall be repaired
when possible.  When replacement is necessary, the replacement shall be an
all-wood window.  Simulated divided light sashes may be used.



         (c)   Design-consistent property and new construction. 
Simulated divided light sashes shall be used except as provided in division
(C)(5)(d)1. of this section.  Extruded aluminum-clad or vinyl-clad wood
windows may be permitted, if appropriate.



         (d)   Non-contributing property. Aluminum-clad or
vinyl-clad wood windows may be permitted, if appropriate.



            1.   Display windows on the first story of
commercial buildings, may be larger than those typical of residential
buildings and are not required to be subdivided.  The first story windows
shall show symmetry and proportion to the building and relate to the windows
of the second floor.  The length of a hypothetical rectangle that
encompasses all first story windows and doors shall be the same length as
that of a rectangle, which encompasses all second story windows.  Commercial
buildings may have a greater amount of building elevation occupied by windows
and doors than residential buildings. 



            2.   The main entry of a building shall preferably
face the street. The entry of a corner building may face the street or be at
an angle to the street.  Entries may be flush with the building or recessed.



            3.   For residential and commercial buildings,
doors shall be constructed of wood and be paneled, either solid or with glass
panes.  Door trim shall be compatible with window trim. Transoms above doors
with glass panes and side lights may be permitted.  On residential
buildings, doors shall be about the same width as the windows.  On
commercial buildings, rear service doors may be wider than windows and may be
constructed of metal.  On commercial buildings, four or six paneled steel
doors will be allowed when required by the Fire Code.



            4.   Exterior storm/screen windows with a wood
frame or painted aluminum may be allowed as an alternative to replacing
existing sash or on a new unclad sash.



   (D)   Design Review Criterion #4 MATERIALS. Ensure the use of
construction materials appropriate to the District, the era and the
architecture of the building.



      (1)   Appropriate construction materials include brick, stone,
natural wood clapboard, wood board and batten, wood shingles, and
traditionally applied stucco. Vinyl, aluminum, and steel siding and exterior
insulation and finishing system (EIFS, aka synthetic-stucco) are prohibited.
Smooth fiber-cement siding and trim may be used on new construction, as a
replacement on non-landmark property, and on additions to any property
including landmark property. Materials for windows and doors are covered in
Design Review Criterion # 3.



      (2)   Brick masonry in new buildings or additions to existing
buildings shall have brick and mortar joints similar in color, size, and
texture to historic examples in the district.  The preferred color for brick
is in the red-orange range. Variations in color may be used to reduce the
mass of a large building. The color should be uniform rather than mottled or
speckled.  Unpainted brick is preferred, unless the building has been
previously painted.



      (3)   Clapboard siding shall run horizontally, and shall have
appropriate lap exposure.



      (4)   Slate, copper, wood, or standing seam metal roofs are
preferred. Asphalt-fiberglass shingles may also be used but shall be uniform
in color. When replacing roofing, every effort shall be made to duplicate the
original roofing material.



   (E)   Design Review Criterion #5 COLORS.  Use paint colors
appropriate to the District. 



      (1)   Paint serves two purposes - aesthetic enhancement and
protection against deterioration. Paint colors shall relate to the style and
period of the building and to the traditional character of the District.  In
general paint colors for buildings shall be muted rather than vivid.



      (2)   In the early 19th century, white and light neutral
colors were favored; then in the late 19th century colors darkened and
palettes broadened, until the early 20th century brought a return to white
and light colors.  Greek Revival homes typically had white exteriors and
dark green or black doors and shutters, while Victorian dwellings were
enhanced by rich color treatments such as browns, olives, blues, ochres, and
grays with contrasting colors for trim and decorative details.



      (3)   The simpler the building design, the fewer colors should
be used on it, with a maximum of three different colors on a building unless
appropriate to the architecture of that era.  The body of a building should
be painted all one color.  However, variations in paint color may be used to
reduce the mass of a large building.



      (4)   The body and trim of the building shall be painted
different, but complementary colors.  However, for late 19th century
buildings, trim may be painted the same color as the body in a lighter or
darker shade.



      (5)   Select colors that complement a building's materials -
whether brick, wood, or stone - as well as the colors of abutting buildings.



      (6)   The city maintains a color chart of historic colors that
should be used as a guide in picking appropriate colors.  For guidelines on
colors for permanent and sandwich board signs, see Design Review Criterion #7.



      (7)   A flat or satin finish shall be used on the body, and
semi-gloss on windows and trim.



   (F)   Design Review Criterion #6 LANDSCAPE. Use landscape elements
and street furniture appropriate to the District.



      (1)   Improvements in the public right-of-way shall conform to
the City of Montgomery's Heritage District Streetscape Plan.  Improvements
shall also conform to § 151.1407.



      (2)   The materials to be used for fences, non-structural
walls, railings, and trellises are strictly limited to natural materials or
painted iron.  Vinyl fences are prohibited. The materials to be used for
steps, stairs, or railings are limited to wood, concrete, stone, or brick.



   (G)   Design Review Criterion #7 SIGNS.  Use sign design
appropriate to the District.



      (1)   Signs must comply with the regulations in Chapter 151.30.



      (2)   Signs shall respect the overall architectural
composition of the building and its scale, while not overwhelming the
façade. 



      (3)   Sign colors shall be harmonious with the building's
materials and colors.  Sign colors shall relate to the style and period of
the building and to the traditional character of the District.  In general
sign colors should be muted rather than vivid. Paint shall be flat, satin or
semi-gloss.



      (4)   Corporate identity colors or logos may be permitted and
shall be used with restraint.



      (5)   Sign letter styles and heights shall be appropriate to
the District and respect the overall composition of the sign.



      (6)   Wall signs shall be affixed on a continuous, flat,
vertical, opaque surface and cannot project more than six inches from the
building surface.  Signs shall not cover architectural features.



      (7)   Wall signs shall not extend higher than the bottom of
the sill of the second story window, or above the lowest point of the roof,
or over 25 feet above grade whichever is lowest.  Wall signs shall be at
least six inches from the lintel, sill or other trim of the windows above and
below.



      (8)   No more than one right angle sign, projecting not more
than four feet, is allowed for each business establishment.  The bottom of
the sign shall be at least seven feet above the ground level (sidewalk). The
top of the sign shall not extend higher than the bottom of the sills of the
second story window, the lowest point of the roof, or 25 feet above grade,
whichever is lowest.



      (9)   Window signs shall only be applied directly to the
inside surface of the window glass.  The letters shall be four inches or
less and symbols shall not be larger than eight inches.



      (10)   Signs shall have a simple design.  Wall and projecting
signs shall not have more than three lines of lettering.  Ground signs for
multi-tenant commercial buildings are restricted to two lines of lettering
per business.  Ground signs for single occupancy buildings may contain four
lines of type plus a line for the address.  Landmarks Commission may approve
additional lines for institutional ground signs, if appropriate.



      (11)   Signs may be externally illuminated.  Neon lighting,
internally illuminated, and backlit signs are prohibited.  Ground signs
shall include the street address.



      (12)   Sign materials may be of wood, cast metal, natural
stone, brick, or glass, with painted faces or letters.  Other materials may
be permitted if appropriate.  Plastic and foam signs are prohibited. Vinyl
or plastic letters may be approved, if appropriate.



   (H)   Design Review Criterion #8 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.  Ensure that
accessory structures enhance, yet be subordinate to the primary structure in
size, scale, and architectural detail.



      (1)   All accessory structures shall be limited to the rear
yard and shall not exceed one and one-half stories in height.  Roof style
shall be limited to either gable or shed roof designs.  Flat or gambrel
roofs are not allowed. 



      (2)   Garage doors shall be made only of wood.  Other
materials may be permitted if appropriate.  Separate doors must be used for
each bay.  Exceptions may be made for the replacement of existing,
non-conforming garage doors.



      (3)   Decks, patios and porches shall be compatible with the
era of the building.



         (a)   For landmark and contributing buildings, masonry
and concrete patios directly on grade are permissible.  Porches are
permitted if they are compatible in design to the rest of the building and
the era.  The deck of new porches shall not be more than four feet above
grade.  Porches in conjunction with walk-out basements are discouraged.
Above-grade decks are not permitted as additions to landmark and contributing
buildings.



         (b)   For other buildings, masonry and concrete patios
directly on grade are encouraged.  Walk-out basements or porches are
discouraged.  Decks are permitted, but shall be painted or stained (not
clear) and be compatible with the era of the building.  Vinyl is prohibited
but other materials may be considered if appropriate.



      (4)   Arbors, trellises, fences and other accessory structures
shall be of a natural material.  If they are made of wood, they must be
painted or stained (not clear).  They shall be designed to be compatible
with the era of the building.  Vinyl is prohibited but other materials may
be considered if appropriate.



   (I)   Design Review Criterion #9 LIGHTING. Use exterior lighting
appropriate to the District in type, design, location, and quantity.



      (1)   Lighting shall be used in a very limited manner and only
to highlight architectural details on a building, illuminate a sign, or
illuminate walkways and/or parking areas.



      (2)   The use of incandescent, natural gas, or halogen lights
is allowed, but colored, flashing or neon lights are prohibited. Compact
fluorescents and LED lights may be used but only if enclosed in a light
fixture.  Other lights may be considered if appropriate.  Lighting must
also comply with other sections of this Code.  See Design Review Criterion
#7 for allowable lighting for signage.



      (3)   Lighting must not exceed the standards set in §§
151.1213(B) and 151.3212(C).



(Ord. 5-2010, passed 7-7-10; Am. Ord. 16-2013, passed 11-6-13)



§ 151.1406  REVIEW PROCEDURES.



   (A)   The Zoning Administrator, subject to approval by the Landmarks
Commission, shall adopt certain rules and regulations setting forth the color
guidelines, roof materials, building materials, and other construction
materials acceptable in the Heritage Overlay District for the enforcement of
this Code.



   (B)   All new and rehabilitation projects in the Heritage Overlay
District shall be subject to the development plan review procedures set forth
in Chapter 150.14.



   (C)   Applications for exterior changes to property in the Heritage
Overlay District that is neither a listed landmark nor subject to development
plan review shall comply with the procedures set forth in § 150.1207.



(Ord. 5-2010, passed 7-7-10)



§ 151.1407  REGULATIONS FOR FURNITURE/FURNISHINGS.



   (A)   Definitions.  When in this section, unless the context
otherwise requires, the following terms shall have the following meanings:



      (1)   CERTIFICATE HOLDER.   The holder of a certificate of
compliance issued by the Zoning Administrator in accordance with the
provisions of this section.  A certificate holder is responsible for the
installation and maintenance of street furnishings encompassed by any
certificate of compliance issued pursuant to the provisions of this section
and for compliance with all provisions contained herein.



      (2)   CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE. The certificate of compliance
issued by the Zoning Administrator to the certificate holder in accordance
with the provisions of this section.



      (3)   NEWSRACK.   Any type of self-service device for the
vending or free distribution of newspapers, advertisements, or periodicals.



      (4)   OPERATOR.   Any natural person or other legal entity
including, but not limited to, corporations, partnerships, joint ventures and
the like, who either own, operate or otherwise are in control of a newsrack.



      (5)   PROPERTY OWNER.   A natural person or other legal
entity including, but not limited to, corporations, partnerships, joint
ventures and the like, who either own, lease or rent real property within the
Heritage Overlay District.



      (6)   PUBLIC WAY.   Any sidewalk or streetscape area
dedicated to public use, public plaza open and dedicated to public use,
public highway, public street or public alleyway.



      (7)   STREET FURNISHINGS.   Street furniture including but
not limited to benches, tables, chairs, table umbrellas, planters, waste
containers, newsracks, mailboxes and similar personal property used to vend a
product or for aesthetic display.



      (8)   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.   The Zoning Administrator of the
City of Montgomery or such person as said Zoning Administrator may from time
to time designate.



   (B)   Development standards.



      (1)   All street furnishings in the Heritage Overlay District
which are maintained, erected, placed or situated by an owner or operator in
a public way or which are placed upon private property, but are open to and
visible from any public way shall comply with the standards of this section.



      (2)   The Zoning Administrator, subject to approval of the
Landmarks Commission, shall adopt certain rules and regulations setting forth
the palette of colors and acceptable materials for all street furnishings in
the Heritage Overlay District for the enforcement of this Code.



   (C)   Any street furnishings placed within the Heritage District
after the effective date of this Code must comply with the design criteria
and placement restrictions as set forth within this section.  Any street
furnishings in place on the effective date of this section must be either
removed or brought into compliance with the terms of this section within 60
days after written notice of nonconformity is delivered to the owner or
operator by the Zoning Administrator.



   (D)   (1)   Certificate of compliance.



         (a)   Within the Heritage Overlay District, no person
shall affix, erect, place or maintain street furnishings in or on any part of
the public way or upon private property in any area which fronts upon a
public sidewalk, street or alleyway and is visible to such public sidewalk,
street or alleyway without first obtaining a certificate of compliance from
the Zoning Administrator in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
Street furnishings placed on private property which are placed within a solid
material walled courtyard which are not visible to such public sidewalk,
street or alleyway are exempt from the provisions of this section requiring a
certificate of compliance.



         (b)   The certificate of compliance must be renewed
annually by application to the Zoning Administrator.



      (2)   Application for certificate of compliance.



         (a)   An application form shall be prepared by the
Zoning Administrator and shall require the following detail:



            1.   The name, address and telephone number of the
applicant who is the owner/operator or other person who is the principal
person responsible for the street furnishings;



            2.   The name, address and telephone number of a
natural person (if different from the applicant) who the city may notify
and/or contact at anytime concerning the applicant's street furnishings. 
This person would be responsible for receiving complaints and notices of
violations when the certificate of compliance is issued and for providing
information relating to the application during the application process;



            3.   A specific written description of the type,
style and quantity of street furnishings proposed to be located and the
proposed location for such street furnishings; and



            4.   If street furnishings are placed on or within
a public way, a certificate of insurance naming the city as an additional
insured in an amount not less than $1,000,000 sufficient to indemnify the
city and hold it harmless from any and all claims or judgments for personal
and bodily injury, including death or property damage, and from costs and
expenses to which the city may be subjected or which it may suffer or incur
by reason of the design, placement, installation, operation or maintenance of
the applicant's street furnishings.  Reasonable evidence of self-insurance
coverage may be substituted by the applicant for the certificate of
insurance.  Insurance under this section shall run continuously while the
street furnishings are in place within the city public ways, and any
termination or lapse of such insurance shall be a violation of this section.



      (3)   Issuance of a certificate of compliance.  Upon a
finding by the Zoning Administrator that the applicant is in compliance with
the provisions of this section, the Zoning Administrator shall issue a
certificate of compliance for installation of street furnishings by the
applicant.  The Zoning Administrator shall issue a partial certificate of
compliance upon a finding that some of the proposed street furnishings
locations are in compliance with the provisions of this section. Issuance of
a certificate of compliance or partial certificate of compliance shall
designate the applicant to be the certificate holder.  The Zoning
Administrator shall issue a certificate of compliance within ten business
days of the Zoning Administrator's receipt of a completed application. 
Proposed locations within the public way shall be approved on a first
come/first serve basis by the Zoning Administrator. 



      (4)   Denial of certificate of compliance.  If an application
for a street furnishings location is denied, or if the type and style of the
street furnishings is denied, the Zoning Administrator shall



notify the applicant in writing within ten business days of the receipt of
the completed application.  The Zoning Administrator shall state the
specific reason for denial.  An applicant who has been denied a certificate
of compliance pursuant to this section may appeal such denial within 30 days
of the date of the written denial by filing a copy of an appeal with the
Zoning Administrator.  Such appeal shall be heard by the City Manager, or
his/her designee, within ten business days of the filing of the appeal.  A
final decision on the appeal shall be sent to the applicant within five days
of the hearing.



      (5)   Abatement.



         (a)   The Zoning Administrator reserves the right to
order, by written notice to the certificate holder, that non-complying street
furnishings be removed from an approved location either temporarily or
permanently.



         (b)   If the certificate holder fails to remove street
furnishings from a location within three business days after receipt of a
notice by the Zoning Administrator, the Zoning Administrator, or his/her
designee, may summarily remove such street furnishings to storage at a place
designed by the city.  Such street furnishings may then be returned to the
certificate holder upon a certificate holder paying the cost of storage and
the reasonable cost to remove such street furnishings to storage, which
reasonable removal cost shall not exceed $100.  If a certificate holder
fails to pay such storage and removal fees or fails to claim such street
furnishings from storage within 60 days after receipt of a notice from the
Zoning Administrator that such property has been removed to storage, then the
city may dispose of such street furnishings as the city deems appropriate. 
The city shall then be entitled to retain any monies received from the sale
of such street furnishings as abandoned property, and no portion of such
proceeds from the sale need be accounted to or paid to the certificate
holder.  If the Zoning Administrator determines that there is an
unreasonable and imminent risk of danger to person or property by
non-complying street furnishings remaining at a location or in a condition of
disrepair at an approved location, the Zoning Administrator may summarily
remove such furnishings without advanced written notice to the certificate
holder.



   (E)   Standards.  All street furnishings shall be maintained in a
neat and clean condition and in good repair at all time.  Specifically, but
without limiting the generality of the foregoing, street furnishings shall be
serviced and maintained so that:



      (1)   It is reasonably free of dirt and grease;



      (2)   It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, pealing and/or
cracked paint in any visible painted areas;



      (3)   It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in visible
unpainted metal areas;



      (4)   Any clear, plastic or glass parts of any display area of
a newsrack are unbroken and reasonably free of cracks, dents, blemishes and
discoloration;



      (5)   The structural parts of any street furnishings are not
broken or unduly misshapen;



      (6)   There shall be no advertisement attached to, posted
upon, or incorporated within any street furnishings except:



         (a)   Umbrellas affixed to tables within the street
furnishings authorized in the District may display the name of the business
or logo of the business on site where the street furnishings are placed. 
Provided, however, such name may not be printed in letters larger than four
inches in height and they must be displayed only on the drop flaps of the
umbrella, may not be displayed more than four times.



         (b)   Newsracks may have a clear display area not to
exceed one square foot.  Lettering listing the name of the publication is
limited to one inch in height and must be displayed only on the front of the
newsrack.



      (7)   All newsracks shall be equipped with a coin return
mechanism to permit a person using the machine to secure an immediate refund
in the event he or she is unable to receive the publication paid for.  The
coin return mechanism shall be maintained in good working order.  Newsracks
dispensing free publications are exempt from this division;



      (8)   Each newsrack shall have affixed to it, in a readily
visible place so as to be seen by anyone using the newsrack, a notice setting
forth the name and address of the distributor and the telephone number of a
working telephone service to call to report a malfunction or to secure a
refund in the event of a malfunction of the coin return mechanism, or to give
the notices provided within this section.



   (F)   If appropriate, the City Manager is authorized to place
complying street furnishings in and upon city owned property, or within the
city right-of-way, of any public street, alleyway or sidewalk.  Such public
street furnishings shall include, but not be limited to, flowerpots and
planters, waste containers, tables, chairs, umbrellas, and newsracks.  If
the City Manager elects to place or construct publicly owned newsracks within
the District, the City Manger, at a reasonable fee, may allow such newsracks
to be used in lieu of the private placement of newsracks in compliance with
these regulations.



(Ord. 10-2007, passed 8-1-07)



CHAPTER 151.15:  OLD MONTGOMERY GATEWAY DISTRICT REGULATIONS



Section



   151.1501   Purpose



   151.1502   Applicability of district



   151.1503   Use regulations



   151.1504   Development standards



   151.1505   Residential lot requirements



   151.1506   Sites of two acres or more



   151.1507   Site layout criteria



   151.1508   Building setbacks



   151.1509   Site layout and building configuration



   151.1510   Pedestrian and vehicular access and circulation



   151.1511   Parking



   151.1512   Building design



   151.1513   Scale and massing



   151.1514   Architectural details



   151.1515   Exterior construction materials



   151.1516   Colors



   151.1517   Variation of materials and colors in facades



   151.1518   Signage



   151.1519   Lighting



   151.1520   Landscaping



   151.1521   Public facilities



   151.1522   Definitions



   151.1523   Review procedure



§ 151.1501  PURPOSE.



   The Old Montgomery Gateway District (OMG) is established in order to
impose specific design criteria for both rehabilitation and new construction
projects within the Old Montgomery Gateway District of Montgomery. Therefore
the purposes of this chapter are to:



   (A)   Ensure that new development in the Old Montgomery Gateway
District shall conform to the city's general plans for the physical
development of this district as embodied in the city's Gateway Area Plan.



   (B)   Guide development and redevelopment in the Old Montgomery
Gateway District to protect and enhance the city's image.



   (C)   Ensure that new development and redevelopment respects the
city's historic qualities and resources through thoughtful and compatible
design.



   (D)   Provide the basis for consistency and objective
decision-making by providing criteria and a review process to be used by the
Zoning Administrator, Landmarks Commission, Planning Commission and City
Council when evaluating proposed development.



   (E)   Provide standards for property owners, architects and
contractors to aid in the preparation of appropriate plans.



   (F)   Increase public awareness of the value of good design in the
gateway into the city.



   (G)   To create a more cohesive development pattern and density in
the city's Gateway and Core.



   (H)   To strengthen the current historic district by promoting
redevelopment in the Gateway that enhances the visual and economic vitality
of the downtown.



(Ord. 7-2006, passed 4-19-06)



§ 151.1502  APPLICABILITY OF DISTRICT.



   All properties designated OMG – Old Montgomery Gateway District on
the official zoning map of the city shall be subject to the regulations of
this chapter.



(Ord. 7-2006, passed 4-19-06)



§ 151.1503  USE REGULATIONS.



   All uses in the Old Montgomery Gateway District shall be governed as
listed in § 151.1203, Schedule of Permitted Uses.



(Ord. 7-2006, passed 4-19-06)



§ 151.1504  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   All lots, buildings, and structures in the Old Montgomery Gateway
District shall comply with the standards set forth in this chapter.



(Ord. 7-2006, passed 4-19-06)



§ 151.1505  RESIDENTIAL LOT REQUIREMENTS.



   Lot requirements for all residential uses as permitted in the Old
Montgomery Gateway District shall be regulated as set forth in § 151.1006.



(Ord. 7-2006, passed 4-19-06)



§ 151.1506  SITES OF TWO ACRES OR MORE.



   (A)   Cohesive multi-structure developments are desirable and are
strongly encouraged in the Old Montgomery Gateway District to enhance the
existing urban features of the adjacent Heritage District and to present a
more coordinated gateway to the city. Any site within the Old Montgomery
Gateway District which is equal to or greater than two acres shall be
required to be developed with multiple structures and a mix of uses.  Lots
of two or more acres recorded as of the date of adoption of this chapter may
not be subdivided into smaller lots to avoid this regulation.



   (B)   After a final site plan has been approved in accordance with
Chapter 150.14, an applicant may subdivide the total development into
separate parcels for tax billing purposes. The subdivided parcels shall
remain subject to the approved development plan and shall not be considered
as non-conforming lots or uses when developed under the approved plan. Any
subsequent redevelopment of the subdivided lots must be consistent with the
approved site plan and shall be considered as a modification to the approved
plan subject to the review and approval process of Chapter 150.14, unless
such modification is exempted as provided therein.



   (C)   When feasible multiple smaller lots (less than two acres) are
encouraged to be consolidated and redeveloped under a single plan in a manner
that is consistent with the standards of the OMG for multiple building
developments.



(Ord. 7-2006, passed 4-19-06)



§ 151.1507  SITE LAYOUT CRITERIA.



   The layout of principal buildings, accessory structures, and parking
areas along Montgomery Road and Main Street are a primary identifying feature
of the city. The Old Montgomery Gateway District is the entrance into an
existing urbanized area that features a strongly defined street wall which
creates an attractive pedestrian street environment. The street wall is
defined by buildings which are set close to the street. Creating a strongly
defined street wall in the Old Montgomery Gateway District will improve the
visual appearance and distinguish the city from the more suburban areas to
the south. Standards for single structure developments and multi-building
developments are presented as follows.



(Ord. 7-2006, passed 4-19-06)



§ 151.1508  BUILDING SETBACKS.



   The setbacks for buildings in the OMG shall be determined as follows:



   (A)   The use of a parking structure for setback purposes shall be
determined as follows: A parking structure shall be considered
non-residential unless residential and only residential uses are built above
the parking structure at the point of measure.



   (B)   Front Yard Setback.  Front yard setbacks in the OMG are
encouraged to create a street wall and buildings should be set a consistent
distance from the right-of-way. The following regulations apply to front yard
setbacks:



      (1)   The maximum front yard setback for buildings shall be
ten feet from the right-of-way.



      (2)   To meet the required minimum ten foot setback, a
building's facade must meet the site layout and building configuration
requirements of § 151.1509(A)(1).



      (3)   For panhandle lots see § 151.1509(C)(2).



      (4)   Exception for Upper Stories. The facades of buildings
above the required minimum height established in § 151.1513(A)(1) may be set
back farther than ten feet from the right-of- way.



      (5)   Exception for Multiple-Buildings. An adequate number of
buildings and front facades on each site must meet the maximum required
setback of ten feet from the right-of-way to create a consistent street wall
along the frontage of the site in conformance with § 151.1509.  However, if
the frontage of the site is designed with buildings at the setback line, the
Planning Commission may allow additional buildings on the site to exceed this
setback if they find that the development meets the other standards of this
chapter and accomplishes the purpose of this district.



   (C)   Side Yard Setbacks.  Side yard setbacks for development in
the OMG shall be determined as follows:



      (1)   Buildings shall be set back a minimum of five feet from
the side lot line when adjacent to any nonresidential use outside of the OMG.



      (2)   When adjacent to a residential use a building must be
setback a minimum of 15 feet or one-half the height of the building,
whichever is greater from the side lot line.



      (3)   Zero side lot line structures with a shared firewall may
be permitted in a development under initial, common ownership.



   (D)   Rear Yard Setbacks. Rear yard setbacks for development in the
OMG shall be determined as follows:



      (1)   Commercial structures shall be setback a minimum of 45
feet from the rear lot line when abutting a residential use outside of the
OMG District.



      (2)   Commercial structures shall be setback 15 feet from the
rear property line when abutting a lot within the OMG District or other
non-residential district or use.



      (3)   Residential structures shall be located no closer than
ten feet to the rear lot line when abutting a lot within the OMG District or
other non-residential district or use.  Residential structures shall be
setback ten feet or one-half the height of the building, whichever is
greater, from the rear lot line when abutting a residential use outside of
the OMG District.



(Ord. 6-2010, passed 7-7-10; Am. Ord. 16-2013, passed 11-6-13)



§ 151.1509  SITE LAYOUT AND BUILDING CONFIGURATION.



   (A)   General site layout. Along Montgomery Road and Main Street
frontages, the general site layout shall conform to the following standards.



      (1)   A minimum of 60% of a development's frontage on either
Montgomery Road or Main Street must be occupied by building frontage, and an
additional 10% may be occupied by building frontage or a wall as specified
below, which is located no further than ten feet from the front property
line. The building wall shall be an extension of the principal or accessory
building(s). The city may allow up to 50% of a building's surface to be set
back further than ten feet to create facade articulation or provide a plaza
or another useful outdoor pedestrian space along the frontage.



      (2)   On panhandle lots, the building may be set back more
than ten feet from the public right-of-way when the lot has less than 25 feet
of frontage along Montgomery Road or Main Street. The building must set back
a minimum of 20 feet from the rear property line of the parcel in front of
the panhandle lot.



      (3)   Walls shall be constructed of solid masonry and shall
have a height not less than three feet nor greater than eight feet, not
including ornamentation or other features.



      (4)   The remaining 30% of a development's frontage on either
Montgomery Road or Main Street may be used for necessary vehicle and
pedestrian access ways.



   (B)   Parking.  Parking lots or parking structures shall be
regulated as follows:



      (1)   Parking lots shall meet the setback standards as
established in § 151.1207.



      (2)   Parking structures shall not be located in the front
yard and shall meet the side and rear project boundary setbacks established
for buildings in § 151.1508.



      (3)   Parking lots and parking structures shall be buffered or
screened at a minimum as required, per § 151.3408.



   (C)   In multi-building developments, a parking lot may be located
between a rear building and a building fronting on Montgomery Road or Main
Street.



   (D)   Building coverage. Building coverage in the OMG shall be
regulated as follows:



      (1)   Single building developments. A single building fronting
on Montgomery Road or Main Street shall not have a footprint which exceeds
15,000 square feet.



      (2)   Panhandle lots. Any building on a panhandle lot with
less than 25 feet of frontage along Montgomery Road or Main Street shall be
treated as a rear building for coverage purposes.



      (3)   Multiple building development. When included in a
multiple-building development on a site in excess of two acres, a single
building may have a footprint in excess of 15,000 square feet if the city
finds that it meets the following regulations:



         (a)   Under no circumstances may a building's footprint
exceed 30,000 square feet;



         (b)   The building is part of a multiple-building
development;



         (c)   The structure is set back from Montgomery Road or
Main Street a minimum of 200 feet;



         (d)   Adequate parking for the building's use as
specified in § 151.3204 can be accommodated in whole or in part in on-site
structured parking, which is integrated into the development design;



         (e)   Off-street loading areas are provided for the
building in accordance with § 151.3211;



         (f)   The building and required parking are screened
from the public right-of-way by smaller buildings that address the street and
meet the minimum ten-foot setback and the standards of § 151.1508;



         (g)   The loading, parking, and trash dumpsters are
adequately screened from adjacent residential uses; and



         (h)   The building meets all other building design
standards as specified by this chapter.



   (E)   Loading and service areas. Loading and service areas shall be
located and designed in such a way as to minimize visual and noise impact on
adjacent residential uses. The use of solid walls and buffer landscaping are
encouraged to reduce the visual and noise impact of loading and service areas
from adjacent rights-of-way and residential areas.



(Ord. 7-2006, passed 4-19-06; Am. Ord. 16-2013, passed 11-6-13)



§ 151.1510  PEDESTRIAN AND VEHICULAR ACCESS AND CIRCULATION.



   Safe, efficient, and convenient circulation and access to and between
developments should be provided for both pedestrians and vehicular traffic.
By creating a safe continuous network of pedestrian walkways within the Old
Montgomery Gateway District development and adjacent Heritage District
development, pedestrians will feel more inclined to safely walk, rather than
drive, between stores. A pedestrian network that offers clear circulation
paths from the parking areas to building entries creates a friendlier, more
inviting image.



   (A)   Pedestrian access and circulation. Pedestrian facilities shall
be designed to meet the following standards:



      (1)   Sites that are more than two acres shall emphasize
pedestrian orientation by creating attractive pedestrian spaces that are
landscaped and include other appropriate elements to facilitate pedestrian
activity. Efforts should be made to incorporate public open spaces into the
design of the development.



      (2)   All commercial developments shall provide attractive,
well-marked pedestrian links between parking and buildings. The connections
shall be clearly marked to provide safe access across traffic lanes and
landscaped areas. Such walkways shall utilize decorative paving at key
locations.



      (3)   All commercial buildings shall be public accessible via
a path or walkway from a public sidewalk.



      (4)   Any sidewalk or walkway shall be designed to connect to
adjacent walkways of either existing or future development.



      (5)   All redevelopment along Montgomery Road and Main Street
in the OMG must comply with the streetscaping master plan for the Heritage
District. New public walkways, connecting sidewalks and new rights-of-way
should incorporate the standards from the Heritage District Streetscaping
Master Plan.



      (6)   Parking area design shall include provisions for
pedestrian access from parking areas to building entrances.



   (B)   Vehicular access and circulation. Vehicular access and
circulation shall be designed to meet the following standards:



      (1)   Primary vehicle entrances. The number and location of
vehicle entrances to a commercial development shall be consistent with the
City Access Management Standards, Chapter 94.18. The specific locations of
primary vehicle entrances are subject to review by the City Engineer and the
approval of the Planning Commission and will be based on the following
factors to promote good traffic management practices:



         (a)   A site shall not be separated into additional
tracts or plats to artificially allow additional access points.



         (b)   The development shall minimize the number of curb
cuts with shared access being preferred.



         (c)   Provide adequate improvements to the right-of-way
to handle increases in traffic generated by the development. These
improvements may include but are not limited to, turn lanes and traffic
control devices.



         (d)   Where possible, access points should align with
previously approved or constructed access points on the opposite side of the
street to reduce conflict points.



      (2)   Internal vehicle circulation. Safe and efficient
internal circulation shall be provided. Where possible, internal vehicle
circulation should be designed as follows:



         (a)   Streets internal to the development should be
designed with a hierarchy of circulation: major access drives from Montgomery
Road and/or Main Street shall have no parking for a distance of 150 feet from
Montgomery Road and/or Main Street, while on-street parking shall be
encouraged on secondary streets which connect to major access drives.



         (b)   Main drive aisles should be continuous and connect
to the main entrance to the development site.



         (c)   Internal driveways or parking aisles should
intersect at angles of between 80 and 100 degrees, with 90 degrees being
preferred.



         (d)   Internal driveways or aisles that are intersected
by crossing traffic should either have their centerlines aligned or be offset
by at least 60 feet.



      (3)   On-site truck traffic/loading and  circulation. Every
development is required to provide on site loading and delivery facilities
separate from customer parking and pedestrian areas.



         (a)   Truck circulation paths shall be designed with
adequate curve radii and maneuvering room.



         (b)   Loading and service areas shall be located in such
a way that trucks accessing the site should not need to back into the site
from a public right-of-way, nor back out of the site onto the public
right-of-way.



         (c)   Loading areas must be large enough that trucks do
not partially or fully obstruct traffic flow on Montgomery Road, Main Street
or side streets during loading activities.



      (4)   Connections to adjacent non-residential uses. To the
maximum extent feasible, vehicular and access connections shall be provided
between adjacent nonresidential development parcels.



(Ord. 7-2006, passed 4-19-06; Am. Ord. 16-2013, passed 11-6-13)



§ 151.1511  PARKING.



   Parking in an urban setting is often difficult and in order to promote
an urban setting, surface parking and structured parking shall be designed in
a way to reduce its visual impact from Montgomery Road and Main Street.



   (A)   Multi-building developments. To promote an urban density,
parking should be provided as follows in multi-building developments:



      (1)   Structured parking is encouraged for 50% of the required
parking on sites with multi-building developments.



      (2)   The city may, at its discretion, permit a reduction in
the number of off-street parking spaces required for a development to as much
as 50% of the required spaces per § 151.3204.



   (B)   Surface parking. Surface parking lots shall be designed in
accordance with Chapter 151.32, Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations.



      (1)   Surface parking shall be limited to no more than 35% of
the site area.  Parking on public streets shall not be included in the 35%
surface parking limitation.



      (2)   Adequate screening and interior landscaping shall be
provided for surface-parking as specified in § 151.3408, Screening and
Landscaping of Parking Lots.



   (C)   Parking structures. Parking structures should be encouraged to
be located in the interior of the site to reduce the visual impact from
Montgomery Road and Main Street. Structured parking is prohibited along
Montgomery Road or Main Street.



(Ord. 7-2006, passed 4-19-06; Am. Ord. 16-2013, passed 11-6-13)



§ 151.1512  BUILDING DESIGN.



   The architecture and general design of the buildings in the Old
Montgomery Gateway District will be the strongest feature in creating an
image for the gateway into the city. Building design for the gateway should
be of a high quality with attention to the creation of a human scale
environment that ties into the historic architectural character of the
Heritage District.



(Ord. 7-2006, passed 4-19-06)



§ 151.1513  SCALE AND MASSING.



   (A)   The relationship of a building's height to its apparent width
is a major contributing factor to the overall character of the Old Montgomery
Gateway District. Buildings in the Old Montgomery Gateway District should
respect the historic architectural character of the adjacent Heritage
District in scale and massing. The following standards shall apply to all
buildings in the Old Montgomery Gateway District.



   (B)   Building height. The height of all buildings in the Old
Montgomery Gateway District shall meet the following standards:



      (1)   The minimum building height for all buildings shall be
two stories for the front facade along Montgomery Road and Main Street or on
any interior street (existing or proposed). All other buildings shall have
the appearance of a minimum of two stories.



      (2)   The maximum height of primary facades shall not exceed
45 feet as measured from the grade line to the gutter on buildings fronting
on Montgomery Road and Main Street.



      (3)   Additional stories or height are permissible for the
rear or side facades or buildings not directly facing onto Montgomery Road
and Main Street when lower grade lines allow.



      (4)   A building's vertical and horizontal dimensions shall be
in proportion to one another without over-emphasis of either dimension.
Horizontally long buildings shall be visually broken up through the use of
recesses or setback variations, to cause the facade to appear as a series of
proportionally correct masses.  The building's articulation should help
establish a human scale and provide visual rhythms and interest.



(Ord. 7-2006, passed 4-19-06)



§ 151.1514  ARCHITECTURAL DETAILS.



   To create a more interesting and inviting environment all buildings
shall include architectural details, including but not limited to cornices,
and window and door trim. Buildings shall be designed with a distinct
architectural style that respects the historic character of the Heritage
District but adequately accommodates the intended modern uses. When authentic
architectural details such as windows and doors are not feasible, simulated
openings may be approved.



   (A)   Roof type. The roof types of buildings in the OMG shall be
designed in conformance with the following regulations:



      (1)   For approximately every front 25 feet of building facade
a variation of roof type is encouraged to reduce visual monotony and assist
in development of a human scale environment.



      (2)   Gabled roofs are encouraged; however, other roof types
may be approved by the Planning Commission on a case-by-case basis.



      (3)   When gabled roofs are used, the design of the roof pitch
may vary, but should not be less than one-quarter of the building height as
measured from the grade line to the gutter.



      (4)   The appearance of flat roofs is prohibited. The use of
decorative cornices and parapet roof lines are encouraged to reduce the
appearance of a flat roof and screen rooftop equipment.



   (B)   Building entrances. The building entrances in the OMG shall be
designed in conformance with the following regulations:



      (1)   When a commercial building has frontage on Montgomery
Road or Main Street, the building entrances should be encouraged to face onto
Montgomery Road or Main Street when feasible.



      (2)   When a residential building has frontage on Montgomery
Road or Main Street, the first floor entrances should be located facing onto
Montgomery Road or Main Street when feasible. Access to upper stories from
Main Street and Montgomery Roads is strongly encouraged.



      (3)   When a new road is proposed for interior circulation and
meets the streetscaping requirements as detailed in the city's streetscaping
plan, buildings may be oriented to face onto these streets and the entrance
may also be oriented to these streets.



      (4)   In all cases the main entrance of the building shall be
easily identifiable, and should provide an introductory statement for a
building using architectural articulation or landscaping or a combination of
both.



      (5)   Entrances should be designed to allow individual
business to present a clear image without compromising the sense of unity of
the facade or development.



   (C)   Windows. Windows in the OMG District shall be designed in
conformance with the following regulations:



      (1)   The shape and configuration of windows for buildings in
the Old Montgomery Gateway District should maintain a consistent rhythm and
pattern throughout the development.



      (2)   A window's proportions should generally be vertical with
the height being approximately two times the width of the window, however,
display windows in commercial structures may be larger than those typical in
a residential structure and do not need to have this exact proportion.



      (3)   Generally, windows should be subdivided and separated by
mullions. Large expanses of glass should be used in limited amounts as
storefront display windows, and should relate to the architectural style of
the buildings. Large undivided display windows or plate glass windows are
appropriate only on the ground floor for display purposes.



      (4)   Window and door openings on the ground floor of a
commercial building should occupy no less than 50% of the building's facade
length on any facade facing Montgomery Road or another public street. Upper
story window and door openings should be proportioned to the first floor as
in division (C)(5) of this section.



      (5)   Windows in all structures shall exhibit symmetry and
proportion to the building. To ensure that the windows on the first floor
relate properly to windows on the upper floors, the length of a hypothetical
rectangle that encompasses all first story windows and doors must be the same
length as that of a rectangle that encompasses all second story windows.



      (6)   Windows should be detailed with architectural elements
such as projecting sills, molded surrounds and/or lintels. Windows shall be
constructed of clear glazing and tinted glazing shall not be used.



      (7)   Vinyl or vinyl clad windows are prohibited.



(Ord. 7-2006, passed 4-19-06; Am. Ord. 16-2013, passed 11-6-13)



§ 151.1515  EXTERIOR CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS.



   The character of the Old Montgomery Gateway District is enhanced by the
use of quality building materials that reflect the desired image of the City
of Montgomery. The following standards apply to the exterior of all buildings
in the Old Montgomery Gateway District.



   (A)   Permitted materials. The use of exterior building and
finishing materials in the OMG shall be in conformance with the following
regulations:



      (1)   Primary materials.



         (a)   Buildings in the Gateway shall have a primary
exterior covering of brick, stone, natural wood clapboard, wood board and
batten, wood shingles or modern manufactured materials that create the
appearance of the materials listed above except as prohibited herein.



         (b)   The color of brick is encouraged to be in the
red-orange range. The color should be uniform rather than being mottled or
speckled.



      (2)   Accent materials. Buildings in the OMG may incorporate
any of the above permitted primary materials as an accent. Exterior insulated
finish systems, and decorative concert masonry units may be used on a
building in the gateway as an accent that comprises no more than 15% per side
of the building's exterior wall surface.



      (3)   Other materials that are not listed as prohibited may be
approved by the Landmarks Commission on a case-by-case basis as a primary or
accent building material.



   (B)   Prohibited materials. Exterior covering materials that are
prohibited include vinyl, aluminum, or steel siding, standard concrete
masonry units, or tilt-up concrete.



(Ord. 7-2006, passed 4-19-06; Am. Ord. 16-2013, passed 11-6-13)



§ 151.1516  COLORS.



   (A)   Permitted colors. The base colors used on buildings in the Old
Montgomery Gateway District should be the natural color of the material in
the case of brick or stone or of a neutral muted palette. Brighter, more
vivid colors should be reserved for limited use as trim or accent. Permitted
colors may be further regulated as established in § 151.1523(A).



   (B)   Prohibited colors. No fluorescent, reflective, metallic or
neon colors shall be used in the construction of a building in the Old
Montgomery Gateway District.



(Ord. 7-2006, passed 4-19-06)



§ 151.1517  VARIATION OF MATERIALS AND COLORS ON FACADES.



   Variation of materials and colors on facades is permissible, provided
the variation enhances the human scale of the buildings, and is used to
define specific elements of the building. General guidelines for variations
in materials are:



   (A)   A maximum of three colors, excluding the natural color of
brick or stone, may be used on a single structure, except in the case where
the building's facade is designed to appear as more than one building. In
such case, each element may use a combination of colors as approved by the
Landmarks Commission, but the overall color scheme of the building should be
coordinated.



   (B)   Changes in materials should occur at inside corners of
buildings or transition with an appropriate trim detail. Material changes at
outside corners or in the middle of a wall give an impression of thinness and
artificiality which should be avoided.



   (C)   The use of a coordinating trim material is encouraged on all
facades of a building, and should be used to break larger wall plans into
smaller, more human-scale elements.



   (D)   The number of materials on the exterior of a building should
be limited to a few complementary materials.



   (E)   A palette of proposed materials and colors should be submitted
by the applicant for approval by the Landmarks Commission.



(Ord. 7-2006, passed 4-19-06; Am. Ord. 16-2013, passed 11-6-13)



§ 151.1518  SIGNAGE.



   (A)   Signage shall comply with the standards of Chapter 151.30,
Sign Regulations.



   (B)   Signs should respect the overall architectural composition of
the building and its scale while not overwhelming the facade.



   (C)   Sign colors shall relate to the style and period of the
building and to the traditional character of the Heritage District.  In
general sign colors shall be muted rather than vivid.  Paint shall be flat,
satin or semi-gloss.



   (D)   Corporate identity colors or logos may be permitted and shall
be used with restraint.



   (E)   Sign materials may be wood, composite wood, metal or high
density urethane (HDU) with painted or vinyl letters.  Other materials may
be permitted, if appropriate.



   (F)   Wall signs should be affixed on a continuous, flat, vertical,
opaque surface and cannot project more than six inches from the building
surface.  Signs may not cover architectural features.



   (G)   Wall signs should have a simple design and shall not have more
than three lines of letters.



   (H)   Signs shall only be illuminated by an exterior lighting
source.  Internally illuminated, back-lit neon signage is prohibited, with
the exception of internally illuminated "Open" signs in the window, not to
exceed three square feet in size.



   (I)   Wall signs should not extend higher than the bottom sill of
the second story window, or above the lowest point of the roof, or over 25
feet above grade (whichever is lower).  They must be at least six inches
from the lintel or other trim of the window above or below it.



   (J)   Window signs may only be applied directly to the inside
surface of the window glass.  The letters should be four inches or less and
symbols cannot be larger than eight inches.



(Ord. 7-2006, passed 4-19-06; Am. Ord. 16-2013, passed 11-6-13)



§ 151.1519  LIGHTING.



   (A)   Lighting shall be appropriate to the district in type, design,
location and quantity.



   (B)   Lighting shall be used in a limited manner, and only to
highlight architectural details on a building, illuminate a sign, or to
illuminate walkways and/or parking areas.



   (C)   Lighting used to illuminate parking areas shall meet the
standards established in § 151.3212, Lighting.



(Ord. 7-2006, passed 4-19-06)



§ 151.1520  LANDSCAPING.



   (A)   Landscaping and screening shall be provided as specified in
Chapter 151.34, Landscaping and Screening Regulations.



   (B)   Any principal access or new roads constructed in a development
shall comply with the specifications for streetscaping, tree planting and
pedestrian elements as established in the city's streetscaping plan.



(Ord. 7-2006, passed 4-19-06)



§ 151.1521  PUBLIC FACILITIES.



   Adequate public facilities must be available to support the proposed
development.



(Ord. 7-2006, passed 4-19-06)



§ 151.1522  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ARCHITECTURAL STYLE.  The characteristic form and detail of buildings
in a particular period.



   ARTICULATION (ARCHITECTURAL). The variation in a building's surfaces
which identify or divide the building into distinct and significant parts.



   BUILDING FRONTAGE. The portion of a building's exterior wall which is
parallel to the development frontage, and the public street right-of-way or
easement.



   CORNICE. Any horizontal member, structural or nonstructural, projecting
outward from the exterior walls at the roofline, including eaves and other
roof overhang or any molded projection which finishes or crowns the part to
which it is attached.



   DEVELOPMENT FRONTAGE. The portion of the development site which abuts a
dedicated public street right-of-way or easement.



   FACADE. The exterior walls or surfaces except the roof of a building
exposed to public view.



   GRADE. The elevation of the sidewalk when present, or street elevation
of Montgomery Road at the center of the building.



   HUMAN SCALE. The proportional relationship of a particular building,
structure, open space enclosure, or streetscape element to the human form and
function.



   STREET WALL. The portion of a building wall facing the street or
landscaping which creates a wall to the street, as a wall to a room.



(Ord. 7-2006, passed 4-19-06)



§ 151.1523  REVIEW PROCEDURE.



   (A)   The Zoning Administrator, subject to approval by the Landmarks
Commission, may adopt certain rules and regulations setting forth the palette
of colors, roof materials, building materials, and other construction
materials acceptable in the Old Montgomery Gateway District for the
enforcement of this chapter.



   (B)   All new and redevelopment projects in the Old Montgomery
Gateway District shall be subject to the development plan review procedures
set forth in Chapter 150.14.



   (C)   Applications for exterior changes to property in the Old
Montgomery Gateway District that is neither a listed landmark nor subject to
development plan review shall comply with the procedures set forth in §
150.1207.



(Ord. 7-2006, passed 4-19-06)



CHAPTER 151.16:
HOSPITAL CORRIDOR OVERLAY DISTRICT REGULATIONS (HOS)



Section



   151.1601   Purpose



   151.1602   Applicability of District



   151.1603   Definitions



   151.1604   Parking and loading facilities



   151.1605   Internal pedestrian and automobile connections



   151.1606   Articulation and massing



   151.1607   Building materials and colors



   151.1608   Window regulations



   151.1609   Rooftop screening and utility housings



§ 151.1601  PURPOSE.



   The Hospital Corridor District Regulations (HOS) are established in
order to impose specific design criteria for both rehabilitation and new
construction projects along the northern portion of the Montgomery Road
corridor in the vicinity of Bethesda North Hospital.  The overlay
regulations address all properties fronting on Montgomery Road with the
exception of existing residential properties. The district's south boundary
is the north side of Pfeiffer Road at the intersection with Montgomery Road.
The boundary to the north is at the city corporation line near the
intersection of Montgomery Road and Weller Road.  Therefore the purposes of
this chapter are to:



   (A)   Guide development and redevelopment within the Hospital
Corridor Overlay District to protect and enhance the city's image.



   (B)   Ensure that new development and redevelopment is respectful of
the surrounding residential areas.



   (C)   Ensure that new development and redevelopment is consistent
with the desired character of the city.



   (D)   Create aesthetically cohesive development along the Montgomery
Road corridor.



   (E)   Provide the basis for consistency and objective decision
making by providing criteria to be used by the Zoning Administrator, Planning
Commission, and City Council when evaluating proposed development.



(Ord. 3-2010, passed 4-7-10)



§ 151.1602  APPLICABILITY OF DISTRICT.



   All properties designated HOS - Hospital Corridor Overlay District on
the official zoning map of the City of Montgomery and the inset (see Chapter
151.16) shall be subject to the regulations of this chapter.  Current
residential uses will become a part of the district when the property is
redeveloped to a non-residential use.  The underlying regulations applicable
to these properties are set forth in Chapter 151.12 and specifically §
151.1215, but these regulations are intended to supplement such
regulations.  As a result, the regulations stated in this chapter shall
apply to the properties in addition to the underlying zoning district
regulations. Where the standards are in discrepancy, the more stringent shall
apply.



   (A)   Review Procedure.



      (1)   The Zoning Administrator, subject to approval by the
Planning Commission, shall adopt certain rules and regulations setting forth
the pallet of colors, roof materials, building materials, and other
construction materials acceptable in the Hospital Corridor District for the
enforcement of this Code.



   (B)   Compliance.



      (1)   All new construction on a lot in the Hospital Corridor
District where the existing principal building is completely removed and a
new building is proposed shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter
and the development plan review procedures set forth in Chapter 150.14,
unless exempt by § 150.1207.



      (2)   Additions to the principal structure which result in an
increase in the total exterior wall area of 25% or more shall be subject to
the provisions of this chapter with the exception of §§ 151.1604 and
151.1605; and the development plan review procedures set forth in Chapter
150.14, unless exempt by § 150.1207.



      (3)   Renovation to existing  facades where the renovation
only involves the total replacement of an existing façade material need not
comply with the provisions of §§ 151.1604, 151.1605, 151.1606 and 151.1608,
but must use approved colors and materials. 



      (4)   Maintenance, or minor alterations to existing structures
shall be exempt from development plan review and these standards.



      (5)   No conforming structures as of the adoption of these
standards shall be modified or altered in a manner which makes them
noncompliant with these standards.



      (6)   Site modifications, parking, and modifications to
mechanical equipment shall meet the standards related to those features to
the maximum extent feasible.  Modifications to the site will not require 
modifications to the building.



      (7)   Applications for exterior changes to property in the
Hospital Corridor Overlay District that is not subject to a development plan
review shall comply with the procedures set forth in § 150.1207.



(Ord. 3-2010, passed 4-7-10)



§ 151.1603  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:



   BULKHEAD.   The part of the façade that forms a base for one or more
windows on the ground floor, typically in traditional store fronts. See
Figure 1.







Figure 1



   CLERESTORY.   An upper story row of windows, or windows so placed.
Often applied when there is not an actual interior corresponding floor. See
Figure 2.







Figure 2



   CUPOLA.   A domed or hipped roof cap, usually topping a roof or turret.



   FENESTRATION.   Window and other openings in a building's façade.



   GLAZING.   Fitted or covered with glass.



   KICK PLATE.   A hard plate or veneer fitted to the lower portions of a
building including the lower rail of a door, bulkhead, or risers of a step to
prevent damage from moderate impact. Also referred to as a "toe kick".



   MULLIONS.   A vertical member separating (and often supporting)
windows, doors, or panels set in series. See Figure 3.



   MUNTIN.   A secondary framing member to hold panes within a window,
window wall, or glazed door. See Figure 3.







Figure 3



Source: www.axiominspection.com



   QUOINING.   Dressed stones or bricks at the corners of buildings, laid
so that their faces are alternately large and small. Originally used to add
strength to the masonry wall, they are now used for more decorative
purposes.  See Figure 4.







Figure 4



   SPANDREL. A wall panel filling the space between the top of a lower
story window and the sill of an upper story window. Often with ornamentation
or as a place for signage.



   SPANDREL GLASS.   Heat-strengthened flat glass with a colored ceramic
coating adhered to the back by a heat fusion process. It has double the
strength of annealed glass of the same size and thickness, enabling it to
withstand greater uniform loads and thermal stresses. Spandrel glass cannot
be re-cut after heat strengthening. It is used as fixed opaque colored glass
on buildings in front of floor slabs and columns. It is available in a wide
array of colors.



   VISIBLE.   Capable of being seen or exposed to view from a public
place or residential property.



   VISIBLE TRANSMITTENCE (VT).   An optical property that indicates the
amount of visible light transmitted. The higher the VT the more light is
transmitted.



   WATER TABLE.   A horizontal projecting string course, molding, or
ledge placed so as to divert rainwater from a building's foundation. In
traditional buildings, this element is often placed at or directly above the
sill between the foundation and the base of the structural wall.



   WIDOW'S WALK.   A walkway or narrow platform on roof. Also referred to
as a "captain's walk."



(Ord. 3-2010, passed 4-7-10)



§ 151.1604  PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES.



   (A)   Parking shall be located to the side or rear of buildings
relating to the Montgomery Road frontage when it can be effectively screened
from adjacent residential uses through the use of walls and/or landscaping.



   (B)   If a site is too narrow to effectively provide parking to the
side of the building, the required parking spaces can be provided between the
street and the building, but shall be screened from public view by berms or
landscaping and meet the setback requirements stated in § 151.1207.



   (C)   The visual and environmental impact of loading areas and
off-street parking should be reduced through their location on the site,
their design and configuration, inclusion of landscaping, and minimization of
impervious surfaces.



(Ord. 3-2010, passed 4-7-10)



§ 151.1605  INTERNAL PEDESTRIAN AND AUTOMOBILE CONNECTIONS.



   (A)   Pedestrian Connections.



      (1)   Attractive, well marked pedestrian connections shall be
provided between parking areas and the entrances to buildings.



      (2)   Pedestrian connections from public sidewalks to building
entrances should be provided along private access drives.



      (3)   Pedestrian connections between adjacent commercial and
office developments/ buildings are encouraged. See Figure 5.







Figure 5



   (B)   Pedestrian Safety.



      (1)   When feasible, pedestrian connections or paths shall be
incorporated to reduce the conflict between pedestrian and vehicular traffic.



      (2)   Pedestrian connections and paths shall be clearly
identified through the use of alternate paving materials, colors, pavement
markings or textures at key locations where they cross vehicular circulation
patterns at grade.



      (3)   Materials used in the development of pedestrian
connections shall be level and slip resistant to reduce the potential for
tripping hazards and promote access for all users.



(Ord. 3-2010, passed 4-7-10)



§ 151.1606  ARTICULATION AND MASSING.



   (A)   A single, large, dominant building mass shall be avoided.



   (B)   Facades shall incorporate variation through the use of
recesses, projections, windows, columns, horizontal and vertical offsets,
awnings, canopies, and similar features.



   (C)   A building's vertical and horizontal dimensions should be
related to each other through the use of bays or articulation that visually
separate the building planes into components with proportions that emphasize
neither the vertical nor horizontal dimension beyond a 2:3 ratio.  Buildings
with larger footprints should have the façade subdivided into components to
provide variation and a hierarchy of components.  See Figure 6.



NO







YES



Figure 6



   (D)   Building shall have a clearly defined base, middle, and top.
See Figure 7.



      (1)   A recognizable base may consist of, but is not limited
to: thicker walls, ledges, or sills; integrally textured materials such as
stone or masonry; integrally colored and patterned materials such as
smooth-finished stone or tiles; lighter- or darker-colored materials
different from the body of the building; mullions; or panels. The use of
bulkheads and water table trims are strongly encouraged.



      (2)   A recognizable top may consist of, but is not limited
to: dimensional cornice treatments other than just colored stripes or bands,
variation in masonry pattern or material or differently colored materials;
sloping roof with overhangs and brackets; stepped parapets; or aligned
openings and articulations.



   (E)   Primary facades which have total building heights over 15 feet
which have only one floor level shall be vertically articulated to present
the appearance of a clerestory, half-story, or multiple full stories through
one of the following methods:



      (1)   Exterior demarcation of the change in floors such as a
soldier course, belt course, change in material, or masonry patterns every 12
feet, or portion thereof, of vertical height.



      (2)   Vertical recess of wall plane to a depth of at least 3%
of the building's depth, indicating the presence of a wall change.







   (F)   Building Entrances.



      (1)   Canopies, awnings, porticos, atriums, or similar
features may be used to demarcate primary entrances to buildings.



      (2)   Entry features should not exceed the average building
height by more than 10%.



      (3)   Entry features should not occupy more than 40% of the
horizontal façade length.



      (4)   Building entrances may be set back or project to add
emphasis to the entrance.



      (5)   Building entrances should coordinate with the scale,
mass, and style of the building.



(Ord. 3-2010, passed 4-7-10)



§ 151.1607  BUILDING MATERIALS AND COLORS.



   (A)   Permitted Materials.



      (1)   Primary Materials.  A minimum of 50% of each visible
façade surface shall be finished in brick, stone, natural wood clapboard,
wood board and batten, or wood shingles. Modern manufactured materials that
create the appearance of these materials such as Hardiplank™, architectural
panels, or cast stone may be considered appropriate.  Glass cladding must be
installed at least 18 inches from the ground. (See § 151.1608 for additional
regulations on glazing.)



         (a)   Atriums, entryways or additions which extend from
the main foot print and do not exceed 10% of the total floor area of a
building or are designed to be used as a conservatory, or entry feature may
be exempt from the primary materials standards and be almost entirely glazed
provided glazing is installed at least 18 inches from the ground.



      (2)   Accent Materials.  No more than 30% of each visible
façade may be clad in the following materials: copper, terra cotta, or
decorative concrete masonry units, stucco, and EIFS (exterior insulated
finish systems), decorative precast panels and non-reflective architectural
metal panels



      (3)   Other Materials.  Other materials not listed as
prohibited may be considered by the Planning Commission on a case-by-case
basis as a primary or accent building material. The use of energy producing
elements, advanced roofing features, and other energy efficient features is
encouraged.



      (4)   Visible roofing materials shall be appropriate for the
architectural style of the structure.  Dimensional asphalt shingles, slate,
synthetic slate, and tile are permitted materials.



   (B)   Prohibited Materials.



      (1)   Exterior covering materials that are prohibited include
vinyl, aluminum siding, standard concrete masonry units (cinder block),
tilt-up concrete, corrugated steel, and highly reflective materials such as
mirrored glass or chrome. 



   (C)   Permitted Colors.



      (1)   The base colors used on buildings in the HOS District
should be of the natural color of the material in the case of brick or stone,
or of a muted pallet. Brighter more vivid colors should be reserved for
limited use as a trim or accent.



         (a)   Any proposed color or materials scheme not
consistent with these guidelines, including but not limited to those with
trademarked or brand affiliated colors, must be approved by the Planning
Commission.



         (b)   Exemption for signs.  The permitted colors do not
apply to signage as regulated by Chapter 151.30.



   (D)   Prohibited Colors.



      (1)   No fluorescent, neon, or reflective colors shall be used
in the construction of a new building or renovation of an existing building
within the corridor.



         (a)   Exemption for signs.  The prohibited colors shall
not apply to signage as regulated by Chapter 151.30.



   (E)   Color and Material Variation.



      (1)   A maximum of four different materials or colors shall be
used on a single structure, except in the case where the building's façade
is designed to appear as more than one building. In such case, each element
may use a maximum of four colors and or materials, but the overall color
scheme of the building should be coordinated.



      (2)   Transition of Materials.



         (a)   When a transition from one material to another is
made on the same façade, it shall be completed either with appropriate trim
or as an accent with variation such as quoining or reveals based on the
material thickness.



         (b)   When a transition in materials is made from one
façade to another, the transition of materials shall be made at an inside
corner. 



(Ord. 3-2010, passed 4-7-10)



§ 151.1608  WINDOW REGULATIONS.



   Fenestration and window openings in a façade assist with the
articulation of a building and improve the overall visual appearance.



   (A)   Window Scale and Proportions.



      (1)   Windows should be between 25% and 50% of the floor
height as measured from floor to ceiling.  It should be designed for an
organized exterior appearance and the intended use of the building .



      (2)   Horizontally proportioned windows are encouraged to be
divided into vertically proportioned components either through multi-part
windows or other divided lights. See Figure 8.







Figure 8



      (3)   Windows shall not be installed to run from grade. A
bulkhead constructed of brick, stone, wood, or fiber cement siding with a
minimum of 18 inches shall stand between the sill of the window and grade.
This area should be finished to enhance the architecture of the building.
Inclusion of a water table, knee wall, or kick plate is required to
articulate the base of the façade.



         (a)   A maximum of 50% of a façade area shall consist
of glazing. Atriums, entryways or additions which extend from the main foot
print and do not exceed 10% of the total floor area of a building or are
designed to be used as a conservatory, or entry feature may be exempted from
the glazing standards and be almost entirely glazed provided glazing is
installed at least 18 inches from the ground.



      (4)   Windows should be modulated and separated by mullions or
muntins finished in permitted materials. Fully glazed facades shall not be
permitted.



      (5)   Multi-story windows may be reviewed and approved by the
city on a case-by-case basis. 



   (B)   Fenestration Patterns and Rhythm.



      (1)   Generally window openings or groups of windows should be
equidistant from one to another to create a regular pattern.



         (a)   A horizontal distance of more than one and
one-half times the width of the windows or a group of windows should be
avoided unless other elements of the façade's detailing or building
articulation help continue an established pattern.



      (2)   When a genuine window opening is not feasible, variation
in the façade pattern or the use of "blanks" on mortar buildings and
shuttered windows on non-mortar buildings may be considered.



      (3)   Windows on upper stories should generally be vertically
aligned with lower story windows or off-set in a manner that creates an
intentional pattern.



         (a)   If the distance between the lintel of the first
floor and the second floor windows is greater than two times the height of
the upper story window, spandrel panels shall be used. See Figure 9.







Figure 9



      (4)   Windows used to establish a fenestration pattern should
generally be of the same size; however, smaller or larger windows may be
employed to create variation and interest.



   (C)   Glazing.



      (1)   Fully opaque glazing or mirrored glazing is prohibited
for required window openings.  The Planning Commission may approve fully
opaque glazing on the first floor of medical office buildings.



      (2)   Spandrel or other opaque glass may be appropriate in
limited applications as an accent, where genuine window openings are not
feasible due to internal layout, but not as a replacement for the required
windows.



   (D)   Blanks.



      (1)   Blanks or bricked in openings may be used in locations
where genuine window openings are not feasible due to internal layout, to
continue an established window pattern. See Figure 10.







Figure 10



(Ord. 3-2010, passed 4-7-10)



§ 151.1609  ROOFTOP SCREENING AND UTILITY HOUSINGS.



   Rooftop equipment shall be located in a manner so that it shall be
screened from public view and adjacent residential properties.  Equipment
screening must be provided so that rooftop equipment should be minimally
visible from public rights-of-way or adjacent residential properties when
viewed from an average second story window at a height of 18 feet above the
grade at the property line, at a point 35 feet from the property line of the
residential property.  See Figure 11.







Figure 11



   (A)   Use of parapet walls and the placement of equipment shall be
coordinated with the specified site lines identified above.



   (B)   All utility housings, junctions, and other exterior duct work
or conduits shall be painted and/or permanently colored to match the basic
building material color on which it is located; or successfully integrated
with other trim or detailing in a manner that enhances the architectural
style of the structure. See Figure 12.







Figure 12



   (C)   Flat roofs with parapets and decorative cornices are
appropriate on buildings with at least two stories with finished wall heights
of more than 20 feet.



   (D)   Creative treatments of traditional roof elements such as
dormers, cupolas, or widow's walks to screen rooftop equipment from view from
the primary road and/or adjacent residential uses are encouraged.



   (E)   Roof-mounted mechanical or utility equipment should be
screened in a manner that is architecturally integrated with the structure
through the use of materials, color, shape, and size.



      (1)   The screening materials should be solid building
elements such as parapet walls, cupolas, or dormers, etc., rather than add-on
screening materials wherever possible.



(Ord. 3-2010, passed 4-7-10)



CHAPTER 151.18:  SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES



Section



   151.181   Definitions



   151.182   Zoning regulations



   151.183   License required



   151.184   Application for license



   151.185   Issuance of a license



   151.186   Employee license application



   151.187   Issuance of sexually oriented business employee license



   151.188   Expiration and renewal of license



   151.189   Suspension



   151.1810   Revocation



   151.1811   Appeal rights



   151.1812   Transfer of license



   151.1813   Additional regulations concerning the operation of a
sexually oriented business



Editor’s note:



   For purpose and intent of these regulations, see Section 1 of Ordinance
2-2017



§ 151.181  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply,
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   (A)   (1) “ADULT BOOKSTORE,” “ADULT CABARET,” “ADULT
MOTION PICTURE THEATER,” “ADULT VIDEO STORE,” “CHARACTERIZED BY,”
“NUDE,” “NUDITY,” “STATE OF NUDITY,” “SEMINUDE,” “STATE OF
SEMINUDITY,” “SEXUAL DEVICE,” “SEXUAL DEVICE SHOP,” “SEXUAL
ENCOUNTER CENTER,” “SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS,” AND “SPECIFIED
SEXUAL ACTIVITY” have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2907.40; and



      (2)   “ADULT ARCADE,” “ADULT ENTERTAINMENT,” “ADULT
ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT,” “ADULT NOVELTY STORE,” “ADULT
THEATER,” “DISTINGUISHED OR CHARACTERIZED BY THEIR EMPHASIS UPON,”
“NUDE OR SEMINUDE MODEL STUDIO,” “REGULARLY FEATURES,” “REGULARLY
SHOWN,” AND “SEXUAL ENCOUNTER ESTABLISHMENT” have the same meanings as
in R.C. § 2907.39.



   (B)   “EMPLOYEE” means any individual on a full-time, part-time,
or contract basis, regardless of whether the individual is denominated an
employee, independent contractor, agent, or otherwise, but does not include
an individual exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the
premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises.



   (C)   “IMMEDIATE FAMILY” means a person’s spouse residing in
the person’s household, parents, siblings of the whole or of the half
blood, and children, including adopted children.



   (D)   “LICENSE” means a license to act or operate a sexually
oriented business, issued pursuant to this chapter.



   (E)   “LICENSEE” means a person in whose name a license to
operate has been issued, as well as the individual(s) designated on the
license application as principally responsible for the operation of the
sexually oriented business. With respect to an employee license issued under
this chapter, LICENSEE means an employee as defined by division  (B) above
in whose name a license has been issued authorizing employment at sexually
oriented business.



   (F)   “OPERATE” means to control or hold primary responsibility
for the operation of a sexually oriented business, either as a business
entity, as an individual, or as part of a group of individuals with shared
responsibility. “OPERATE” or “CAUSE TO BE OPERATED” shall mean to
cause to function or to put or keep in operation.



   (G)   “OPERATOR” means any individual on the premises of a
sexually oriented business who causes the business to function or who puts or
keeps in operation the business or who is authorized to manage the business
or exercise overall operational control of the business premises. A person
may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented
business whether or not that person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of
the business.



   (H)   “PATRON” means any individual on the premises of a
sexually oriented business, except for any of the following:



      (1)   An operator or an employee of the sexually oriented
business;



      (2)   An individual who is on the premises exclusively for
repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the
premises;



      (3)   A public employee or a firefighter/emergency medical
services worker acting within the scope of the public employee’s duties as
a public employee.



   (I) “PERSON” means an individual, proprietorship, partnership,
trust, firm, association, joint stock company, corporation or combination of
individuals of whatever form or character.



   (J)   “PREMISES” means the real property on which the sexually
oriented business is located and all appurtenances to the real property,
including, but not limited, to the sexually oriented business, the grounds,
private walkways, and parking lots or parking garages adjacent to the real
property under the ownership, control, or supervision of the owner or
operator of the sexually oriented business.



   (K)   “SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS” means an adult arcade, adult
bookstore, adult cabaret, adult entertainment establishment, adult motion
picture theater, adult novelty store, adult theater, adult video store,
sexual device shop, sexual encounter center, and sexual encounter
establishment as defined by division (A) above, but does not include a
business solely by reason of its showing, selling, or renting materials that
may depict sex.



   (L)   “SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY” means any of the following
offenses:



      (1)   Prostitution or promoting prostitution; soliciting;
loitering to engage in solicitation; sexual performance by a child; public
lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child; sexual assault;
molestation of a child; or any similar offenses to those described above
under the criminal or penal code of any local jurisdiction, state, or country;



      (2)   For which:



         (a)   Less than two years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a
misdemeanor offense; or



         (b)   Less than five years have elapsed since the date
of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense.



      (3)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall not
prevent such conviction from constituting a SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY as
defined in this section.



   (M)   “TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL” of a sexually oriented
business shall mean any of the following:



      (1)   The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;



      (2)   The transfer of securities which constitute a
controlling interest in the business whether by sale, exchange, or similar
means; or



      (3)   The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar
legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except
for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the
person possessing the ownership or control.



(Ord. 2-2017, passed 1-4-17)



§ 151.182  ZONING REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Sexually oriented businesses may only be established in the
General Business District and shall be subject to all further restrictions of
this chapter. No person shall establish a sexually oriented business within
750 feet of another such business or within 750 feet of a property used for
residential purposes, a school, a daycare, or a church.



   (B)   For purchases of this chapter, distance between any two
sexually oriented businesses or between any sexually oriented business and
any protected use shall be measured in a straight line without regard to
intervening structures from the nearest part of the structure containing a
sexually oriented business to the nearest property line of the protected use.
Protected uses are residential uses, schools, daycares and churches.



(Ord. 2-2017, passed 1-4-17)



§ 151.183  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall:



      (1)   Operate a sexually oriented business as defined by §
151.181(K) without a valid sexually oriented business license issued by the
city pursuant to this chapter.



      (2)   In connection with operating a sexually oriented
business, retain the services of a person as an employee, as defined in this
chapter, who is not licensed as a sexually oriented business employee by the
city pursuant to this chapter.



   (B)   Any person who violates division (A)(1) above shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor of the third degree for a first offense, and a misdemeanor
of the first degree for any second or subsequent offense.



   (C)   A violation of division (A)(2) above shall be a ground for the
suspension of a sexually oriented business license as provided for in §
151.189 of this chapter.



   (D)   No person shall act as an employee, as defined in this
chapter, on the premises of a sexually oriented business without having
secured a sexually oriented business employee license (“employee
license”) pursuant to this chapter.



   (E)   A violation of division (D) above shall be a ground for the
suspension of a sexually oriented business employee license as provided for
in § 151.189 of this chapter.



(Ord. 2-2017, passed 1-4-17)



§ 151.184  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   (A)   An original or renewal application for a sexually oriented
business license shall be submitted to the Community Development Director or
its designee on a form provided by the Community Development Director. The
city’s application may require and the applicant shall provide such
information as reasonably necessary (including fingerprints) to enable the
city to determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications established
in this chapter.



   (B)   A filing fee shall be paid at the time of filing the
application in the amount of $500.



   (C)   An application for a sexually oriented business license shall
identify and be signed by the following persons:



      (1)   If the business entity is owned by an individual, that
individual.



      (2)   If the business entity is owned by a corporation, each
officer or director of the corporation, any individual owning or controlling
more than 50% of the voting shares of the corporation, and any person with an
ownership interest in the corporation who will be principally responsible for
the operation of the proposed sexually oriented business.



      (3)   If the business entity is owned by a partnership
(general or limited), a joint venture, or any other type of organization
where two or more persons share in the profits and liabilities of the
organization, each partner (other than limited partners); and any other
person entitled to share in the profits of the organization, whether or not
such person is also obligated to share in the liabilities of the
organization, who will be principally responsible for the operation of the
proposed sexually oriented business.



   (D)   An application for a sexually oriented business license must
designate one or more individuals who are to be principally responsible for
the operation of the proposed sexually oriented business, if a license is
granted. At least one person so designated must be involved in the day-to-day
operation of the proposed sexually oriented business on a regular basis. Each
person so designated, as well as the business entity itself, shall be
considered a license applicant, must qualify as a licensee under this
chapter, and shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted.



   (E)   An application for a sexually oriented business license shall
be completed according to the instructions on the application form, which
shall require the following:



      (1)   If the applicant is:



         (a)   An individual, state the legal name and any
aliases of such individual; or



         (b)   A partnership, state the complete name of the
partnership and all of its partners and whether the partnership is general or



limited, and provide a copy of the partnership agreement, if any; or



         (c)   A joint venture, or any other type of organization
where two or more persons share in the profits and liabilities of the
organization, state the complete name of the organization and provide a copy
of the legal document establishing the organization, if any; or



         (d)   A corporation, state the complete name of the
corporation and the date of its incorporation, provide evidence that the
corporation is in good standing under the laws of its state of incorporation,
and state the names and capacities of all officers and directors, the name of
the registered corporate agent for the State of Ohio, and the address of the
registered office within the State of Ohio for service of process.



      (2)   If the applicant intends to operate the sexually
oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant, state the
fictitious name to be used and submit copies of documentation evidencing the
registration of the business name under applicable laws.



      (3)   State whether any applicant has been convicted of a
specified criminal activity as defined in this chapter, and if so, the
specified criminal activity involved and the date, place, and jurisdiction of
each such conviction.



      (4)   State whether any applicant has had a previous license
under this chapter or other similar regulation of another jurisdiction
denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually
oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as
well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation; and state whether
the applicant has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, or 50% or
greater owner of a corporation licensed under this chapter whose license has
previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location
of the business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked as well
as the date of denial, suspension or revocation.



      (5)   State whether any applicant holds any other licenses
under this chapter or other similar regulation from this or another
jurisdiction and, if so, the names and locations of such other licensed
businesses.



      (6)   State the location of the proposed sexually oriented
business, including a legal description of the property (i.e., permanent
parcel number), street address, and telephone number(s), if any.



      (7)   State the mailing address and residential address of
each applicant and each person signing the application.



      (8)   Submit a recent photograph of each applicant who is a
natural person, taken by the Montgomery Police Department that clearly shows
the applicant’s face.



      (9)   Submit the fingerprints of each applicant who is a
natural person, recorded by the Montgomery Police Department.



      (10)   For any applicant who is a natural person, describe and
identify the location of any tattoos on such person’s face, arms, legs, or
hands, or any other anatomical area that normally would be visible when such
person is on the premises of the proposed sexually oriented business.



      (11)   State the driver’s license number and Social Security
number of each applicant who is a natural person and each person signing the
application, or, for an applicant that is not a natural person, the
applicant’s federally issued tax identification number.



      (12)   Submit proof that each applicant who is a natural
person is at least 18 years old.



      (13)   Submit a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of
the premises of the sexually oriented business. The diagram shall also
designate the place at which the adult business license will be conspicuously
posted, if granted. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally
prepared, but it must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked
dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus
six inches.



      (14)   The above-required disclosures facilitate the police
investigation into the applicant’s criminal background regarding crimes of
a sexual nature so that the city can determine whether the chapter’s civil
disabilities provisions apply. Such provisions exist to combat the sex crimes
connected with sexually oriented establishments by temporarily prohibiting
those recently convicted of such crimes from employment with those
establishments. In addition, the required disclosures ensure continuing
compliance with the chapter’s licensing and permitting requirements.



      (15)   The information gathered pursuant to the above
provisions constitute protected private information and are exempt from
Ohio’s Public Records Act in accordance with the decision of the Sixth
Circuit Court of Appeals in DejaVu of Cincinnati v. Union Township (6th Cir.
2005), 411 F.3d 777.



(Ord. 2-2017, passed 1-4-17)



§ 151.185  ISSUANCE OF A LICENSE.



   (A)   Upon receipt of an application for a sexually oriented
business license, the Community Development Department shall promptly request
that the Montgomery Police Department review the information provided in the
application concerning the criminal background of the applicant(s) and that
the Montgomery Police Department shall transmit the results of its
investigation in writing to the Community Development Department within five
days of the completion of its investigation.



   (B)   Within five days of receipt of an application for a sexually
oriented business, the Community Development Department shall notify the City
Fire Chief and the Hamilton County Health Commissioner of such application.
In making such notification, the Community Development Department shall
request that the Fire Chief and Health Commissioner promptly inspect the
premises for which the sexually oriented business license is sought to assess
compliance with the regulations under their respective jurisdictions.



   (C)   The Fire Chief shall provide to the Community Development
Department a written certification of whether the premises are in compliance
with the City Fire Code within ten days of receipt of notice of the
application.



   (D)   The Community Development Department, or its designee, shall
commence the inspection of the premises for which a sexually oriented
business license is sought promptly upon receipt of the application, and
shall complete, within ten days after receipt of the application, a written
certification of whether the premises are in compliance with the City Zoning
Ordinance, the City Building Code, and the provisions of this chapter related
to physical characteristics of the premises, and whether the city has
received notice from any state or county agency of the premises being in
violation of any applicable state building or property codes.



   (E)   Within 21 days after receipt of a completed sexually oriented
business license application, the Community Development Department shall
approve or deny the issuance of a license. The Community Development
Department shall approve the issuance of a license to an applicant unless
he/she determines that one or more of the following findings is true:



      (1)   An applicant who is a natural person is under 18 years
of age.



      (2)   An applicant has failed to provide all information and
documents required for issuance of the license as requested on the
application form, or has provided information or documents as requested on
the application that are insufficient on their face; provided, however, that
no license shall be denied solely on the ground that an applicant has refused
to disclose its Social Security number in accordance with the provisions of
the Privacy Act of 1974, Pub. L. No. 93-579, § 7(a)(1).



      (3)   An applicant has, within the preceding 12 months, been
denied a sexually oriented business license by any jurisdiction or has had a
license to operate a sexually oriented business revoked by any jurisdiction.



      (4)   An applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal
activity as defined in this chapter.



      (5)   The proposed sexually oriented business would violate or
fail to be in compliance with any provisions of this chapter, the City Zoning
Ordinance, the City Building Code, or state statute or regulation.



      (6)   The application and investigation fee required by this
chapter has not been paid.



      (7)   An applicant is in violation of, or not in compliance
with any provision of this chapter, except as provided in division (F) of
this section.



   (F)   If the Community Development Department determines that one or
both of the following findings is true, the license issued pursuant to this
section shall contain a requirement that the licensee correct all
deficiencies specified within 120 days of the date the license is issued:



      (1)   The results of inspections of the premises by the Fire
Chief or its designee or the Health Commissioner or its designee indicate
that the premises are not in compliance with applicable laws and regulations
under their respective jurisdictions.



      (2)   An applicant is overdue in payment to the city of taxes,
fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon him/her in
relation to any business, which are not the subject of a pending appeal or
other legal challenge.



   (G)   A sexually oriented business license shall state on its face
the name of the applicant, the expiration date, and the address of the
licensed sexually oriented business. All sexually oriented business licenses
shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the
business so that they may be easily read at any time.



   (H)   The Community Development Department or its designee shall
advise the applicant in writing within three days of the Community
Development Department’s decision of the reasons for any license denial. If
the city finds, subsequent to denial, that the basis for the denial of the
license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may reapply.



   (I)   Before an approved sexually oriented business license shall be
issued, the applicant shall pay a one year license fee of $500.



(Ord. 2-2017, passed 1-4-17)



§ 151.186  EMPLOYEE LICENSE APPLICATION.



   (A)   An application for an employee license shall be submitted to
the Community Development Department on a form provided by the Community
Development Department. The application may request, and the applicant shall
provide, such information as reasonably necessary (including fingerprints) to
enable the city to determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications
established in this chapter.



   (B)   A filing fee shall be paid at the time of the application in
the amount of $25.



   (C)   An application for an employee license shall be completed
according to the instructions of the application form, which shall require
the following:



      (1)   State the applicant’s name and any other names
(including “stage” names) or aliases used by the applicant.



      (2)   State the applicant’s date and place of birth.



      (3)   State the applicant’s height, weight, and hair and eye
color.



      (4)   Submit a recent photograph of the applicant, taken by
the Montgomery Police Department, which clearly shows the applicant’s face.



      (5)   Submit the applicant’s fingerprints, recorded by the
Montgomery Police Department.



      (6)   Describe and identify the location of any tattoos on the
applicant’s face, arms, legs, or hands, or any other anatomical area that
normally would be visible when the applicant is on the premises of the
proposed sexually oriented business.



      (7)   State the applicant’s present residence address and
telephone number.



      (8)   State the applicant’s present or intended business
address and telephone number.



      (9)   State the applicant’s driver’s license number and
Social Security number.



      (10)   Submit proof that the applicant is at least 18 years
old.



      (11)   Provide a statement detailing the sexually oriented
business-related license history of the applicant for the five years
immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, including
whether such applicant previously operated or is seeking to operate a
sexually oriented business, in this or any other jurisdiction, and whether
the applicant has ever had a sexually oriented business-related license,
permit, or authorization to do business denied, revoked, or suspended. In the
event of any such denial, revocation, or suspension, state the name of the
issuing or denying jurisdiction and describe in full the reason for the
denial, revocation, or suspension. Attach a copy of any order of denial,
revocation, or suspension.



      (12)   State whether the applicant has been convicted of a
specified criminal activity as defined in this chapter and, if so, the
specified criminal activity involved and the date, place and jurisdiction of
each such conviction.



      (13)   The above-required disclosures facilitate the police
investigation into the applicant’s criminal background regarding crimes of
a sexual nature so that the city can determine whether the chapter’s civil
disabilities provisions apply. Such provisions exist to combat the sex crimes
connected with sexually oriented establishments by temporarily prohibiting
those recently convicted of such crimes from employment with those
establishments. In addition, the required disclosures ensure continuing
compliance with the chapter’s licensing and permitting requirements.



      (14)   The information gathered pursuant to the above
provisions constitutes protected private information and is exempt from
Ohio’s Public Records Act in accordance with the decision of the Sixth
Circuit Court of Appeals in DejaVu of Cincinnati v. Union Township (6th Cir.
2005), 411 F.3d 777.



(Ord. 2-2017, passed 1-4-17)



§ 151.187  ISSUANCE OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE LICENSE.



   (A)   Upon the filing of a completed application for an employee
license, the Community Development Department shall issue a license to said
applicant immediately.



   (B)   Within five days of receipt of a completed application for an
employee license, the Community Development Department shall request that the
Montgomery Police Department initiate an investigation of the information
provided in the application concerning the criminal background of the
applicant. The Montgomery Police Department shall document the results of its
investigation in writing within five days of the completion of its
investigation and transmit this writing to the Community Development
Department or its designee.



   (C)   Within ten days after completion of the criminal background
investigation of the applicant, the Community Development Department shall
either affirm the prior issuance of the license or revoke the license. The
Community Development Department shall affirm the prior issuance of a license
to an applicant unless he/she determines that one or more of the following
findings are true:



      (1)   The applicant has failed to provide all information and
documents required for issuance of the license as requested on the
application form, or has provided information or documents as requested on
the application that are insufficient on their face; provided, however, that
no license shall be denied solely on the ground that an applicant has refused
to disclose its social security number in accordance with the provisions of
the Privacy Act of 1974, Pub. L. No. 93-579, § 7(a)(1).



      (2)   The applicant is under 18 years of age.



      (3)   The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal
activity as defined in this chapter.



      (4)   The employee license is to be used for employment in a
business prohibited by local, state, or federal law, statute, rule or
regulation.



      (5)   The applicant has, within the preceding 12 months, been
denied an employee license by any jurisdiction or has had an employee license
revoked by any jurisdiction.



   (D)   If the employee license is revoked, the Community Development
Department shall advise the applicant in writing within three days of the
reason(s) for any such revocation.



   (E)   Before an approved sexually oriented business employee license
shall be issued, an approved applicant shall pay a license fee of $25.



(Ord. 2-2017, passed 1-4-17)



§ 151.188  EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Each license issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire one
year from the date of issuance and may be renewed by making application as
provided in this section. Application for renewal shall be made no more than
90 days and no less than 21 days before the expiration date. If application
is made less than 21 days before the expiration date, the license will not be
extended pending a decision on the application, but will expire on its normal
expiration date.



   (B)   An application for renewal of a sexually oriented business
license shall be submitted to the Community Development Department on a form
provided by the Community Development Department. The completed renewal
application shall describe any changes or additions to, or deletions from,
the information provided in the applicant’s initial license application
pursuant to this chapter. Copies of any document or material submitted in
connection with the initial license application shall accompany the completed
renewal application that has been revised or such application shall be
revised to reflect any change in circumstances or conditions. Sketches or
diagrams submitted with an initial sexually oriented business license
application may be resubmitted with subsequent renewal applications, provided
that the applicant certifies in writing that the sketch or diagram still
depicts the premises accurately.



   (C)   The Community Development Department shall make determinations
concerning the approval of license renewals based on the same criteria and
time mandates used to evaluate applications for new licenses under this
chapter.



   (D)   The Community Development Department shall advise the
applicant in writing within three days of the reason(s) for any denial of a
license renewal.



   (E)   An application for renewal of an employee license shall be
submitted to the Community Development Department on a form provided by the
Community Development Department. The completed renewal application shall
describe any changes or additions to, or deletions from, the information
provided in the applicant's initial license application pursuant to this
chapter. Copies of any document or material submitted in connection with the
initial license application shall accompany the completed renewal application
that has been revised or requires revision to reflect any change in
circumstances or conditions.



   (F)   When the city denies an application for renewal of a license,
the applicant shall not be issued another license for one year from the date
of denial. However, if the city finds, subsequent to denial, that the basis
for the denial of the renewal license has been corrected or abated, the
applicant may reapply prior to the expiration of the one-year period.



   (G)   An approved sexually oriented business licensee shall pay an
annual renewal license fee of $500 before a license shall be issued. An
approved sexually oriented business employee licensee shall pay an annual
license fee of $25 before a renewal license shall be issued.



(Ord. 2-2017, passed 1-4-17)



§ 151.189  SUSPENSION.



   (A)   The city shall suspend a sexually oriented business license
for a period not to exceed 30 days if it determines that a licensee:



      (1)   Has violated or is not in compliance with any section of
this chapter; or



      (2)   Has knowingly allowed an employee to violate or fail to
comply with any section of this chapter.



   (B)   The city shall suspend a sexually oriented business license
for a period not to exceed 30 days if it determines that a licensee or its
employee or agent has refused to allow, or has prohibited or has interfered
with, an inspection of the licensed sexually oriented business premises as
authorized by § 151.185(B) and (D) of this chapter or any other reasonable
inspection.



   (C)   The city shall suspend an employee license for a period not to
exceed 30 days if it determines that a licensee has violated or is not in
compliance with any section of this chapter.



   (D)   The Community Development Department shall advise the licensee
in writing within three days of the reason(s) for any suspension.



(Ord. 2-2017, passed 1-4-17)



§ 151.1810  REVOCATION.



   (A)   The city shall revoke a sexually oriented business license or
employee license if a cause of suspension under this chapter occurs and the
license has been suspended two times within the preceding 12 months.



   (B)   The city shall revoke a sexually oriented business license if
it determines that:



      (1)   A licensee failed to provide all information and
documents required for issuance of the license as requested on the
application form, or provided information or documents as requested on the
application that are false;



      (2)   The licensee(s) failed to comply with any requirement
stated in the license, pursuant to this chapter, to correct specified
deficiencies within 120 days;



      (3)   A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or
sale of controlled substances on the premises;



      (4)   A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution,
solicitation, or the commission of a felony on the premises;



      (5)   A licensee knowingly operated the sexually oriented
business during a period of time when the licensee’s license was suspended;



      (6)   A licensee has knowingly allowed any act of specified
criminal activity, as defined in this chapter, to occur in or on the licensed
premises;



      (7)   A licensee has been convicted of a specified criminal
activity, as defined in this chapter, during the term of the license; or



      (8)   A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city, county,
or state for any taxes or fees that were assessed or imposed in relation to
any business.



   (C)   The city shall revoke an employee license if it determines
that:



      (1)   The licensee failed to provide all information and
documents required for issuance of the license as requested on the
application form, or provided information or documents as requested on the
application that are false;



      (2)   The licensee has knowingly acted as an employee on the
premises of a sexually oriented business during a period of time when the
licensee’s license was suspended; or



      (3)   The licensee has been convicted of a specified criminal
activity, as defined in this chapter during the term of the license.



   (D)   The Community Development Department shall advise the licensee
in writing within three days of the reason(s) for any revocation.



   (E)   When the city revokes a license pursuant to divisions (A),
(B)(3) through (B)(7), (C)(2) or (C)(3) above, the licensee shall not be
issued another license for one year from the date the revocation became
effective.



   (F)   When the city revokes a license pursuant to divisions (B)(1),
(B)(8) or (C)(1) above, the applicant may be granted a license if the basis
for the revocation has been corrected or abated and at least 30 days have
elapsed since the date the revocation became effective.



(Ord. 2-2017, passed 1-4-17)



§ 151.1811  APPEAL RIGHTS.



   (A)   Any denial, suspension, or revocation of a license under this
chapter may be appealed to the City Council by written notice within ten days
of such denial, suspension, or revocation. Unless the applicant requests a
longer period, the City Council must hold a hearing on the appeal within 21
days and must issue a decision affirming or reversing the denial, suspension,
or revocation within five days after the hearing. During the time between the
date of the denial, suspension, or revocation of a license and the date of
the City Council decision affirming or reversing the denial, suspension, or
revocation, the status quo of the license holder or applicant shall be
maintained.



   (B)   In the event that the City Council denies, suspends, or
revokes a new or renewal license under this chapter, or any action taken on
an appeal that is provided by this chapter, the applicant may pursue an
appeal to Hamilton County Court of Common Pleas pursuant to R.C. Chapter
2506. The failure of the City Council to render a decision on the application
within the time prescribed in division (A) above shall be considered an
affirmance of the denial, suspension, or revocation of the license and the
applicant may pursue an appeal to Hamilton County Court of Common Pleas
pursuant to R.C. Chapter 2506. This appeal provision is intended to comply
with the requirement for prompt judicial review stated by the United States
Supreme Court in Township of Littleton, Colorado v. Z. J. Gifts D-4 (2004),
541 U.S. 774.



   (C)   Any licensee lawfully operating a sexually oriented business
prior to the denial of a license renewal application, or the suspension or
revocation of a license, shall retain said license and all privileges
attendant thereto, subject to all other terms of this chapter, so that the
status quo of the licensee is maintained during the pendency of an appeal to
the City Council of a decision rendered under this chapter and during the
entire time required for the Court of Common Pleas to rule on the appeal
pursuant to division (B) above.



   (D)   Any licensee lawfully acting as an employee in a sexually
oriented business prior to the denial of a license renewal application, or
the suspension or revocation of a license, shall retain said license and all
privileges attendant thereto, subject to all other terms of this chapter, so
that the status quo of the licensee is maintained during the pendency of an
appeal to the City Council of a decision rendered under this chapter and
during the entire time required for the Court of Common Pleas to rule on the
appeal pursuant to division (B) above.



   (E)   In the event that any judicial review of the denial of a new
or renewal license application or the revocation or suspension of a license
is still pending 30 days before the expiration date of any license, the
licensee may file a renewal license application with the Community
Development Department pursuant to this chapter. In the event that an
application for renewal of a license is denied and the applicant seeks
judicial review of that denial, the city has the right to consolidate such
review with any pending judicial actions in regards to the previous denial,
suspension or revocation of a license.



   (F)   If, during the pendency of any appeal pursued under division
(B) above, there are additional denials of a renewal license application or
suspensions or revocations of that license, the city has the right to
consolidate the appeal pursued under division (B) above for the additional
denials, suspensions or revocations with any pending appeal for that same
licensee.



(Ord. 2-2017, passed 1-4-17)



§ 151.1812  TRANSFER OF LICENSE.



   (A)   A sexually oriented business license is not transferable from
one licensee to another or from one location to another. Any purported
transfer of a sexually oriented business license shall automatically and
immediately revoke that license.



   (B)   An employee license is not transferable from one licensee to
another, but the use of the license by the individual to whom it was issued
may be transferred from one licensed sexually oriented business to another
such licensed establishment during the term of the license, provided that the
licensee gives written notice of such transfer to the Community Development
Department within 15 days of such transfer.



(Ord. 2-2017, passed 1-4-17)



§ 151.1813  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS. CONCERNING THE OPERATION OF A SEXUALLY
ORIENTED BUSINESS.



   (A)   Sexual activity, live entertainment and performances.



      (1)   No person shall, in a sexually oriented business, appear
before a patron or patrons in a state of nudity, regardless of whether such
public nudity is expressive in nature.



      (2)   Any employee appearing on the premises of a sexually
oriented business in a state of semi-nudity, as defined by this chapter, must
be on a stage that is at least 24 inches from the floor, and at a distance at
least 36 inches from all parts of a clearly designated area in which patrons
will be present.



      (3)   All live entertainment and performances in a sexually
oriented business must take place on a stage that is at least 24 inches from
the floor and a distance of at least 36 inches from all parts of a clearly
designated area in which patrons will be present.



      (4)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such
a manner that there is a an unobstructed view from an operator’s station of
every area of the premises, including the interior of each viewing room but
excluding restrooms, to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose.
If the premises has two or more operator’s stations designated, then the
interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is
an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is
permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the operator’s
stations. It is the duty of the operator to ensure that at least one employee
is on duty and situated in an operator’s station at all times that any
patron is on the portion of the premises monitored by the operator station.
It shall be the duty of the operator, and it shall also be the duty of any
employees present on the premises, to ensure that the view area specified in
this paragraph remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, walls,
merchandise, display racks or other materials or enclosures at all times that
any patron is present on the premises.



      (5)   No employee shall knowingly or intentionally, in a
sexually oriented business, appear within view of any patron in a nude or
semi-nude condition unless the employee, while nude or semi-nude, shall be
and remain at least six feet from all patrons.



      (6)   Employees in a sexually oriented business shall maintain
a minimum distance of five feet from areas on the business premises occupied
by patrons for a minimum of 20 minutes after the employee appears in a nude
or semi-nude condition within view of any patron. This regulation is not
intended to prohibit ingress or egress from the premises. It is intended to
control illicit sexual contact and reduce the incidents of prostitution
occurring in the establishments.



      (7)   No patron who is not a member of the employee’s
immediate family shall knowingly touch an employee while that employee is
nude or seminude or touch the clothing of any employee while that employee is
nude or semi-nude.



      (8)   No employee who regularly appears nude or seminude on
the premises of a sexually oriented business and while nude or seminude,
shall knowingly touch a patron who is not a member of the employee’s
immediate family or another employee who is not a member of the employee’s
immediate family or the clothing of a patron who is not a member of the
employee’s immediate family or another employee who is not a member of the
employee’s immediate family or allow the patron who is not a member of the
employee’s immediate family or another employee who is not a member of the
employee’s immediate family to touch the employee or the clothing of the
employee.



      (9)   The provisions of divisions (A)(1) through (A)(8) above
shall not apply to an employee’s use of any restroom or any single-sex
dressing room that is accessible only to employees.



      (10)   In addition, divisions (A)(1) through (A)(8) shall not
apply to live performances in which the patron and employee are separated by
an impenetrable barrier such as, but not limited too, glass or Plexiglas.



   (B)   Minors prohibited.  No person under the age of 18 years shall
be permitted on the premises of a sexually oriented business.



   (C)   Hours of operation. No sexually oriented business shall be or
remain open for business between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. on any day,
except that a sexually oriented business that holds a liquor permit pursuant
to R.C. Chapter 4303 may remain open until the hour specified in that permit
if it does not conduct, offer, or allow sexually oriented business activity
in which the performers appear nude.



(Ord. 2-2017, passed 1-4-17)



Editor’s Note:



   The following court cases and state provisions may apply to § 151.1813:



   Sensations, Inc. v. City of Grand Rapids, Michigan Decency Action
Council (6th Cir. 2008), 526 F.3d 291



   Sensations, Inc. v. City of Grand Rapids, Michigan Decency Action
Council (6th Cir. 2008), 526 F.3d 291



   729, Inc. v. Kenton County Fiscal Court (6th Cir. 2008), 515 F.3d 485



   R.C. § 2907.40(B), (C)(1) and (C)(2)



CHAPTER 151.20:  CONDITIONAL USE REGULATIONS



Section



   151.2001   Purpose



   151.2002   General criteria for all conditional uses



   151.2003   Specific standards for conditional uses



   151.2004   Schedule of minimum lot and yard dimensions for
conditional uses in residential districts



   151.2005   Supplemental regulations for conditional uses in
residential districts



   151.2006   Schedule of minimum lot and yard dimensions for
conditional uses in office, office commercial, retail business, Old
Montgomery Gateway and Old Montgomery Districts



   151.2007   Supplemental regulations for certain uses



   151.2008   Accessory building regulations for conditional uses in
residential districts



   151.2009   Accessory building regulations for conditional uses in
office and commercial districts



§ 151.2001  PURPOSE.



   (A)   Conditionally permitted uses are those uses which have a
particular impact on the surrounding area that cannot be predetermined and
controlled by general regulations. In order to insure that these uses in
their proposed locations will be compatible with surrounding development,
their establishment shall not be a matter of right but may be permitted after
review and approval as hereinafter provided.



   (B)   This consideration of conditional uses is particularly
important. In recent years, the characteristics and impacts of an
ever-increasing number of new and unique uses, together with the broadening
of numerous conventional uses, have fostered the development of more flexible
regulations designed to accommodate these activities in a reasonable and
equitable manner, while safeguarding both the property rights of all
individuals and the health, safety, and general welfare of the community.
Toward these ends, it is recognized that this Zoning Code should provide for
more detailed evaluation of each use listed as a conditional use in a
specific district with respect to such considerations as location, design,
size, method(s) of operation, intensity of use, requirements for public
facilities, and traffic generation. Accordingly, conditional use permits
shall conform to the procedures and requirements of Chapter 150.16.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05; Am. Ord. 2-2014, passed 3-5-14; Am. Ord.
19-2014, passed 12-3-14)



§ 151.2002  GENERAL CRITERIA FOR ALL CONDITIONAL USES.



   A conditional use, and uses accessory to such conditional use, shall be
permitted in a district only when specified as a conditional use in such
district and only if such use conforms to the following general criteria,
which are in addition to specific conditions, standards and regulations set
forth in §§ 151.2003 through 151.2008. The Planning Commission shall review
the particular facts and circumstances of each proposed use in terms of the
following criteria and shall find adequate evidence that the use as proposed:



   (A)   Will be designed, constructed, operated and maintained so as
to be harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended
character of the general vicinity, and that such use will not essentially
change the character of the same area;



   (B)   Will not be detrimental to property values in the immediate
vicinity;



   (C)   Will not restrict or adversely affect the existing use of the
adjacent property owners;



   (D)   Will be designed and constructed so that all access drives,
access points to public streets, driveways, parking and service areas shall
be in compliance with the regulations set forth in Chapter 151.32;



   (E)   Will be properly landscaped in accordance with Chapter 151.34;



   (F)   The establishment, maintenance or operation of the conditional
use will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety or
general welfare;



   (G)   The hours of operation of the proposed use are similar to a
use permitted in the district;



   (H)   The establishment of the conditional use in the proposed
location will not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement
of the surrounding property for uses permitted in the district;



   (I)   Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and/or necessary
facilities have been or are being provided;



   (J)   Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide
ingress and egress designed to minimize traffic congestion on the surrounding
public streets;



   (K)   The establishment of the conditional use should not be
detrimental to the economic welfare of the community by creating excessive
additional requirements at public cost for public facilities such as police,
fire and schools; and



   (L)   There is minimal potential for future hardship on the
conditional use that could result from the proposed use being surrounded by
uses permitted by right that may be incompatible.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05; Am. Ord. 2-2014,  passed 3-5-14; Am. Ord.
19-2014, passed 12-3-14)



§ 151.2003  SPECIFIC STANDARDS FOR CONDITIONAL USES.



   In addition to the general criteria established in § 151.2002, the
following specific conditions pertaining to each use or group of uses shall
apply.



   (A)   Supplementary Conditions and Safeguards. Nothing in these
regulations shall prohibit the Planning Commission from prescribing
supplementary conditions and safeguards in addition to these requirements in
order to ensure compliance with the criteria set forth in § 151.2002.



   (B)   Conformance with District Regulations.  A conditional use
shall conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located and
to other substantive requirements of this Zoning Code, as well as satisfy the
conditions, standards and requirements of this chapter. In the event that the
standards of this section conflict with the standards of other sections of
the Zoning Code, these standards shall prevail, except for nonconforming uses
as regulated in Chapter 151.50.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05; Am. Ord. 19-2014, passed 12-3-14)



§ 151.2004  SCHEDULE OF MINIMUM LOT AND YARD DIMENSIONS FOR CONDITIONAL
USES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.



   Schedule 151.2004 sets forth regulations governing minimum lot area,
minimum lot width and minimum yard requirements for principal and accessory
buildings and parking areas for conditional uses in residential districts.
Supplemental requirements pertaining to such uses are set forth in §
151.2007, and the specific subsections are referenced in Schedule 151.2004,
below.



 


Schedule 151.2004
Minimum Area, Width and Yard Regulations for Conditional Uses in Residential
Districts




Conditional Use:

 

Minimum Lot Regulations

 

Minimum Building Setbacks For Principal Buildings

 

Minimum Parking Setbacks

 

Also See Section:




Area

 

Width

 

Front

 

Side

 

Rear

 

Front

 

Side - Rear





(1)   Cemeteries
 

See § 151.2007(E)



(2)   Clubs, lodges or other assembly halls
 

1½ ac

 

150 ft

 

50 ft

 

(b)

 

50 ft

 

50

 

20 ft

 

151.2007(F )



(3)   Day care within churches, schools
 

–

 

–

 

–

 

–

 

–

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

151.2007(G )



(4)   Golf courses
 

None

 

None

 

50 ft

 

(b)

 

50 ft

 

50

 

20 ft

 

151.2007(J)



(5)   Libraries, museums
 

1 ac

 

150 ft

 

50 ft

 

(b)

 

50 ft

 

50

 

20 ft

 

151.2007(L )



(6)   Places of worship
 

1½ ac

 

150 ft

 

50 ft

 

(b)

 

50 ft

 

50

 

20 ft

 

151.2007(Q )



(7)   Public safety facilities
 

1 ac

 

150 ft

 

50 ft

 

(b)

 

50 ft

 

50

 

20 ft

 

151.2007(R )



(8)   Public utility substations
 

20,000 sf

 

100 ft

 

50 ft

 

(b)

 

(c)

 

50

 

20 ft

 

151.2007(T )



(9)   Retirement villages
 

1½ ac

 

150 ft

 

50 ft

 

(b)

 

50 ft

 

50

 

20 ft

 

151.2007(U )



(10)   Schools, public & private
 

2 ac

 

200 ft

 

50 ft

 

(b)

 

50 ft

 

50

 

20 ft

 

151.2007(V )



(11)   Wireless Telecom-munications Facilities
 

See Chapter 151.36



Notes to Schedule 151.2004:

(a)   Shall comply with the parking setback requirements for the principal
building on the lot.

(b)   Shall be twice the side yard setback requirement set forth in the
district regulations.

(c)   Shall comply with district regulations for a single-family dwelling.

ft = feet      sf = square feet      ac = acres      – = Not
applicable      NP = Not permitted




 



(Am. Ord. 16-2013, passed 11-6-13; Am. Ord. 19-2014, passed 12-3-14)



§ 151.2005  SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS FOR CONDITIONAL USES IN RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICTS.



   In any residential district, the percentage of a lot covered by a
nonresidential use, including buildings and parking, shall not exceed 40% of
the total area of the lot. The Planning Commission or City Council may
approve up to 50% impervious surface if stormwater best management practices
are used and the increase in impervious surface area does not negatively
impact the surrounding neighborhood.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05; Am. Ord. 19-2014, passed 12-3-14)



§ 151.2006  SCHEDULE OF MINIMUM LOT AND YARD DIMENSIONS FOR CONDITIONAL
USES IN OFFICE, OFFICE COMMERCIAL, RETAIL BUSINESS, OLD MONTGOMERY GATEWAY
AND OLD MONTGOMERY DISTRICTS.



   Schedule 151.2006 sets forth regulations governing minimum lot area,
minimum lot width and minimum yard requirements for principal and accessory
buildings and parking areas for conditional uses in a business district.
Supplemental requirements pertaining to such uses are set forth in §
151.2007, and the specific divisions are referenced in Schedule 151.2006
below.



 


Schedule 151.2006
Area, Width and Yard Regulations for Conditional Uses in Office, Office
Commercial, Retail Business, Old Montgomery Gateway and Old Montgomery
Districts




Conditional Use:

 

Minimum Lot Regulations

 

Minimum Building Setbacks

 

Minimum Parking Setbacks

 

Also See Section:




Area

 

Width

 

Front

 

Side - Rear(b)

 

Front

 

Side - Rear(b)





(1)   Animal boarding facility
 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(b)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

151.2007(A)



(2)   Automobile, truck and trailer sales and rental
 

3 ac

 

200 ft

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

151.2007(B)



(3)   Bed and Breakfast
 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

151.2007(C)



(4)   Car wash
 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

151.2007(D)



(5)   Drive-through facility in association with a permitted use
 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

151.2007(H)



(6)   Gasoline Stations
 

.5ac

 

100 ft

 

50 ft

 

50 ft

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

151.2007(I)



(7)   Hospitals
 

3 ac

 

300 ft

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

151.2007(K) )



(8)   Mixed Use Developments
 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

151.2007(M )



(9)   Nursing homes
 

3 ac

 

300 ft.

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

151.2007(N)



(10)   Outdoor recreation including tennis courts, miniature golf courses,
swimming pools and similar uses
 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

151.2007(O)



(11)   Parking as principal use (lot or garage)
 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

151.2007(P)



(12)   Places of worship
 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

151.2007(Q)



(13)   Public service facility
 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

151.2007(S)



(14)   Public utility substation
 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

151.2007(T)



(15)   Retirement villages
 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

151.2007(U)



(16)   Schools, public & private
 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

151.2007(V)



(17)   Vehicle maintenance and repair facility
 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

(a)

 

151.2007(W )



Notes to Schedule 151.2006:

(a)   Shall comply with district regulations.

(b)   Regulations apply to all side and rear setbacks unless a greater
setback is specified in the district regulations for lots adjacent to
residential districts.

(c)   Shall comply with the parking setback requirements for the principal
building on the lot.

ft = feet      sf = square feet      ac = acres      – = Not
applicable




 



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05; Am. Ord. 2-2014, passed 3-5-14; Am. Ord.
19-2014, passed 12-3-14)



§ 151.2007  SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS FOR CERTAIN USES.



   The following are specific conditions, standards and regulations for
certain conditional uses and are in addition to the criteria and standards
set forth in §§ 151.2002, 151.2003, 151.2004, 151.2005, and 151.2006.



   (A)   Animal boarding facility shall comply with the following:



      (1)   All animal housing and play areas shall be located
inside an enclosed building with baffled air intake and discharge.



      (2)   No operable windows shall be permitted and all fixed
windows shall be double glazed.



      (3)   Outdoor exercise areas shall not be located closer than
100 feet to any residential property and shall be screened from adjacent
residential properties. All outdoor exercise areas and runs shall be enclosed
by a solid fence or similar enclosure as approved by the Planning Commission
and/or Council.



      (4)   Unattended outdoor exercise areas shall be visually
screened from other exercise areas so that dogs cannot see each other.



      (5)   No animals shall be walked or exercised in outdoor areas
between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.



      (6)   The proposed use shall not generate excessive odor or
noise beyond the premises. In order to minimize any effects of the above, the
Planning Commission and/or Council may impose additional noise reduction
measures, including mounding, landscaping and sound barriers, to assure that
the level of noise is less than or the same as the prevailing noise levels of
permitted uses in the District.



   (B)   Automobile, truck, and trailer sales and rental shall comply
with the following:



      (1)   Vehicle parking areas, equipment storage areas,
maneuvering lanes, and access ways to public streets shall be designed to
cause no interference with the safe and convenient movement of automobile
traffic on and adjacent to the site.



      (2)   Display of vehicles for sale shall be located on a paved
surface and shall comply with the parking setbacks according to the
regulations in § 151.1207.



      (3)   No junk or inoperative vehicle shall be permitted to
remain outdoors on the property for a period exceeding 72 hours.



      (4)   Lighting for all areas used for the outdoor display of
automobiles shall be in accordance with a plan consistent with the lighting
regulations set forth in § 151.3213(C) and approved by the Planning
Commission.



   (C)   Bed and breakfasts shall comply with the following:



      (1)   Such use may only occupy an existing structure that was
previously occupied for residential purposes or a new structure that shall be
residential in character.



      (2)   A maximum of four guestrooms shall be permitted and
shall be located within the dwelling.



      (3)   Meals shall be provided only to guests taking lodging in
the facility.



      (4)   The building shall not contain a commercial kitchen and
guestrooms shall not contain cooking facilities. A common lounge area may be
provided for guests.



   (D)   Car washes shall comply with the following:



      (1)   The facility shall be located in an enclosed building or
in an area covered by a roof, unless otherwise permitted by the Planning
Commission.



      (2)   The area for the facility shall be located on the lot so
as to utilize the maximum amount of the lot for the purpose of containing the
waiting line of cars prior to the time the cars or other vehicles are
actually serviced.



      (3)   Run off from the washing of vehicles shall be directed
to a sanitary drain.



   (E)   Cemeteries and related structures shall comply with the
following:



      (1)   No building, including a mausoleum or crematory, shall
exceed three stories or 45 feet, including all construction mechanicals.



      (2)   Burial vaults or crypts, gravestones, grave markers,
monuments, statuary or bell towers and similar structures which do not exceed
six feet in height shall be setback 15 feet from all property lines.



      (3)   Structures, as described in division (E)(2) above,
greater than six feet in height but not exceeding 45 feet in height, shall be
setback not less than 50 feet from the right-of-way line or any lot zoned and
used for residential purposes abutting the cemetery property. Accessory
buildings and sheds used for general maintenance of the cemetery grounds and
other structures not related to a gravesite, must be setback a minimum of 50
feet from the front property line and 25 feet from the side and rear property
line.



      (4)   Any building, mausoleum, crematory, or associated
parking, shall be setback 50 feet from the street right-of-way line.



   (F)   Clubs, lodges or other assembly halls shall comply with the
following:



      (1)   Such uses shall be located on an arterial or collector
street or have direct access to an arterial or collector street to minimize
impacts on local streets and residential neighborhoods.



      (2)   All access drives shall be located as far as practicable
from an existing intersection in order to maximize traffic safety and
minimize congestion and constricted turning movements.



      (3)   Planning Commission and/or Council may require all
outdoor children's activity areas to be enclosed by a fence at a height
approved by the Planning Commission and/or Council.



      (4)   Outdoor activity areas shall not be located closer than
20 feet to any residential property.



      (5)   Night lighting of outdoor activity areas shall be
determined upon a careful review and consideration of all site and adjacent
residential property characteristics.



      (6)   All activities, programs and other events shall be
directly related to the conditional use permit so granted.



      (7)   No building shall exceed three stories or 45 feet,
including all construction mechanicals.



      (8)   The design of new structures or modifications to
existing structures shall be visually compatible with the character of the
surrounding residential neighborhood.



      (9)   Parking lots shall be in compliance with Chapter 151.32
and § 151.3408.



      (10)   Ground mounted identification signs for clubs, lodges
or other assembly halls shall be permitted in compliance with the criteria
set forth for ground mounted residential development identification signs in
§ 151.3012(A).



   (G)   Day care within churches and schools shall comply with the
following:



      (1)   Day cares located within conditionally approved churches
and schools shall be permitted, if the use is clearly accessory to the
principal use of the building.



      (2)   Such uses shall be located on an arterial or collector
street or have direct access to an arterial or collector street to minimize
impacts on local streets and residential neighborhood



      (3)   An on-site drop-off/pick-up area that will not impede
traffic on or off the site shall be provided at the main entrance to the
facility to ensure the safety of children and adults. Additional parking
shall be provided in compliance with Chapter 151.32.



      (4)   All outdoor children's activity areas to be enclosed by
a fence at a height approved by the Planning Commission and/or Council.



      (5)   The Planning Commission and/or Council may impose
restrictions on the hours of operation, both indoor and outdoor.



      (6)   Such uses shall be permitted one ground mounted or wall
mounted identification sign not to exceed 12 square feet in size. Ground
mounted identification signs for daycares within an approved church or school
shall be in compliance with the criteria set forth for ground mounted
residential development identification signs in § 151.3012(A)(2) through
(A)(6).



   (H)   Drive-through facility in association with a permitted use
shall comply with the following:



      (1)   Drive-through facilities and associated access aisles
and canopies shall not be permitted to be in the front yard of any lot and
shall be a minimum of 200 feet from a residential dwelling unit.



      (2)   No signage shall be permitted on the canopy covering of
a drive-through facility.



      (3)   Drive-through facilities shall be in compliance with the
supplemental regulations set forth for drive-through facilities and
free-standing automated teller machines in § 151.1214.



   (I)   Gasoline stations shall comply with the following:



      (1)   Fuel pumps and associated access aisles and canopies
shall not be permitted to extend closer to the street right-of-way than 50
feet. Fuel islands must be located at least 200 feet from a residential
dwelling unit.



      (2)   The only service permitted to be performed on a vehicle
at a gasoline station shall be the dispensing of fuel, oil, air, and
windshield wiper fluid.



      (3)   Except while being serviced at a pump island, no vehicle
shall be parked between the pumps and the front property line.



      (4)   Signage shall not be permitted on the canopy covering
the fuel pumps.



      (5)   A maximum of six square feet of manual or LED changeable
copy shall be permitted on a permanent ground mounted sign for the display of
gas prices only. LED changeable copy signs shall not incorporate flashing
lights and shall not exceed 0.3 footcandles over ambient lighting conditions.



      (6)   Car washes shall be permitted as an accessory use to a
gasoline station if they can accommodate only one car at a time during both
the wash and dry cycles.



   (J)   Golf courses shall comply with the following:



      (1)   Vehicular access to such uses shall be located on a
major street.



      (2)   Only incidental retail sales and services shall be
permitted related to a snack bar, restaurant or pro shop. Such retail and
service uses shall be provided for the convenience of the patrons and no sign
advertising such retail or service use shall be permitted.



   (K)   Hospitals shall comply with the following:



      (1)   Such use shall be located on an arterial or collector
street.



      (2)   Outdoor storage of ambulances and other vehicles used in
the operation of the principal use may be permitted provided such storage
areas shall be located in the side or rear yard in off-street parking areas.



      (3)   The minimum setbacks for individual buildings shall
comply with those established in Schedule 151.2006. As part of the
development plan approval for a conditional use permit, Planning Commission
and/or Council may establish greater setbacks when the minimum setbacks do
not provide adequate safeguards to adjoining residential property, due to
topography, vegetation or building size.



   (L)   Libraries and museums shall comply with the following:



      (1)   Such uses shall be located on an arterial or collector
street or have direct access to an arterial or collector street to minimize
impacts on local streets and residential neighborhoods.



      (2)   All access drives shall be located as far as practicable
from an existing intersection in order to maximize traffic safety and
minimize congestion and constricted turning movements.



      (3)   No building shall exceed three stories or 45 feet,
including all construction mechanicals.



      (4)   The design of new structures or modifications to
existing structures shall be visually compatible with the surrounding
residential neighborhood character.



      (5)   Outdoor exhibit areas shall meet the setbacks
established for parking in the district.



      (6)   Parking lots shall be in compliance with Chapter 151.32
and § 151.3408.



   (M)   Mixed use developments shall comply with the following:



      (1)   A mixed use development in the LB and GB Districts shall
have a minimum project size of three acres.



      (2)   The mixed use development project area shall be in one
ownership or if in several ownerships, the application shall be filed jointly
by all owners of the properties included in the proposed mixed use
development boundaries.



      (3)   The uses permitted within a mixed use development shall
be governed by the permitted uses established in the respective L-B or GB
District, in which the project is located, and may also include single-family
attached dwellings, single-family detached clusters, and multi-family
dwellings.



      (4)   When residential uses are included in a mixed use
development plan, as permitted in division (M)(2) above, such uses shall
conform to the building and parking setback requirements and height
regulations established for the district in which the project is located.



      (5)   Residential uses proposed as part of a mixed use
development shall not exceed 50% of the total gross floor area proposed in
the project in the LB or GB Districts.



      (6)   If the development is to be implemented in phases, each
phase shall be presented at the time of development plan review, as required
by § 150.1402, in order to demonstrate the location and mix of uses proposed
for development.



   (N)   Nursing homes shall comply with the following:



      (1)   Such uses shall be located on an arterial or collector
street or have direct access to an arterial or collector street without going
through a residential neighborhood to lessen the impact on the residential
area.



      (2)   The minimum setbacks for individual buildings shall
comply with those established in Schedule 151.2006. As part of the
development plan approval for a conditional use permit, Planning Commission
and/or Council may establish greater setbacks when the minimum setbacks do
not provide adequate safeguards to adjoining residential property, due to
topography, vegetation or building size.



      (3)   The development plan shall indicate the parking and
emergency entrances or exits and other safety precautions.



      (4)   Outdoor storage of vehicles used in the operation of the
principal use may be permitted provided such storage areas shall be located
in the side or rear yard in off-street parking areas.



   (O)   Outdoor recreation including tennis courts, miniature golf
courses, swimming pools and similar uses shall comply with the following:



      (1)   The proposed use shall not generate excessive odor,
dust, or smoke beyond the premises. In order to minimize any effects of the
above, the Planning Commission and/or Council may impose additional noise
reduction measures, including mounding, landscaping and sound barriers, to
assure that the level of noise is less than or the same as the prevailing
noise levels of permitted uses in the District.



      (2)   All active recreation areas shall be enclosed by a fence
or similar enclosure as approved by the Planning Commission and/or Council.



      (3)   Rifle ranges, skeet shooting ranges, pistol ranges, and
other activities involving the use of firearms shall not be permitted.



      (4)   Delivery trucks shall not be used as refreshment stands,
souvenir stands or concession stands.



      (5)   Only retail uses that are customarily accessory and
incidental to the main recreational use shall be permitted as part of the
recreational area. Included as such retail uses are refreshment stands,
souvenir stands, concession stands and other similar uses.



      (6)   All activities, programs and other events shall be
directly related to the conditional use permit so granted, and shall be
adequately and properly supervised so as to prevent any hazard and to assure
against any disturbance or nuisance to surrounding properties, residents or
to the community in general.



   (P)   Parking as principal use of the lot shall comply with the
following:



      (1)   Parking lots shall be in compliance with Chapter 151.32
and Chapter 151.34.



      (2)   All access drives shall be located as far as practicable
from an existing intersection in order to maximize traffic safety and
minimize congestion and constricted turning movements.



      (3)   Surface parking shall not account for more than 40% of
the lot width for lots fronting on Montgomery Road or Main Street.



      (4)   Parking structures shall be in conformance with the
height requirements as established for principal building in the district.



      (5)   Parking structures shall meet the setbacks as
established for the principal building in the district. Landscaping shall be
in compliance with Chapter 151.34 and lighting shall be provided in
accordance with Chapter 151.34.



      (6)   The design of parking structures or modifications to
existing structures shall be visually compatible with the district and the
surrounding residential neighborhood character.



   (Q)   Places of worship shall comply with the following:



      (1)   Such uses shall be located on an arterial or collector
street or have direct access to an arterial or collector street to minimize
impacts on local streets and residential neighborhoods.



      (2)   All access drives shall be located as far as practicable
from an existing intersection in order to maximize traffic safety and
minimize congestion and constricted turning movements.



      (3)   In any district, the Planning Commission and/or Council
may require all outdoor children's activity areas to be enclosed by a fence
at a height approved by the Planning Commission and/or Council. An entry gate
shall be securely fastened.



      (4)   Outdoor activity areas shall not be located closer than
20 feet to any residential property. Play structures and other similar
apparatus shall not be located closer than 40 feet to any residential
property.



      (5)   Night lighting of outdoor activity areas shall be
determined upon a careful review and consideration of all site and adjacent
residential property characteristics. Places of worship must also comply with
the regulations in §§ 151.3212(C) and 151.1213(B).



      (6)   No building shall exceed three stories or 45 feet,
including all construction mechanicals. Church and temple steeples/spires may
be erected to a height not exceeding 75 feet; provided however, in both
instances, that the building is set back from each required yard at least one
foot for every foot of additional building height above the height limit
otherwise provided in the district where the building is built.



      (7)   When located in a residential district, the design of
new structures or modifications to existing structures shall be visually
compatible with the surrounding residential neighborhood character.



      (8)   All activities, programs and other events shall be
directly related to the conditional use permit so granted and shall be
adequately and properly supervised.



      (9)   Associated uses such as a convent, faculty residence,
cafeteria, fieldhouse or infirmary shall be located on the same lot as the
principal use and comply with the building setback requirements set forth in
this chapter.



   (R)   Public safety facilities shall comply with the following:



      (1)   The minimum setbacks for individual buildings shall
comply with those established in Schedules 151.2004 and 151.2006,
respectively. As part of the development plan approval for a conditional use
permit, Planning Commission and/or Council may establish greater setbacks
when the minimum setbacks do not provide adequate safeguards to adjoining
residential property, due to topography, vegetation or building size.



      (2)   No building shall exceed three stories or 45 feet,
including all construction mechanicals.



      (3)   Outdoor storage of vehicles used in the operation of the
principal use may be permitted provided such storage areas shall be located
in the side or rear yard in off-street parking areas. Freestanding carports
which are visually compatible with the principal structure and are used for
the storage of vehicles used in operation of the principal use shall be
permitted in the side and rear yard, provided the carport maintains a minimum
setback of 20 feet from adjoining residentially zoned property.



      (4)   When located in a residential district, the design of
new structures or modifications to existing structures shall be visually
compatible with the surrounding residential neighborhood character.



   (S)   Public service facilities shall comply with the following:



      (1)   The proposed use shall not generate excessive odor, dust
or smoke beyond the premises. In order to minimize any effect of the above,
the Planning Commission and/or Council may impose additional noise reduction
measures, including mounding, landscaping and sound barriers, to assure that
the level of noise is less than or the same as the prevailing noise levels of
permitted uses in the District.



      (2)   The minimum setbacks for individual buildings shall
comply with those established in Schedule 151.2006. As part of the
development plan approval for a conditional use permit, Planning Commission
and/or Council may establish greater setbacks when the minimum setbacks do
not provide adequate safeguards to adjoining residential property, due to
topography, vegetation or building size.



      (3)   Natural or man-made barriers shall be provided to lessen
any intrusion into a residential area.



      (4)   When practicable, storage of materials shall be within a
completely enclosed building. Outdoor storage areas shall be enclosed by a
fence or similar enclosure as approved the Planning Commission and/or Council.



      (5)   Run off from areas of outdoor storage shall be directed
to a sanitary drain.



      (6)   No building shall exceed three stories or 45 feet,
including all construction mechanicals.



      (7)   Outdoor storage of vehicles used in the operation of the
principal use may be permitted provided such storage areas shall be located
in the side or rear yard in off-street parking areas. Freestanding carports
which are visually compatible with the principal structure and are used for
the storage of vehicles used in operation of the principal use shall be
permitted in the side and rear yard, provided the carport maintains a minimum
setback of 35 feet from adjoining residentially zoned property.



   (T)   Public utility substations shall comply with the following:



      (1)   Natural or man-made barriers shall be provided to lessen
any intrusion into a residential area.



      (2)   Storage of materials shall be within a completely
enclosed building.



      (3)   Substations shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from
any dwelling existing at the time the substation is erected.



   (U)   Retirement villages shall comply with the following:



      (1)   A retirement village may include one or more of the
following types of residential facilities:



         (a)   Independent living with congregate dining
facilities;



         (b)   Congregate living; or



         (c)   Assisted living.



Nursing care may be permitted as an accessory use to one or more of the above
facilities in a retirement village.



      (2)   Such uses shall be located on an arterial or collector
street or have direct access to an arterial or collector street without going
through a residential neighborhood to lessen the impact on the residential
area.



      (3)   The minimum setbacks for individual buildings shall
comply with those established in Schedules 151.2004 and 151.2006,
respectively. As part of the development plan approval for a conditional use
permit, Planning Commission and/or Council may establish greater setbacks
when the minimum setbacks do not provide adequate safeguards to adjoining
residential property, due to topography, vegetation or building size.



      (4)   The design of new structures or modifications to
existing structures shall be visually compatible with the surrounding
residential neighborhood character.



      (5)   The development plan shall indicate the parking and
emergency entrances or exits and other safety precautions.



   (V)   Schools, public & private shall comply with the following:



      (1)   Such uses shall be located on an arterial or collector
street or have direct access to an arterial or collector street without going
through a residential neighborhood to lessen the impact on the residential
area.



      (2)   All access drives shall be located as far as practicable
from an existing intersection in order to maximize traffic safety and
minimize congestion and constricted turning movements.



      (3)   In any district, the Planning Commission and/or Council
may require all outdoor children's activity areas to be enclosed by a fence
at a height approved by the Planning Commission and/or Council. An entry gate
shall be securely fastened.



      (4)   All outdoor activity areas shall be setback a minimum of
50 feet from any residential property. Any outdoor activity area with night
lighting shall be setback 100 feet from any residential property.



      (5)   No building shall exceed three stories or 45 feet,
including all construction mechanicals.



      (6)   When located in a residential district, the design of
new structures or modifications to existing structures shall be visually
compatible with the surrounding residential neighborhood character.



      (7)   The minimum setbacks for individual buildings shall
comply with those established in Schedules 151.2004 and 151.2006,
respectively. As part of the development plan approval for a conditional use
permit, Planning Commission and/or Council may establish greater setbacks
when the minimum setbacks do not provide adequate safeguards to adjoining
residential property, due to topography, vegetation or building size.



      (8)   A designated on-site drop-off/pickup area shall be
provided at the facility.



      (9)   All activities, programs and other events shall be
directly related to the conditional use permit so granted and shall be
adequately and properly supervised so as to prevent any hazard and to assure
against any disturbance or nuisance to surrounding properties, residents or
the community in general.



      (10)   Associated uses such as a stadium, cafeteria, and other
similar uses shall be located on the same lot as the principal use and comply
with the building setback requirements set forth in this chapter.



   (W)   Vehicle maintenance and repair facility shall comply with the
following:



      (1)   All work shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed
building.



      (2)   Outdoor storage of supplies, parts and merchandise shall
be within an entirely enclosed building; however, an area not to exceed 200
square feet in size of outdoor storage shall be permitted, if the area is
entirely screened by an opaque fence and landscaping.



      (3)   The parking of employee vehicles and vehicles waiting to
be serviced or returned to the customers following service shall be parked in
areas indicated for such parking on the approved site plan.



      (4)   No junk, inoperable or unlicensed vehicles may be stored
on site.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05; Am. Ord. 16-2013, passed 11-6-13; Am. Ord.
19-2014, passed 12-3-14)



§ 151.2008  ACCESSORY BUILDING REGULATIONS FOR CONDITIONAL USES IN
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.



   Accessory buildings for storage 576 square feet or less may be set back
a minimum of 15 feet from the side or rear property line when abutting a
residential use or district and ten feet when abutting an office or
commercial district. Buildings over 576 square feet must meet the setbacks of
principal buildings. Accessory buildings are not permitted in the front yard.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05; Am. Ord. 19-2014, passed 12-3-14)



§ 151.2009  ACCESSORY BUILDING REGULATIONS FOR CONDITIONAL USES IN OFFICE
AND COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS.



   Accessory buildings for storage in the Office and Commercial Districts
shall meet the setback requirements established in § 151.1211(A).



(Ord. 19-2014, passed 12-3-14)



CHAPTER 151.30:  SIGN REGULATIONS



Section



   151.3001   Purposes



   151.3002   Classification of signs



   151.3003   Signs exempt from regulation



   151.3004   Prohibited signs



   151.3005   Computation of sign size



   151.3006   Maximum sign area permitted



   151.3007   Permanent identification signs in residential districts



   151.3008   Permanent business identification signs



   151.3009   Additional permanent signs permitted



   151.3010   Schedule of maximum sign area and height regulations in
residential districts



   151.3011   Schedule of maximum sign area in office, office
commercial, retail business, Old Montgomery Gateway and Old Montgomery
Districts



   151.3012   Regulations for permanent ground mounted signs



   151.3013   Bonus sign area permitted



   151.3014   Regulations for commercial window signs



   151.3015   Supplemental regulations for temporary signs



   151.3016   Criteria for the design, construction, and location of
permanent signs



   151.3017   Criteria for the design, construction and location of
temporary signs



   151.3018   Maintenance



   151.3019   Administration procedures



   151.3020   Regulations for nonconforming signs



   151.3021   Inspection upon completion



   151.3022   Indemnification and insurance



§ 151.3001  PURPOSES.



   The purpose of this chapter is to promote and protect the public
health, welfare, and safety by regulating existing and proposed advertising
signs. More specifically, the purpose of these regulations is to:



   (A)   Ensure that signs are consistent with the community's
development objectives, thereby maintaining the community's character.



   (B)   Promote and maintain attractive, high value residential,
office, retail, and heritage districts, and preserve the scenic and natural
beauty of designated areas.



   (C)   Provide reasonable, yet appropriate, conditions for
identifying institutions, businesses, and office and retail establishments.



   (D)   Ensure that signs are located and designed to maintain a safe
and orderly pedestrian and vehicular environment.



   (E)   Provide review procedures that enable the city to
comprehensively evaluate the appropriateness of a sign to the site, building
and surroundings.



   (F)   Guarantee equal treatment under the law through accurate
record keeping and consistent enforcement.



   (G)   Provide businesses with equitable sign standards, based on the
values of fair competition and aesthetic standards acceptable to the
community.



   (H)   Prohibit all signs not expressly permitted by this chapter, if
not otherwise listed in § 151.3003.



   (I)   Place appropriate limits upon temporary signs to prevent waste
and debris.



   (J)   Provide reasonable yet appropriate restrictions regarding the
number, size and location of signs for traffic safety purposes so as not to
distract motorists traveling within the city.



   (K)   Allow a medium for non-commercial expression balanced against
the community's interest to preserve the integrity and aesthetics of the
residential community.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05; Am. Ord. 1-2006, passed 2-1-06)



§ 151.3002  CLASSIFICATION OF SIGNS.



   (A)   For the purposes of these regulations, a sign can include any
object, device, display, graphic, architectural feature, structure, or part
thereof, which is situated indoors or outdoors or is attached to, painted on,
or displayed from any premises in order to advocate a person, position or
cause, to direct attention to or announce an object, person, institution,
organization, business, product, service, event, or location by any means,
including words, letters, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors,
illumination, or projected images. The Zoning Administrator shall determine
whether objects, architectural features, or other design features that do not
contain written text constitutes signage, including a trademark, service
mark, or a logo particular to the business, institution, or organization.



   (B)   Both permitted and prohibited signs shall further be
classified by physical design or structure, and function or purpose based on
the following:



      (1)   Abandoned Sign: A sign which advertises a business,
lessor, service, owner, product, or activity which no longer operates at that
location.



      (2)   Awning or Canopy Sign: A sign that is painted on or
attached to the face of an awning or canopy or other fabric, plastic, or
structural protective cover over a door entrance or window.



      (3)   Banner Sign: Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar
material with no enclosing framework that is mounted to two or more supports
or to a building at one or more edges. National flags, state or the official
flag of any institution or business shall not be considered banners.







 



   Figure 1. Banner Sign



      (4)   Building Marker/Cornerstone: Letters, words, or insignia
cut into the building surface, or otherwise permanently mounted on the
building, at the time the building was constructed to convey a memorial, the
name of the building, address or date of construction, or similar message.



      (5)   Changeable Copy: A variable message sign composed of
individual letters, numbers or symbols panel-mounted in or on a track system.



      (6)   Directional Signage:



         (a)   Perimenter. Any sign which serves solely to
provide special information such as direction, entrance/exit, or parking
located at or near the public right-of-way, to direct or guide traffic from
the street onto private property and which does not include business names,
brand names, trademarks, logos, or information regarding product lines or
service.



         (b)   Interior. Any sign located within the interior of
a lot which is designed solely to direct pedestrian and vehicular traffic to
the proper destination within the premises and which is not oriented for
viewing from the street or adjoining properties.



      (7)   Double-faced Sign: A sign with two faces back to back.



      (8)   Electronic Message Sign:  A sign with a fixed or
changing display/message composed of a series of lights that may be changed
through electronic means. Signs whose alpha numeric, pictographic, or
symbolic informational content can be changed or altered on a fixed display
screen composed of electrically illuminated segments.



      (9)   Face of Sign: The area of a sign on which the copy is
placed.



      (10)   Flashing Sign: A sign that contains an intermittent or
flashing light source, or which includes the illusion of flashing or
intermittent light by means of animation or an externally-mounted
intermittent light source.



      (11)   Flutter Flag:  A sign constructed of cloth, canvas or
other light-weight fabric which is self-supporting, vertical in nature and
designed to wave, flap or flutter with the wind.



      (12)   Free Standing Sign: A sign that is supported by one or
more columns, or other type of base, in or upon the ground.



         (a)   Ground Mounted Sign: A freestanding sign, other
than a pole mounted or yard arm sign, independently supported by the ground
or mounted on a decorative wall or fence, and 5 feet in height or less.







 



   Figure 2. Ground Mounted Sign



         (b)   Pole Mounted Sign: A sign mounted on a ground
mounted pole or other similar support so that the height of the sign is more
than 5 feet in height.



         (c)   Yard Arm Sign: A sign mounted on a ground mounted
pole or other similar support, and is 5 feet in height or less.







 



   Figure 3. Yard Arm Sign



      (13)   Hand-decorated Sign:  A variable message sign composed
of individual letters, numbers or symbols hand-written or drawn onto a sign
panel, including chalkboard signs.



      (14)   Identification Sign (currently Development Sign): A
sign intended to identify the principal use of a lot, development, building
or building unit according to the following:



         (a)   Business Identification Sign: A sign intended to
announce or promote the use, activity, service or business on the premises of
any business or commercial establishment, and which may include a directory
of occupants.



         (b)   Development Identification Sign (currently
Subdivision Sign): A ground mounted sign identifying the name and address of
a completed residential subdivision or multi-family development.



         (c)   Institution Identification Signs: A sign
displaying the name of the organization, activities or services occupying the
premises of a public or semi-public use such as but not limited to: churches
and other places of worship, community centers, hospitals, public or
semi-public recreational facilities, or schools.



      (15)   Illuminated Sign: A sign with an artificial light
source incorporated internally or externally for the purpose of illuminating
the sign.



      (16)   Incidental Sign: A sign that is located on private
property which is generally instructional, contains no commercial message,
and has a purpose secondary to the principal use of the site on which it is
located.  The types of signs included in this category are traffic control
signs, hours of operation signs, open/close signs, parking or loading control
signs, method of payment accepted, and signs indicating the location of
telephones or emergency equipment.



      (17)   Land Sales Sign: A ground mounted sign erected in
connection with the establishment of a subdivision and the sale of lots.



      (18)   Marquee Sign: A sign attached to or supported by a
permanent roof-like structure or canopy of rigid materials supported by and
extending from the facade of a building.



      (19)   Menu Board: A sign used for drive-through facilities in
association with a permitted use.



      (20)   Mobile Signs:  Signs which are mounted on or attached
to trailers, trucks, or other motor vehicles, or motor vehicles which are
painted, decaled, or detailed to be an advertisement for goods or services,
or to advertise a person, cause or event.



      (21)   Name Plate: A sign indicating only the name and address
of the person, business, or title of the owner, renter, or lessee of the
premises or building(s).



      (22)   Nonconforming Sign: A sign that was erected legally but
which does not comply with subsequently enacted sign restrictions and
regulations.



      (23)   Off-Premise Sign: An outdoor sign which directs
attention to a business, use, service, activity, commodity, or profession
which is not conducted, sold, or offered upon the same lot where such sign is
located.



      (24)   Owner: For the purposes of this section, the owner of
the property on which a sign is located is presumed to be the owner of the
sign unless facts to the contrary are officially recorded or otherwise
brought to the attention of the building department, for example, a sign
leased from a sign company.



      (25)   Pennant: A triangular shaped flag.



      (26)   Plaque: A sign that is attached to a building,
identifying such building’s upper story occupants or street level occupants
with no street frontage.



      (27)   Political Sign: A sign which does not advertise or
promote a product, service, or commercial or institutional establishment and
which either advocates a cause, position, or issue; promotes a political or
religious organization or issue; or advocates the candidacy of a person or
slate of persons running for elective office.



      (28)   Portable Sign: Any sign not permanently attached to the
ground or other permanent structure which is typically of an A-frame style,
which is designed to be moved or transported, including sandwich board signs.



      (29)   Project Construction/Land Development Sign: A sign
which is located on a lot where construction is in progress which indicates
the name of the project, architect, engineer, contractor, or other similar
information concerning the project.



      (30)   Projecting Sign: A sign which is suspended from,
attached to, or supported by a building or structure and extending away from
said building or structure.







 



   Figure 4. Projecting Sign



      (31)   Public Regulation and Information: A sign erected by a
public authority, utility, public service organization or private industry
upon the public right-of-way or, when required by law, on private property
and which is intended to control traffic, direct, identify or inform the
public or provide needed public service as determined by the rules and
regulations of governmental agencies or through public policy. Such signs
include “No Parking Fire Lane”.



      (32)   Real Estate Sign: Any sign which advertises or
announces the sale, rental or lease of the premises upon which the sign is
located.



      (33)   Roof Sign: A sign erected, constructed, and maintained
upon or over the roof or parapet wall of any building, and having its
principal support on the roof or walls of the building.



      (34)   Rotating Sign: A sign in which the sign itself or any
portion of the sign moves in a revolving or similar manner.



      (35)   Sandwich Board Sign: A free standing ground sign
composed of two boards which contain a message and are set up in a triangle
shape, hinged along the top.  Such signs shall not exceed 24 inches in width
per face and 36 inches in height,  not including ‘legs’ which can be
used to raise the sign off the ground, provided those legs do not exceed six
inches in height.  Such signs shall be constructed of materials that present
a finished appearance.  Rough cut plywood and plastic are not acceptable
materials.  Such signs must have a frame of no less than one inch thick.



      (36)   Streamer: A ribbon shaped or cord rope which may have
pennants or banners attached which is stretched or hung between two or more
supports.



      (37)   Temporary Sign: A sign not intended for permanent
installation and which is portable, excluding prohibited signs listed in §
151.3004.



      (38)   Under-Canopy Sign: A sign suspended beneath a canopy,
ceiling, roof or marquee intended to be viewed by pedestrians from the
sidewalk beneath the canopy, ceiling, roof or marquee.



      (39)   Wall Sign: Any sign attached to or erected against the
wall of a building or structure, and having the exposed face of the sign in a
plane parallel to the plane of such wall.







 



   Figure 5. Wall Sign



      (40)   Window Sign: A sign affixed to, displayed from, or
installed inside a window for purposes of viewing from outside the premises,
and which can include screening, tinting or interior shades designed to
project an image or message. This sign does not include merchandise and other
displays located in a window.







 



   Figure 6. Window Sign



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05; Am. Ord. 16-2008, passed 11-5-08; Am. Ord.
9-2010, passed 7-21-10; Am. Ord. 16-2013, passed 11-6-13)



§ 151.3003  SIGNS EXEMPT FROM REGULATION.



   The following signs shall be exempt from regulation under the Zoning
Code.



   (A)   Any public regulations and information sign and any other
notice or warning required by a valid and applicable federal, state or local
law, regulation or resolution or by order of the City Manager.



   (B)   Any sign inside a building, not attached to a window or door
that is not legible from a distance of more than 3 feet beyond the building
in which such sign is located.



   (C)   Works of art that do not include a commercial message.



   (D)   Religious and other holiday lights and decorations containing
no commercial message when displayed during the appropriate time of the year.



   (E)   Flags of the United States, the state, foreign nations having
diplomatic relations with the United States, and any other flag adopted or
sanctioned by an elected legislative body of competent jurisdiction. These
flags must be flown in accordance with protocol established by the Congress
of the United States for the Stars and Stripes. Any flag not meeting these
conditions shall be considered a sign and shall be subject to regulations as
such.



   (F)   Building address numbers provided they do not exceed 24 inches
in height.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05; Am. Ord. 9-2010, passed 7-21-10)



§ 151.3004  PROHIBITED SIGNS.



   All signs not expressly permitted in this Chapter or exempt from
regulation pursuant to § 151.3015 are prohibited in the City of Montgomery.
Such signs include, but are not limited to, the following:



   (A)   Abandoned signs;



   (B)   Signs which incorporate in any manner any flashing or moving
lights;



   (C)   Any sign which, by reason of its size, location, content,
coloring or manner of illumination, constitutes a traffic hazard or a
detriment to traffic safety by obstructing the vision of a driver, or by
obstructing or detracting from the visibility of any traffic sign or control
device on public streets or roads;



   (D)   Signs containing any words or symbols that would cause
confusion because of their resemblance to highway traffic control or
direction signals;



   (E)   Merchandise, equipment, products, motor vehicles or other
items not themselves for sale and placed for attention getting,
identification or advertising purposes;



   (F)   Signs which are painted on or attached to any trees, utility
poles, public benches, street lights or any other form of public property or
in the public right-of-way;



   (G)   Roof signs;



   (H)   Off-premise signs;



   (I)   Pennants, streamers or similar moving devices, or air
activated graphics or balloons or flutter flags;



   (J)   Searchlights;



   (K)   Pylon or pole mounted signs;



   (L)   Mobile signs and portable signs on wheels, runners, casters,
parked trailers, parked vehicles, or other mobile devices.  Mobile signs in
transit through the city are not prohibited, but such signs are prohibited
when parked or standing on public streets or private property unless shielded
from public view.



   (M)   Changeable copy signs;



   (N)   Electronic message signs;



   (O)   Dry-erase board signs;



   (P)   Hand-decorated signs, except as provided in §§ 151.1208(D)
and 151.1209(G), 151.3014, and 151.3015(C)(2).



   (Q)   Signs which contain words, statements or graphics of an
obscene, violent or indecent nature.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05; Am. Ord. 16-2008, passed 11-5-08; Am. Ord.
9-2010, passed 7-21-10; Am. Ord. 16-2013, passed 11-6-13)



§ 151.3005  COMPUTATION OF SIGN SIZE.



   The following principals shall control the computation of sign area and
sign height:



   (A)   Determining Sign Area or Dimension.



      (1)   In the case of freestanding or projecting signs, the
sign area consists of the entire surface area of the sign on which copy could
be placed, and may include the surrounding frame structure, as provided
herein.



      (2)   For a sign comprised of individual letters, figures or
elements on a wall or similar surface of the building or structure, or an
irregular shaped ground mounted sign, the area of the sign shall encompass a
regular, or a combination of regular geometric shapes which form or
approximate the perimeter of all the elements in the display. Letters of the
same word or phrase are measured as a unit unless a letter, or symbol within
a word, is intended as a trademark or other identifiable mark. If so, such
trademark or identifiable mark shall be measured as a separate rectangular
unit within the word or phrase. When separate elements are organized to form
a single sign, but the elements are separated by open space, the area shall
be calculated by determining the geometric form, or combination of forms,
which comprise all the display areas, including the space between the
elements.



      (3)   The supporting structure or bracing of a sign shall not
be counted as part of the sign face area, unless such structure or bracing is
made part of the sign's message by inclusion of a symbol, logo, or other
three-dimensional figure, in which case the smallest rectangle which can
encompass the area of said symbol or figure shall be included as part of the
total message area calculations.



      (4)   The area for a sign with more than one face shall be
computed by adding together the area of all sign faces visible from any one
point. When two identical sign faces are placed back to back so that both
faces cannot be viewed from any point at the same time, and when such sign
faces are part of the same sign structure and are not more than 42 inches
apart, the sign area shall be computed by the measurement of one of the faces.



      (5)   In the event there is a dispute in determining the sign
area or any sign dimension, the Zoning Administrator shall have the final
responsibility for making such determination.



   (B)   Determining Sign Height.



      (1)   The height of a projecting sign shall be measured from
the top most element of the sign to the ground below.



      (2)   The height of a wall sign shall be measured from the
finished grade at the building base below the sign to the top most element of
the sign.



      (3)   The height of a ground mounted sign shall be measured
from grade level to the top of the sign. A ground mounted sign on a man-made
base, including a graded earth mound, shall be measured from the grade of the
nearest street, drive or parking area.



   (C)   Determining Clearance of a Sign. The smallest vertical
distance between the grade of the adjacent street or street curb and the
lowest point of any sign, including framework and embellishments, extending
over that grade.



   (D)   Determining Building Frontage and Building Unit. The building
wall that faces the principal street or the building wall that contains the
main entrance to the uses therein shall be considered the building frontage.



      (1)   The building frontage shall be measured along the front
wall between the exterior faces of the exterior sidewalls.



      (2)   In the case of an irregular wall surface, a straight
line extended along such wall surface shall be used to measure the length.



      (3)   For lots fronting on two or more streets, or where the
building has its main entrance on a wall other than the wall that faces the
street, the property owner shall determine which wall shall be the primary
building frontage and which wall shall be the secondary building frontage.
Only one outside wall of any business shall be considered its primary
frontage.



      (4)   For multi-tenant buildings, the portion of a building
that is owned or leased by a single tenant shall be considered a building
unit. The building frontage for a building unit shall be measured from the
centerline of the party walls defining the building unit.



   (E)   Determining Window Area. The window area of a building shall
be the total glass area of windows on the first floor of the wall of the
building facing a public street. A window panel shall be the area of glass
separated from another window panel by an opaque panel four or more inches
wide.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.3006  MAXIMUM SIGN AREA PERMITTED.



   Signs as permitted in the respective zoning districts shall conform to
the maximum area limitations set forth in Schedules 151.3010 and 151.3011,
and the supplemental regulations set forth in the following sections, as
applicable. Signs for which no maximum area limitations are specified are
subject to the review and approval of the Planning Commission, subject to the
procedures and requirements of § 151.3019 unless such signing is exempt
according to § 151.3003.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.3007  PERMANENT IDENTIFICATION SIGNS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Residential Development Identification Signs. All residential
development identification signs shall comply with the maximum area
requirements set forth in Schedule 151.3010 as well as the requirements for
ground mounted signs set forth in § 151.3012.



   (B)   Institution Identification Signs. All institutional uses,
community facilities and recreational uses, as conditionally permitted in
residential districts, shall comply with the maximum area requirements set
forth in Schedule 151.3010 as well as the requirements for ground mounted
signs set forth in § 151.3012.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.3008  PERMANENT BUSINESS IDENTIFICATION SIGNS.



   (A)   Single Occupancy Buildings in the Retail Business, Old
Montgomery Gateway and Old Montgomery Districts.  The maximum area permitted
for business identification signs for a business in a single occupancy
building or development shall be 1.5 square feet per lineal foot of building
frontage, up to 60 square feet. On lots with more than one frontage on a
public right-of-way, the frontage with the greatest length shall be used for
this calculation. Bonus sign area as specified in § 151.3013 is permitted
for secondary frontages. The allowable area shall include the sum of the
areas of all permanent signs attached to buildings, including wall signs,
awning/canopy signs and projecting signs, as well as ground mounted signs and
permanent window signs, where permitted. Sandwich board signs permitted under
§ 151.3015(C)(2) are excluded from the maximum area calculation. The maximum
area shall also include the area of incidental signs unless such incidental
signs are determined to be exempt pursuant to § 151.3009 below. In
determining the maximum area permitted, ground mounted signs and permanent
window signs shall not exceed the maximum area set forth in Schedule
151.3011. The maximum number of signs per single occupancy building or
development over which the maximum area for signage may be divided shall be
limited to three signs, including any signage allowed in § 151.3013. The
maximum height for the wall for a business identification sign is 20 feet as
measured from the building grade line to the top of the sign.



   (B)   Multiple Occupancy Buildings in the Retail Business, Old
Montgomery Gateway and Old Montgomery Districts. Business identification
signs for multiple occupancy building shall comply with the following:



      (1)   Signs Attached to Buildings. The maximum area permitted
for signs attached to the building for each tenant unit or space shall be 1.5
square feet per lineal foot of building frontage, up to 60 square feet. This
maximum area shall be the sum of the areas of all signs attached to the
building for a single tenant space, including wall signs, awning/canopy
signs, projecting signs, as well as ground mounted signs and permanent window
signs, where permitted. The maximum area shall also include the area of
incidental signs unless such incidental signs are determined to be exempt
pursuant to § 151.3009. In determining the maximum area permitted for signs
attached to buildings, permanent window signs shall not exceed the maximum
area set forth in Schedule 151.3011. The maximum number of signs per tenant
space over which the maximum area for signage may be divided shall be limited
to three signs. The maximum height on the wall for a business identification
sign is 20 feet as measured from the building grade line to the top of the
sign.



      (2)   Ground Mounted or Yard Arm Signs. Multiple occupancy
buildings shall be permitted one ground mounted or yard arm sign per project
or development in compliance with the area requirements outlined in Schedule
151.3011.



   (C)   Office and Office Commercial Districts.  Business
identification signs for a project or development in the Office and Office
Commercial Districts shall be limited to one of the following types of signs:



      (1)   A wall sign, the area of which shall be equivalent to
1.5 square feet per lineal foot of building frontage, up to 60 square feet; or



      (2)   A ground mounted or yard arm sign, the area of which
shall not exceed the maximum sign area set forth in Schedule 151.3011.



      (3)   Additional signage as permitted in § 151.3013.



   (D)   Supplemental Regulations.  In addition to the maximum area
requirements set forth in this section, permitted business identification
signs shall comply with the supplemental regulations set forth in §
151.3012, 151.3013 and 151.3014, as applicable.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05; Am. Ord. 9-2010, passed 7-21-10; Am. Ord.
2-2014, passed 3-5-14)



§ 151.3009  ADDITIONAL PERMANENT SIGNS PERMITTED.



   (A)   Incidental Signs. Incidental signs shall not be included in
the sum of the area of identification signs, provided that they are clearly
intended for incidental purposes, as determined by the Zoning Administrator
and in compliance with the following:



      (1)   The sign is not in a location and does not possess
design characteristics that constitute or serve the purposes of an
identification sign; and



      (2)   The sign is not larger than necessary to serve the
intended incidental purpose, except when located in a window, in which case
the incidental sign shall not exceed the maximum sign area set forth in
Schedules 151.3010 and 151.3011 for incidental signs.



   (B)   Under-Canopy Signs. Under-canopy signs for retail developments
shall comply with the maximum area set forth in Schedule 151.3011; the area
of which shall not be included in the sum of the maximum sign area set forth
in § 151.3008(B).



   (C)   Plaques. Plaques shall be permitted for upper story occupants
of a multi-tenant retail building to be attached to the premises at the point
of building access in compliance with the following:



      (1)   One identifying plaque permitted per occupant.



         (a)    The maximum area of the plaque shall be 3 square
feet.



         (b)   The width of the plaque may not exceed the width
of the surface of the attachment.



         (c)   The centerline height of the plaque shall be no
higher than five feet above the average grade level.



         (d)   Where more than 1 plaque is placed at an entrance,
the total group is to be related in an orderly and integrated manner in one
or more vertical columns with common vertical centerlines. The horizontal
centerline of each group must be 5 feet above the average grade level.



         (e)   Plaques must be of cast metal or of any natural
stone or wood.



      (2)   The maximum permitted area for plaques shall not be
included in the sum of the maximum sign area set forth in § 151.3008(B).



      (3)   No internally illuminated plaques shall be used.



   (D)   Menu Boards. Menu boards used in association with
drive-through facilities of a permitted use shall comply with the maximum
area set forth in Schedule 151.3011; the area of which shall not be included
in the sum of the maximum sign area set forth in § 151.3008 for business
identification signs.



   (E)   Directional Signs. Directional signs shall comply with the
maximum sign area set forth in Schedules 151.3010 and 151.3011.



§ 151.3010  SCHEDULE OF MAXIMUM SIGN AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS IN
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.



 

Sign Type (a)(f)
 
Single-Family and Multi-Family Districts


Area
 
Height




(A)   Nameplate
 
2 sq. ft.
 
NA


(B)   Residential Development Identification Sign
 
25 sq. ft. (b), (c)
 
5 ft.


(C)   Institution Identification Signs
 
25 sq. ft. (d)
 
5 ft.


(D)   Directional Signs
 
4 sq. ft.
 
4 ft.


(E)   Incidental Signs
 
1 sq. ft. (e)
 
NA


(F)   Temporary Signs
 
 


   (1)   Project Construction/ Land Development Signs and Real Estate
Signs for Multi-Family/Non-Residential Uses (g)
 
50 sq. ft. on lots 1 acre or more in size
16 sq. ft. on lots less than 1 acre in size
 
6 ft.


   (2)   Project Construction/Land Sale Signs Single Family Residential
Lot
 
8 sq. ft.
 
4 ft.


   (3)   Garage Sale Signs
 
4 sq. ft. (c), (f)
 
4 ft.


   (4)   Real Estate or Political Signs
 
4 sq. ft. (c), (f)
 
4 ft.


   (5)   Special event signs for institutional uses
 
25 or 50 sq. ft. (h)
 
5 ft.


   (6)   Political Signs
 
4 sq. ft. (c), (i)
 
4 ft. (i)


Notes to Schedule 151.3010:


NP = Not permitted      sq. ft. = square feet      NA = Not
applicable      ft. = feet


(a)   No sign type listed in Schedule 151.3010 shall be permitted to be
internally illuminated in any Residential District.


(b)   In compliance with § 151.3007(A).


(c)   Maximum of 2 faces per sign. Maximum sign area permitted per face.


(d)   Only one sign permitted, may be either a ground mounted or wall
sign, in compliance with § 151.3007(B).


(e)   Considered an identification sign unless exempt pursuant to §
151.3009. Area limitation only for incidental signs located in a window.


(f)   In compliance with § 151.3015(B) and 151.3015(A).


(g)   In compliance with § 151.3015(C).


(h)   Not more than 25 sq. ft. per sign face with a maximum of 2 sides
permitted for yard signs, or not more than 50 sq. ft. per sign face with a
maximum of 1 side permitted for banners. Temporary window signs can not take
up more than 50% of the area of the window pane it is placed on. See also §
151.3015(B)(2).


(i)   Individual political signs in residential districts shall be limited
in size to 4 sq. ft. per side, provided however, that on lots with greater
than 150 linear feet of street frontage along any one public street on which
the property is located, larger signs of up to 25 sq. ft. per side (maximum 2
sides) are permitted up to a height of 6 ft., provided however, that the
total square footage for all political signs located on a residential lot
shall not exceed a total of 50 sq. ft. [See § 151.3005(A)(4) for sign area
calculation.]




 



§ 151.3011  SCHEDULE OF MAXIMUM SIGN AREA IN OFFICE, OFFICE COMMERCIAL,
RETAIL BUSINESS, OLD MONTGOMERY GATEWAY AND OLD MONTGOMERY DISTRICTS.



 


Sign Type

 

Office Districts

 

Office Commercial Districts

 

Retail Business Districts

 

Old Montgomery Gateway District

 

Old Montgomery District





(A)   Name Plate
 

2 sq. ft.

 

2 sq. ft.

 

2 sq. ft.

 

2 sq. ft.

 

2 sq. ft.



(B)   Building Marker
 

6 sq. ft.

 

6 sq. ft.

 

6 sq. ft.

 

6 sq. ft.

 

6 sq. ft.



(C)   Residential Development Identification Signs
 

25 sq.



ft.(a), (b)

 

25 sq.



ft.(a), (b)

 

NP

 

25 sq. ft.(a)(b)

 

25 sq. ft.(a), (b)



(D)   Institution Identification
 

(c)

 

(c)

 

(c)

 

(c)

 

(c)



(E)   Business Identification Signs (d)
 


 


 


 


 




   (1)   Attached to Buildings
 

(d)

 

(d)

 

(d)

 

(d)

 

(d)



   (2)   Ground Mounted or Yard Arm Signs
 

30 or 36 sq. ft.(b), (e)

 

30 or 36 sq. ft.(b)(e)

 

30 or 36 sq. ft.(b), (e)

 

30 or 36 sq. ft.(b)(e)

 

30 or 36 sq. ft.(b), (e)



   (3)   Permanent Window Signs
 

10 sq. ft. or 20% of the window area, whichever is less

 

10 sq. ft. or 20% of the window area, whichever is less

 

10 sq. ft. or 20% of the window area, whichever is less

 

10 sq. ft. or 20% of the window area, whichever is less

 

20% of window area(f)



(F)   Plaques
 

NP

 

NP

 

3 sq. ft.(g)

 

3 sq. ft.(g)

 

3 sq. ft.(g)



(G)   Under-Canopy Signs
 

NP

 

NP

 

2 sq. ft.(b), (h)

 

2 sq. ft.(b)(h)

 

2 sq. ft.(b), (h)



(H)   Directional Signs
 


 


 


 


 




   Perimeter
 

4 sq. ft.

 

4 sq. ft.

 

4 sq. ft.

 

4 sq. ft.

 




   Interior
 

8 sq. ft.

 

8 sq. ft.

 

8 sq. ft.

 

8 sq. ft.

 




(I)   Incidental Signs
 

2 sq. ft.(i)

 

2 sq. ft.(i)

 

2 sq. ft.(i)

 

1 sq. ft.(i)

 

1 sq. ft.(i)



(J)   Menu Boards
 

NP

 

NP

 

20 sq. ft.

 

20 sq. ft.

 

20 sq. ft.



(K)   Temporary Signs(j)
 


 


 


 


 




   (1)   Project Construction/Land Development Signs
 

50 sq. ft.(j)

 

50 sq. ft.(j)

 

50 sq. ft.(j)

 

50 sq. ft.(j)

 

50 sq. ft.(j)



   (2)   Special Event Signs
 

25 or 50 sq. ft.(j), (k)

 

25 or 50 sq. ft.(j)(k)

 

25 or 50 sq. ft.(j), (k)

 

25 or 50 sq. ft.(j)(k)

 

25 or 50 sq. ft.(j), (k)



   (3)   Political Signs
 

4 sq. ft.(l)

 

4 sq. ft.(l)

 

4 sq. ft.(l)

 

4 sq. ft.(l)

 

4 sq. ft.(l)



   (4)   Real Estate Signs, on lots less than 1 acre in size
 

16 sq. ft.(j)

 

16 sq. ft.(j)

 

16 sq. ft.(j)

 

16 sq. ft.(j)

 

16 sq. ft.(j)



   (5)   Real Estate Signs, on lots 1 acre or more in size
 

50 sq. ft.(j)

 

50 sq. ft.(j)

 

50 sq. ft.(j)

 

50 sq. ft.(j)

 

50 sq. ft.(j)



Notes to Schedule 151.3011:

NP = Not permitted      sq. ft. = square feet

(a)   One per street entrance.

(b)   Maximum of 2 faces per sign. Maximum sign area permitted per face.

(c)   Shall be permitted the allowable sign area for business
identification signs for the district in which the use is located. See also
§ 151.3008.

(d)   In compliance with the maximum area requirements set forth in §
151.3008.

(e)   Maximum of 30 square feet per side if internally illuminated and 36
square feet per side if externally illuminated or not illuminated

(f)   In compliance with § 151.3014.

(g)   In compliance with the requirements set forth in § 151.3009(C).

(h)   In compliance with the requirements set forth in § 151.3009(B).

(i)   Considered an identification sign unless exempt pursuant to §
151.3009(A). Area limitation only for incidental signs located in a window.

(j)   In compliance with § 151.3015.

(k)   Not more than 25 square feet per sign face with a maximum of 2 sides
permitted for yard signs, or not more than 50 square feet per sign face with
a maximum of 1 side permitted for banners. Temporary window signs can not
take up more than 50% of the window pane it is placed on.

(l)   Individual political signs in commercial districts shall be limited
in size to 4 sq. ft. per side, provided however, that on lots with greater
than 150 linear feet of street frontage along any one public street on which
the property is located, larger signs of up to 25 sq. ft. per side (maximum 2
sides) are permitted up to a height of 6 ft., provided however, that the
total square footage for all political signs located on a commercial lot
shall not exceed a total of 50 sq. ft. [See § 151.3005(A)(4) for sign area
calculation.]




 



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05; Am. Ord. 16-2008, passed 11-5-08; Am. Ord.
9-2010, passed 7-21-10; Am. Ord. 16-2013, passed 11-6-13; Am. Ord. 2-2014,
passed 3-5-14)



§ 151.3012  REGULATIONS FOR PERMANENT GROUND MOUNTED SIGNS.



   Ground mounted signs shall be permitted in compliance with the criteria
set forth in § 151.3016 and the  following regulations:



   (A)   Ground Mounted Residential Development Identification Signs. A
ground mounted residential development identification sign shall be permitted
for a residential development in compliance with the following requirements:



      (1)   Maximum Number of Ground Mounted Signs. A maximum of 2
signs shall be permitted per development, one per street entrance, part of a
decorative wood, brick, stone, or masonry wall or of some similar design
compatible with the character of the neighborhood.



      (2)   Minimum Setback from Street. Such signs shall be located
no closer than 15 feet from the back of the curb or two feet beyond the right
of way, whichever is greater except as otherwise permitted in division (A)(3)
below, and shall be placed so as not to obstruct sight lines for vehicles or
pedestrians.



      (3)   Signs Located in the Right-of- Way. A ground mounted
sign may be placed in the right-of-way provided such sign shall be located on
the center island of a boulevard entrance, placed no closer than 25 feet to
the intersecting street’s right-of- way. Such signs are subject to being
removed by the city without reimbursement if such sign interferes with the
city’s use of the right-of-way or causes a threat to the public safety.



      (4)   Minimum Setback from Side Lot Lines. Such signs shall be
located no closer than 25 feet to a side lot line.



      (5)   Illumination.  Such signs may be externally illuminated
only, in compliance with § 151.3016(M)(l)(a) through (M)(1)(g).



      (6)   Address.  Ground signs shall include the street address.



   (B)   Ground Mounted Institution Identification Signs in Residential
Districts.  Ground mounted institution identification signs in residential
districts shall comply with the setback requirements for residential
development identification signs, as outlined in division (A) of this section.



   (C)   Ground Mounted Business Identification Signs.  In addition to
the requirements set forth in § 151.3008, a ground mounted sign or yard arm
sign in the O, OC, L-B, G-B, OMG and OM Districts shall comply with the
following:



      (1)   Maximum Number of Signs.  Not more than one ground
mounted sign shall be permitted per project or development, except for
facilities on corner lots or double frontage lots pursuant to §
151.3012(C)(6).



      (2)   Minimum Sign Setback from Street. In the OM and OMG
Districts, ground mounted or yard arm signs shall be located no closer to a
street curb or edge of pavement than six feet or 50% of the building setback,
whichever is less, but shall not be placed within the public right-of-way. In
the O, OC, L-B, and G-B Districts, ground mounted or yard arm signs shall be
located no closer than six feet to any street right-of-way line.



      (3)   Minimum Sign Setback from Side Lot Lines. Ground mounted
signs and yard arm signs in the O, OC, L-B, G-B and OMG Districts shall be
located no closer than ten feet from any side property line, except that when
a side lot coincides with a residential zoning district boundary line, the
minimum setback shall be 25 feet.



      (4)   Maximum Height of Ground Mounted Signs. All permitted
ground mounted signs or yard arm signs shall not exceed a height of five
feet, except for directional signs which shall not exceed a height of four
feet.



      (5)   Multi-Tenant Facilities.  When a ground mounted sign or
yard arm sign is erected on a site that has more than one tenant, it is the
property owner's responsibility to determine the sign area devoted to
identification of the development, building, anchor tenant, all tenants, or
some combination thereof.



      (6)   Additional Area for Corner Lots or Double Frontage
Lots.  One additional ground mounted or yard arm sign shall be permitted for
a corner lot or double frontage lot in the O, OC, L-B, and G-B Districts and
the additional area shall not be included in the sum of the maximum sign area
set forth in § 151.3008 for business identification signs provided that:



         (a)   The total frontage of both streets is not less
than 300 feet and there are at least two curb cuts providing access to the
lot;



         (b)   The area of each ground mounted or yard arm sign
complies with Schedule 151.3011, and the total area of both signs shall not
exceed 150% of the maximum area permitted for a single sign;



         (c)   The second ground mounted or yard arm sign is
clearly located to provide identification along the secondary street; and



         (d)   The two signs may be aggregated into a single sign
at the corner provided that the area of any sign face shall not exceed the
area specified in § 151.3012(C)(6)(b).



      (7)   Landscaping.  Ground mounted or yard arm signs in the
O, L-B, G-B, and OMG Districts shall be erected in a landscaped setting and
shall not be permitted on sidewalks, drives or in parking lots.



      (8)   Address. Ground signs shall include the street address.



      (9)   Ground Mounted Institution Identification Signs in
Business Districts. Ground mounted institution identification signs located
in business districts shall comply with the applicable supplemental
regulations for ground mounted business identification signs, as outlined in
divisions (C)(1) through (C)(8) above.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05; Am. Ord. 9-2010, passed 7-21-10; Am. Ord.
16-2013, passed 11-6-13; Am. Ord. 2-2014, passed 3-5-14)



§ 151.3013  BONUS SIGN AREA PERMITTED.



   Business identification signs in the ‘O’, ‘OC’, ‘LB’,
‘GB’, ‘OMG’, and ‘OM’ Districts attached to buildings may exceed
the allowable areas set forth in § 151.3008 in compliance with the following:



   (A)   One additional sign shall be permitted when a building has a
secondary customer entrance facing a side or rear parking area. Such
additional sign shall be permitted only on the secondary frontage.



   (B)   The additional sign area shall not exceed .75 square feet per
lineal foot of building frontage based on the length of the secondary
building frontage, up to 30 square feet.



   (C)   All or a portion of the sign area permitted on the primary
building frontage may be redistributed along the secondary building frontage,
provided that



the total sign area on the secondary frontage shall not exceed 1.5 square
feet per lineal foot of the secondary building frontage or 60 square feet,
whichever is less.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05; Am. Ord. 9-2010, passed 7-21-10; Am. Ord.
2-2014, passed 3-5-14)



§ 151.3014  REGULATIONS FOR COMMERCIAL WINDOW SIGNS.



   Permanent and temporary commercial window signs shall be permitted in
the Old Montgomery, Old Montgomery Gateway, Office and Retail Business
Districts in compliance with the following:



   (A)   The percentage of allowable coverage for permanent and
temporary window signs, shall comply with the maximum sign area set forth in
§ 151.3011.  The maximum area of all window signage shall not exceed ten
square feet or 20% of the window area, whichever is less.



   (B)   All temporary window signs which are two square feet and below
do not require a permit from the Community Development Department; however,
the cumulative total of such signs per business shall comply with the maximum
percent coverage as outlined in § 151.3011.  If more than one sign is used
to convey a single message and the total sign area of the signs exceeds two
square feet, a permit is required and all of the signs will be treated as one
sign.



   (C)   All temporary window signs which are between two and ten
square feet in size require a permit from the Community Development
Department and shall be counted toward the total allowable days for a special
event sign, as outlined in § 151.3015(E).  Such signs shall also comply
with the maximum percent coverage as outlined in § 151.3011.



   (D)   Permanent window signs, excluding incidental signs as outlined
in § 151.3009(A) require a permit from the Community Development Department
and will be counted toward the total sign allowance as outlined in §§
151.3010 and 151.3011.



   (E)   Permanent and temporary hand decorated window signs may not
exceed two square feet and may not be displayed simultaneously with a hand
decorated sandwich board sign.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05; Am. Ord. 16-2008, passed 11-5-08)



§ 151.3015  SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS FOR TEMPORARY SIGNS.



   The intent and purpose of the regulations governing temporary signs are
to allow signs for the occasional advertisement for the sale of a product or
service, to promote community events, or to advocate a political candidate or
issue while preserving the residential character of the Montgomery
community.  Temporary signs are by their definition signs which are not
displayed on a continuous, permanent basis.  Signs which are displayed on a
property without interruption are permanent signs governed by other
restrictions within the Code.  Temporary signs are intended to advertise a
specific event or occasion, or to advocate a candidate or cause.  The city
does not intend to unfairly limit any property owner's First Amendment right
to free expression, but the city intends such restrictions to balance the
property owner's rights against the community's interests to preserve and
protect safe pedestrian and vehicular traffic within the community, preserve
the character and integrity of the residential community, and to prevent
waste and debris.  With this intent in mind, the following rules are adopted:



   (A)   Materials and Construction.



      (1)   Temporary signs must be durable and water resistant,
constructed of sturdy material such as light weight wood and paperboard with
a wire or plastic frame so as not to litter or waste during the period of
display or during inclement weather.  Any sign which has deteriorated to
cause litter or waste, or which presents other unacceptable risks to public
safety, shall be repaired, removed and/or replaced. 



      (2)   Temporary signs shall be fastened or anchored
sufficiently, whether attached to the building or positioned in the ground,
but shall not be attached to light fixtures, landscaping features, fences,
vehicles or similar structures.



      (3)   Temporary signs may not be illuminated.



   (B)   Location.



      (1)   Temporary signs may not be erected within the street
lawn which encompasses the area within 13 feet of the back of the street curb
or from the edge of the street pavement if there is no curb.  This
limitation preserves the safe travel upon the streets of the city, preserves
the city right-of-way, and in areas where right-of-way is not easily defined,
provides an area where the property owner or a person erecting a temporary
sign can know clearly where a temporary sign can and cannot be located. 
Additionally, temporary signs may not be posted in such a position which
impairs the line of vision of motorists traveling the street or pedestrians
crossing streets or alleyways, or in such a place which otherwise causes an
unacceptable risk to public safety.



   (C)   Project Construction/Land Development Signs.  Project
construction sign and land sales signs shall be permitted in all districts in
compliance with the following:



      (1)   There shall not be more than two project construction
signs and/or two land sales signs per residential subdivision, single-family
detached cluster development, single-family attached or multi-family project,
or lot proposed for nonresidential development. Such signs shall be erected
only upon the property for sale or being developed.



      (2)   The sign shall be erected and maintained on a lot only
during the period of time that the project is under construction.  The sign
shall be removed within 14 days of commencement of the intended use. 



      (3)   Such signs shall be no closer than ten feet to any
street right-of-way line or side lot line.



      (4)   Such signs shall not be illuminated. 



      (5)   Project construction signs and land development signs
shall not exceed a height of six feet.



   (D)   Garage Sale Signs.  One temporary sign promoting a garage
sale or other similar household sale may be permitted, provided it is posted
on private property for a period not to exceed 72 hours, no more than two
times in a year.



   (E)   Special Event Signs.  Owners of a business in a business or
office district, or institutions such as churches and schools in a
residential district, may erect one temporary yard sign or banner attached to
the building on the property, for the purpose of announcing special events,
the opening of a business, community events, community markets, programs or
festivals up to 60 days per year, but no more than 14 days for each event,
business opening, program or festival.  Such sign shall be removed within
two days of the completion of the event, program, business opening or
festival.  Such special event sign shall not exceed 25 square feet per side
for double-sided signs or 50 square feet for banners with one side. 
Temporary ground signs shall not exceed six feet in height.  Such temporary
signs require a permit from the city.



   (F)   Sandwich Board Signs.  For the purpose of attracting
pedestrian traffic, sandwich board signs shall be permitted in the GB, LB,
OMG, and OM Districts to announce special events or daily specials for a
business on the premises in compliance with the following:



      (1)   In the OM District, not more than one sandwich board
sign shall be permitted per business.  A sandwich board sign may be placed
in front of the building and displayed 365 days per year.  However, in the
OM District, design criteria place the sidewalk within the right-of-way and
front the building to the sidewalk leaving no front yard, as a result such
signs may be placed on the sidewalk even if it encroaches upon the public
right-of-way, provided an unobstructed walkway with a minimum of five feet is
reserved for public passage.  Sandwich board signs must be removed from
display at the close of each business day, or no later than 10:00 p.m.  The
sign may contain a message per face, which may be permanently printed on the
sign or be a hand decorated sign.  The sign must be consistent with the
material and color requirements of design guidelines for the Heritage Overlay
District, as outlined in Chapter 151.14.  The signs may not be illuminated.



      (2)   In the GB, LB, and OMG Districts, sandwich board signs
shall meet the requirements for all other temporary signs.  Hand decorated
sandwich board signs are permitted, provided they meet the following
additional requirements:



         (a)   Such signs must be placed on a paved pedestrian
surface within ten feet of the entry door to the business for which the sign
provides an announcement or message. 



         (b)   To avoid visual clutter, the maximum outside
dimension of such signs shall not exceed 24 inches in width and 36 inches in
height per face, not including 'legs' which can be used to raise the sign off
the ground, provided those legs do not exceed six inches in height.



   (G)   Real Estate Sales Signs.  Each property owner is permitted to
erect one real estate sales sign per street front per property on more than
48 inches in height, and no greater than four square feet per side for
double-sided signs, for such period of time as is reasonably necessary to
advertise the sale or lease of such real estate.  Such signs shall be
removed within two days of the closing of the sale or lease of such real
estate.  Property owners are permitted to erect one additional sign per
property per street front no greater than eight square feet per side for
double-sided signs advertising an open house for the opportunity to visit and
tour such property which is offered for sale or lease.  Such open house
signs may be erected 72 hours in advance of the scheduled open house and must
be removed within two hours of the close of the open house.  Open house
signs shall be erected upon the property which is advertised for sale.  Open
house signs which are posted off site may only be posted off site with the
permission of the property owner upon whose lot the open house sign is
displayed.



   (H)   Construction Signs.  Construction signs advertising a
remodeling or reconstruction of a particular property may be displayed on
site only during the period of time such reconstruction or remodeling is
being completed.  Such signs must be removed within two days of the
completion of such construction.  Such signs may not exceed 48 inches in
height and are restricted to eight square feet per side for double-sided
signs.



   (I)   Non-commercial Signs.  Signs which advertise the sale or
lease of a product or service are commercial signs governed herein by the
regulation of permanent signs or special event signs.  Non-commercial signs
are those signs which announce a community event or festival.  Each property
owner may erect a non-commercial sign upon such property for the purposes
outlined herein for a period not to exceed 135 days.  Such signs after 45
days must be removed or replaced to prevent waste, litter or debris.  Such
sign must be removed earlier if it has deteriorated to debris, litter or
waste.  Such temporary non-commercial signs may be no higher than 48 inches,
and may not exceed eight square feet per side for double-sided signs.  Each
property owner is permitted up to 24 square feet of temporary signs during
the designated period provided; however, that corner lots may display two
additional temporary signs not to exceed eight square feet per side for
double-sided signs, and lots with more than 100 linear feet fronting on a
single street may display one additional temporary sign not to exceed eight
square feet per side for double-sided signs for each additional 50 linear
feet of street frontage. 



   (J)   Removal to Storage.  After the period of time outlined above
for the display of temporary signs, such temporary signs must be removed to
storage and may not be displayed or stored on site in such a manner to
continue the public display of such sign.



   (K)   Political Signs.  Political signs are temporary signs
designed for the purpose of advertising or promoting a candidate for office,
an issue standing at election or advocating a cause.



      (1)   Political signs are permitted in all districts as
temporary signs as noted in §§ 151.3010 and 151.3011.  Such signs must be
constructed in accordance with § 151.3015(A) and appropriately located as
noted in § 151.3015(B).



      (2)   While case law does not permit time limitations on the
display of political signs, property owners should repair, remove or replace
such signs periodically to prevent such temporary signs from deteriorating to
waste.



      (3)   Property owners, candidates and advocates for a ballot
issue are encouraged to remove such signs after an election to prevent
unnecessary clutter or waste.



      (4)   Although a specific permit is not required before
erecting a political sign, candidates or committees advocating a cause or
issue are encouraged to register contact information with the office of the
Zoning Administrator so that signs which deteriorate to waste and must be
removed or signs posted in the right-of-way may be removed to storage and
allow appropriate contact with the candidate or committee.



   (L)   Abatement.



      (1)   In addition to any fine which may be assessed for a
violation of this chapter, any temporary sign placed in a prohibited area or
upon public property owned by the city, or in such a position which otherwise
presents an unacceptable risk to public safety may be removed by the city or
its designated representative without notice to the owner of the sign.  If
the sign or sign materials have deteriorated to waste, debris or litter, the
sign and its materials may be disposed of immediately by the city.  Any
other sign which has been removed which has not wasted shall be removed by
the city to a place of safe storage at the City Public Works Department where
it shall remain for a period of ten days after written notice has been mailed
by ordinary U.S. mail to the owner (if such owner and the owner's address can
be identified), or notice may be provided by posting the notice on the
property from which the sign was removed if the Zoning Administrator
reasonably believes that the owner of the property in question is the owner
of or has control over the posting of the violating sign.  After the ten day
period has expired, from either mailing notice, posting the notice or the
date such sign was taken into storage if the owner or owner's address cannot
be identified, such sign may be disposed of by the city.  During such ten
day period the sign owner may retrieve such sign from the city by exhibiting
evidence of the ownership of such sign and upon payment of an administrative
abatement fee to the city in the amount of $50 per sign, such fee to cover
the costs incurred by the city for abatement and storage of the sign.



      (2)   In addition to any fine which may be assessed against a
property owner for violation of this section, a non-complying temporary sign
may be removed by the city, or its representative, 24 hours after written
notice to abate such sign has been presented to the property owner if such
sign remains in non-compliance after such 24 hour period.  The city, or its
representative, shall remove such non-complying sign to a place of safe
storage at the City Service Department where it shall remain for a period of
ten days.  After the ten day period has expired, such sign may be disposed
of by the city.  During such ten day period the business owner or property
owner which has erected such temporary sign from the city by exhibiting
evidence of the ownership of such sign, and upon payment of an administrative
abatement fee to the city in the amount of $50 per sign, such fee to cover
the costs incurred by the city for abatement and storage of the sign. 



      (3)   Written notice of abatement may be given to the owner of
the property upon which a non-complying sign has been posted by any of the
following means:



         (a)   Personal delivery to the property owner;



         (b)   Posting notice of abatement in a conspicuous place
upon such property where the non-complying sign is located;



         (c)   Regular mail notice addressed to the owner at the
property address or the address of the owner as listed in records of the
Hamilton County Auditor.  If the notice is served by ordinary mail, the
period allowed for abatement shall begin to run three days after the notice
is mailed.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05; Am. Ord. 16-2008, passed 11-5-08; Am. Ord.
9-2010, passed 7-21-10; Am. Ord. 5-2011, passed 4-6-11; Am. Ord. 16-2013,
passed 11-6-13)



§ 151.3016  CRITERIA FOR THE DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION AND LOCATION OF PERMANENT
SIGNS.



   In addition to ensuring compliance with the numerical standards of
these regulations, the Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator, when
applicable, shall consider the proposed general design, arrangement, and
placement of the sign as well as the appropriateness of the proposed sign in
relationship to other signs and other structures both on the premises and in
the surrounding areas, and shall only approve signs that are consistent with
the intent, purposes, standards, and criteria of these sign regulations.
Specific standards for determining the appropriateness of the sign shall
include, but not be limited, to the following:



   (A)   There shall be not more than 2 styles nor more than 3 sizes of
lettering used for any sign, including characters or trademarks used for
identification.



   (B)   The number of items, letters, symbols and shapes shall be
consistent with the amount of information which can be comprehended by the
viewer, reflect simplicity, avoid visual clutter and improve legibility.



   (C)   The shape of the sign shall be simple, and the sign should be
consolidated into a minimum number of elements.



   (D)   A ratio between the message and the background shall permit
easy recognition of the message.



   (E)   The size, style and location of the sign shall be appropriate
to the activity of the site.



   (F)   The sign shall complement the building and adjacent buildings
by being designed and placed to enhance the architecture.



   (G)   There shall not be more than four colors, including black and
white, used on any sign. Fluorescent colors are prohibited. For signs in the
Old Montgomery District, the colors shall be in conformity with the approved
colors for that District.



   (H)   Signs identifying multiple tenants of a building should be
designed to allow changes in tenant occupancy. Unused tenant identification
areas shall be filled with matching decorative panels so as to minimize the
appearance of vacancy.



   (I)   Signs, if seen in series, shall have a continuity of design
with the style of sign generally consistent throughout the building or block.



   (J)   Incidental signs shall contain the minimum information and the
minimum area necessary to convey the message and instruct the viewer in the
safe and efficient use of the facility.



   (K)   A sign should be constructed with a minimum of different types
of material so as to provide a consistent overall appearance.



   (L)   All signs proposed within the Heritage Overlay District
boundaries shall be constructed in compliance with the design guidelines for
this district, as outlined in Chapter 151.14.



   (M)   Illumination. The illumination of signs shall be permitted in
compliance with the following:



      (1)   Signs may be illuminated internally or by reflected
light in the Office, Office Commercial and Retail Business Districts provided
that:



         (a)   Light sources shall be shielded from all adjacent
buildings and streets.



         (b)   Lights shall not be of such brightness so as to
cause glare that is hazardous to pedestrians or motorists, or cause
reasonable objection from adjacent residential districts.



         (c)   An exposed incandescent lamp shall not be used in
excess of 25 watts unless a screen is attached or unless the sign is placed
over ten feet above the ground.



         (d)   Internally illuminated signs shall be constructed
so as to allow the illumination of only letters, numbers, or other
identifying symbols on the display surface. No light shall pass through the
background. The background material of the sign's exterior surface and the
enclosing cabinet shall be of a single, opaque, non-reflective material with
a texture approved by the Zoning Administrator.



         (e)   Sources of light and power sources shall be
weatherproofed, the fixtures shall be UL approved for outdoor use and shall
present no heat or electrical hazards under all weather conditions.



         (f)   All plastic faced signs shall have a matte-finish,
non-reflective surface.



         (g)   Signs shall not be lighted to obstruct traffic
control or any other public informational signs. Signs visible from sight
lines along streets shall not contain symbols or words, or red and green
lights that resemble highway traffic signs or devices. These regulations
shall not apply to seasonal holiday display lighting.



   (N)   Signs located within the Residential Districts and Old
Montgomery District shall be externally illuminated only.



   (O)   Construction Standards.



      (1)   The construction, erection, safety and maintenance of
signs shall comply with the Ohio Basic Building Code and the Ohio Revised
Code.



      (2)   Signs shall be located so as to pose no threat to
pedestrian or vehicular traffic.



      (3)   All signs shall be rigidly secured and no part of any
sign shall be revolving or oscillating to attract attention.



      (4)   All ground mounted signs shall have self-supporting
structures erected on or permanently attached to concrete foundations.



      (5)   All under-canopy, bracketed projecting or awning signs
shall have a minimum clearance of 15 feet over any vehicular use area. For
pedestrian use areas, the minimum clearance should be seven feet, six inches
in the Retail Business Districts and seven feet in the Office, Office
Commercial, Old Montgomery Gateway and Old Montgomery Districts.



      (6)   All bracketed projecting signs shall be attached to a
building wall at an angle of 90 degrees and project not more than four feet.
All wall signs shall not project more than six inches from the building wall
to which it is attached in the Old Montgomery Gateway and Old Montgomery
District and eight inches from the building wall to which it is attached in
the Office, Office Commercial and Retail Business Districts.



      (7)   No sign shall be erected so as to obstruct any window,
door, fire escape, balcony, platform, stairway, ladder, vent or other means
of ingress of any building.



      (8)   Signs shall be fabricated on and of material that are of
good quality, good durability and are complimentary to the building of which
they become a part.



      (9)   Signs shall be located in such a way as to maintain
horizontal and vertical clearance of all overhead electrical conductors in
accordance with National Electrical Code specifications, depending on
voltages concerned. However, in no case shall a sign be installed closer than
12 inches horizontally or vertically from any conductor or public utility guy
wire.



      (10)   Signs shall be structurally designed to withstand wind
pressure of 30 pounds per square foot in any direction.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05; Am. Ord. 16-2013, passed 11-6-13; Am. Ord.
2-2014, passed 3-5-14)



§ 151.3017  CRITERIA FOR THE DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION AND LOCATION OF TEMPORARY
SIGNS.



   The intent and purpose of the regulations governing temporary signs are
to allow signs for the occasional advertisement for the sale of a product or
service, to promote community events, or to advocate a political candidate or
issue while preserving the residential character of the community. 
Temporary signs are by their definition signs which are not displayed on a
continuous, permanent basis.  Signs which are displayed on a property
without interruption are permanent signs governed by other restrictions
within this code.  Temporary signs are intended to advertise a specific
event or occasion, or to advocate a candidate or cause.  The city does not
intend to unfairly limit any property owner's First Amendment right to free
expression, but the city intends such restrictions to balance the property
owner's rights against the community's interests to preserve and protect safe
pedestrian and vehicular traffic within the community, preserve the character
and integrity of the residential community, and to prevent waste and
debris.  With this intent in mind, the following rules are adopted:



   (A)   Materials and construction.



      (1)   Temporary signs must be durable and water resistant,
constructed of sturdy material such as light weight wood and paperboard with
a wire or plastic frame, so as not to deteriorate to litter or waste during
the period of display or during inclement weather. Any sign which has
deteriorated to cause litter or waste or which presents other unacceptable
risks to public safety shall be repaired, removed and/or replaced.



      (2)   Temporary signs shall be fastened or anchored
sufficiently, whether attached to the building or positioned in the ground,
but shall not be attached to light fixtures, landscaping features, fences,
vehicles or similar structures.



      (3)   Temporary signs may not be illuminated.



   (B)   Location.  Temporary signs may not be erected within the
street lawn which encompasses the area between the back of the street curb
and any public sidewalk, and in areas where there is no public sidewalk
within 13 feet of the back of the street curb from the edge of the street
pavement if there is no curb.  This limitation preserves the safe travel
upon the streets of the city, preserves the city right-of-way, and in areas
where the right-of-way is not easily defined, provides an area where the
property owner or a person erecting a temporary sign can know clearly where a
temporary sign can and cannot be located.  Additionally, temporary signs may
not be posted in such a position which impairs the line of vision of
motorists traveling the streets or pedestrians crossing streets or alleyways,
or in such a place which otherwise causes an unacceptable risk to public
safety.



   (C)   Special event signs.  Property owners in a business or office
district, or institutions such as churches and schools in a residential
district, may erect one temporary yard sign or banner attached to the
building on the property for the purpose of announcing special sales events,
the opening of a business, community events, programs or festivals up to 49
days per year, but not more than 14 days for each event, business opening,
program or festival.  Such signs shall be removed within two days of the
completion of the event, program, business opening or festival.  Such
special event signs shall not exceed 25 square feet per side for double-sided
signs, or 50 square feet for banners with one side.  Such temporary signs
require a permit from the city.



   (D)   Sandwich board signs.  The OM District is predominantly a
pedestrian district with limited signs to advertise the sale of a product or
service.  The city recognizes that additional temporary signs are necessary
for the viability of such businesses.  In the OM District, not more than one
sandwich board sign shall be permitted per business.  Such signs shall not
exceed 24 inches in width per face and 36 inches in height.  A sandwich
board sign may be placed in front of the building and displayed 365 days a
year.  The placement of the sign shall be no less than five feet from the
front of the building and may encroach upon the public right-of-way, provided
an unobstructed walkway with a minimum width of five feet is preserved for
public pedestrian traffic.  The City Manager or his or her designee shall
approve all signs located in the public right-of-way.  Sandwich board signs
must be placed indoors at the close of each business day, or no later than
10:00 p.m.  The sign may contain a message per face, provided such message
is permanently printed on the sign and not designed for changeable copy. 
The signs must be consistent with the design guidelines for the Heritage
Overlay District, as outlined in Chapter 151.14.



   (E)   Real estate sales signs.  Each property owner is permitted to
erect one real estate sales sign per street front per property no more than
48 inches in height, and no greater than eight square feet per side for
double-sided signs, for such period of time as is reasonably necessary to
advertise the sale or lease of such real estate.  Such signs shall be
removed within two days of the closing of the sale or lease of such real
estate.  Property owners are permitted to erect one additional sign per
property per street front no greater than eight square feet per side for
double-sided signs advertising an open house for the opportunity to visit and
tour such property which is offered for sale or lease.  Such open house
signs may be erected 72 hours in advance of the scheduled open house and must
be removed within two hours of the close of the open house.  Open house
signs shall be erected upon the property which is advertised for sale.  Open
house signs which are posted off site may only be posted off site with the
permission of the property owner upon whose lot the open house sign is
displayed.



   (F)   Construction signs.  Construction signs advertising a
remodeling or reconstruction of a particular property may be displayed on
site only during the period of time such reconstruction or remodeling is
being completed.  Such signs must be removed within two days of the
completion of such construction.  Such signs may not exceed 48 inches in
height and are restricted to eight square feet per side for double-sided
signs.



   (G)   Non-commercial signs.  Signs which advertise the sale or
lease of a product or service are commercial signs governed herein by the
regulation of permanent signs or special event signs.  Non-commercial signs
are those signs which advocate a candidate or political issue, or which
announce a community event or festival.  Each property owner may erect a
non-commercial sign upon such property for the purposes outlined herein for a
period not to exceed 135 days.  Such signs, after 45 days, must be removed
or replaced to prevent waste, litter or debris.  Such sign must be removed
earlier if it has deteriorated to debris, litter or waste.  Such temporary
non-commercial signs may be no higher than 48 inches, and may not exceed
eight square feet per side for double-sided signs.  Each property owner is
permitted up to 24 square feet of temporary signs during the designated
period provided, however, that corner lots may display two additional
temporary signs not to exceed eight square feet per side for double-sided
signs, and lots with more than 100 linear feet fronting on a single street
may display one additional temporary sign not to exceed eight square feet per
side for double-sided signs for each additional 50 linear feet of street
frontage.



   (H)   Removal to storage.  After the period of time outlined above
for the display of temporary signs, such temporary sign must be removed to
storage and may not be displayed or stored on site in such a manner to
continue the public display of such sign.



   (I)   Abatement.



      (1)   In addition to any fine which may be assessed for a
violation of this section, any temporary sign placed in a prohibited area or
upon public property owned by the city, or in such a position which otherwise
presents an unacceptable risk to public safety may be removed by the city or
its designated representative without notice to the owner of the sign.  If
the sign or sign materials have deteriorated to waste, debris or litter, the
sign and its materials may be disposed of immediately by the city.  Any
other sign which has been removed which has not wasted shall be removed by
the city to a place of safe storage at the City Service Department where it
shall remain for a period of ten days after written notice has been mailed by
ordinary U.S. mail to the owner (if such owner and the owner's address can be
identified), or notice may be provided by posting the notice on the property
from which the sign was removed if the Zoning Administrator reasonably
believes that the owner of the property in question is the owner of or has
control over the posting of the violating sign.  After the ten-day period
has expired, from either mailing notice, posting the notice, or the date such
sign was taken into storage if the owner or owner's address cannot be
identified, such sign may be disposed of by the city.  During such ten-day
period, the sign owner may retrieve such sign from the city by exhibiting
evidence of the ownership of such sign and upon payment of an administrative
abatement fee to the city in the amount of $50 per sign, such fee to cover
the costs incurred by the city for abatement and storage of the sign.



      (2)   (a)   In addition to any fine which may be assessed
against a property owner for a violation of this section, a non-complying
temporary sign may be removed by the city, or its representative, 24 hours
after written notice to abate such sign has been presented to the property
owner if such sign remains in non-compliance after such 24-hour period.  The
city, or its representative, shall remove such non-complying sign to a place
of safe storage at the City Service Department where it shall remain for a
period of ten days.  After the ten-day period has expired, such sign may be
disposed of by the city.  During such ten-day period, the business owner or
property owner which has erected such temporary sign may retrieve such sign
from the city by exhibiting evidence of the ownership of such sign, and upon
payment of an administrative abatement fee to the city in the amount of $50
per sign, such fee to cover the costs incurred by the city for abatement and
storage of the sign.



         (b)   Written notice of abatement may be given to the
owner of property upon which a non-complying sign has been posted by any of
the following means:



            1.   Personal delivery to the property owner;



            2.   Posting notice of abatement in a conspicuous
place upon such property where the non-complying sign is located;



            3.   Regular mail notice addressed to the owner at
the property address or the address of the owner as listed in the records of
the Hamilton County Auditor.  If the notice is served by ordinary mail, the
period allowed for abatement shall begin to run three business days after the
notice is mailed.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05; Am. Ord. 1-2006, passed 2-1-06)



§ 151.3018  MAINTENANCE.



   All signs shall be maintained in accordance with the following:



   (A)   The property owner shall maintain the sign in a condition fit
for the intended use and has a continuing obligation to comply with all
building code requirements.



   (B)   Whenever any sign, either conforming or nonconforming to these
regulations, is required to be removed for the purpose of repair or
repainting, the same may be done without a permit or any payment of fees
provided that all of the following conditions are met:



      (1)   There is no alteration or remodeling to the structure or
the mounting of the sign itself.



      (2)   There is no enlargement or increase in any of the
dimensions of the sign or its structure.



      (3)   There is no change in the sign message or its design.



      (4)   The sign is accessory to a legally permitted,
conditional or nonconforming use.



   (C)   If a permanent sign is deemed by the Zoning Administrator to
be in an unsafe condition, the owner of the business shall be immediately
notified, in writing, and shall, within 7 days of such notification, correct
such unsafe condition or remove the sign. The time may be extended up to 21
days by written request to the Zoning Administrator if the owner provides
evidence that it is not an immediate safety risk and a contract to
repair/replace has been entered. The allowable time may be reduced if the
sign or sign condition poses unreasonable risk to public health and/or
safety. If the correction has not been made within the time allowed, the
Zoning Administrator may remove, or cause such unsafe sign to be removed,
repaired or maintained at the expense of the property owner or lessee, sign
owner or sign lessee. If the amount owed for the removal of such sign is not
paid within 30 days of the notice, it shall become an assessment upon a lien
against the property of the sign owner, and will be certified as an
assessment against the property together with a 10% penalty for collection in
the same manner as real estate taxes. Written notice of abatement may be
given per the process outlined in § 151.3015(E)(2)(ii).



   (D)   In cases of emergency, the Zoning Administrator may cause the
immediate removal of a dangerous or defective permanent sign without notice.
Signs removed in this manner must present a hazard to the public safety as
defined in the Ohio Basic Building Code or the City of Montgomery Traffic
Code.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05; Am. Ord. 9-2010, passed 7-21-10; Am. Ord.
2-2014, passed 3-5-14)



§ 151.3019  ADMINISTRATION PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Signs requiring a permit. The following signs shall require a
permit prior to the erection or alteration of signs.



      (1)   The Planning Commission, except as otherwise required in
§ 151.3019(E), shall review and act on sign applications for the following
signs according to the design and construction criteria set forth in §
151.3016 and the review criteria for development plan review set forth in
Chapter 150.1410. Signs in the Heritage Overlay District shall be processed
according to the procedures of § 150.1206 or § 151.1207, as applicable.



         (a)   Business identification signs;



         (b)   Residential development identification signs;



         (c)   Identification signs for community facilities and
entertainment or recreational uses in residential districts;



         (d)   Permanent window signs; and



         (e)   Menu Boards, except those defined as sandwich
boards per § 151.3015(C)(2).



      (2)   The Zoning Administrator shall review and act on an
application for the following signs according to the design and construction
criteria set forth in § 151.3016. However, the Zoning Administrator may
forward such application to the Planning Commission for their review and
comment.



         (a)   Building markers;



         (b)   Directional signs;



         (c)   Temporary signs for uses other than single family
and two-family dwellings, except as required in § 151.3019(A)(2)(d) below;



         (d)   Political signs in all districts;



         (e)   Plaques; and



         (f)   Incidental signs, except when located in a window.



   (B)   Signs not requiring permit. The erection of the following
signs shall not require a permit provided that all applicable regulations of
this chapter are complied with:



      (1)   Temporary signs for single-family and two-family
dwellings.  See note regarding political signs, § 151.3015(J)(4);



      (2)   Nameplates;



      (3)   Incidental signs located in a window, including signs
promoting community events that do not exceed 18 inches by 24 inches;



      (4)   Holiday displays and greetings which display no
commercial message; and



      (5)   Internal signs not intended to be viewed from public
streets and located so as not to be visible from public streets or adjacent
properties.



   (C)   Sign concept plan. The Planning Commission may approve basic
sign parameters that set forth the location, size and style of signs to be
used within a project, whether for a single occupancy or multiple occupancy
building or development. Such sign parameters may be established when the
Planning Commission and/or Council and reviews development pans for new
buildings or at the time a specific sign application is made for an
identification sign for an existing building. Whenever the Planning
Commission has approved such sign parameters, the Zoning Administrator shall
be authorized to review and approve any subsequent sign application submitted
for the development, or a tenant of the development, that complies with such
sign parameters.



   (D)   Application Requirements. An application for a sign permit
shall be made to the Zoning Administrator on the form provided. The
application shall present the sign in a manner which best illustrates how the
sign shall be experienced by the public after it is erected on the site.
Specifically, the application shall include:



      (1)   A complete site plan or photograph showing the location
of the sign and its relationship to the building, the locations and square
footage areas of all existing signs on site, the adjacent parcels and parking
lots, drives and sidewalks.



      (2)   Three sets of detailed drawings showing the design of
the sign, including size, content, style of lettering, logo and other graphic
features, colors of the applied lettering and background, the materials of
the sign and the frame or structure, and the method of illumination.



      (3)   For applications which require review and approval by
Planning Commission, 12 sets of items (1) and (2) above must be submitted.



      (4)   Construction, erection or fastening details.



      (5)   A permit fee for each sign application, pursuant to the
current fee schedule.



   (E)   Modification to Existing Sign. When a modification is proposed
to an existing sign that is already in compliance with an approved
development plan, the Zoning Administrator shall review and act on the
application in compliance with this section. However, the Zoning
Administrator may forward such application to the Planning Commission for
their review and comment.



(Am. Ord. 9-2010, passed 7-21-10)



§ 151.3020  REGULATIONS FOR NONCONFORMING SIGNS.



   (A)   Maintenance of nonconforming signs. Nonconforming signs shall
be maintained in good condition pursuant to § 151.3018.



   (B)   Legal nonconforming status. The burden of establishing that a
sign is a legal nonconforming sign shall, in all cases, be upon the owner of
such sign.



   (C)   Alteration and removal of nonconforming signs.



      (1)   Nonconforming signs shall be removed and any subsequent
modification or replacement, excluding maintenance pursuant to § 151.3018,
shall conform to all requirements of this chapter:



         (a)   When the sign is damaged to a degree greater than
50% of the estimated replacement value;



         (b)   When the use which the nonconforming sign is
accessory to is vacant for 90 consecutive days;



         (c)   When the sign is altered in any way in structure
or size;



         (d)   When the sign is relocated;



         (e)   When the sign is replaced;



         (f)   When the sign is repainted, excluding normal
repainting or touch-up;



         (g)   Following 7 years from the date of notice to the
property owner of the amendment of this chapter which made the sign
nonconforming.



      (2)   A nonconforming sign shall not be altered, modified or
reconstructed other than to comply with this chapter except:



         (a)   When the existing use has new ownership which
results in a change in the name of the use or business on the property;



         (b)   When the space is reoccupied by a similar use and
the new occupant requires no external building or site renovation; or



         (c)   An existing sign pursuant to this division may be
changed by replacing a sign panel. Such alterations shall not require changes
to the structure, framing or erection or relocation of the sign unless such
changes conform to this chapter.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.3021  INSPECTION UPON COMPLETION.



   (A)   Any person installing, altering, or relocating a sign for
which a permit has been issued shall notify the Zoning Administrator upon
completion of the work. The Administrator may require a final inspection,
including an electrical inspection and inspection of footings on ground
mounted signs.



   (B)   The Zoning Administrator may require, upon issuance of a
permit, that he or she be notified in writing for inspection prior to the
installation of certain signs.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.3022  INDEMNIFICATION AND INSURANCE.



   All persons involved in the maintenance, installation, alteration, or
relocation of signs near or upon any public right-of-way or property shall
agree to hold harmless and indemnify the city, its officers, agents, and
employees, against any and all claims resulting from such work or the
placement of such sign(s) insofar as this code has not specifically directed
the placement of a sign. The city may also require sufficient insurance from
such persons to indemnify the city against any loss or claim by a third party.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



CHAPTER 151.32:  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS



Section



   151.3201   Purpose



   151.3202   Parking facilities required



   151.3203   Units of measure



   151.3204   Off-street parking standards



   151.3205   Allowance for shared parking



   151.3206   Allowance for parking reserves



   151.3207   Specific standards for the Old Montgomery District



   151.3208   Off-street waiting spaces for drive-thru facilities



   151.3209   Parking spaces for persons with disabilities



   151.3210   Parking design standards



   151.3211   Regulations for access drives



   151.3212   Off-street loading requirements



   151.3213   Improvement and maintenance standards



   151.3214   Parking lot landscaping and screening



   151.3215   Development plan review



§ 151.3201  PURPOSE.



   Off-street parking regulations are established to achieve, among
others, the following:



   (A)   To relieve congestion so streets can be utilized more fully
for movement of vehicular traffic;



   (B)   To promote the safety and convenience of pedestrians and
shoppers by separating parking areas and extensive car movements in the
vicinity of pedestrian ways;



   (C)   To protect adjoining residential neighborhoods from on-street
parking; and



   (D)   To establish reasonable controls on the amount of impervious
surface coverage on a property;



   (E)   To provide for the effective management of stormwater runoff
from off-street parking; and



   (F)   To promote the general convenience, welfare and prosperity of
residential, business, and service developments which depend on off-street
parking facilities.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05; Am. Ord. 2-2009, passed 3-4-09)



§ 151.3202  PARKING FACILITIES REQUIRED.



   (A)   Accessory off-street parking facilities, including access
driveways, shall be provided prior to the occupancy of any building or use.
Facilities shall be provided for the entire building or use in accordance
with the regulations contained in this Chapter whenever:



      (1)   A building is constructed or a new use is established.



      (2)   The use of an existing building is changed to a use
requiring more parking facilities.



      (3)   An existing building is altered and there is an increase
in seating capacity, floor area of the building, or number of employees.



   (B)   All off-street parking facilities, or those required as
accessory to a use of a proposed or altered building, shall continue
unobstructed in operation and shall not be reduced below the required size as
long as the principal use remains, unless an equivalent number of spaces are
provided for said use in another approved location.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.3203  UNITS OF MEASURE.



   In computing the number of parking spaces required by this Code, the
following rules shall apply:



   (A)   Floor Area. Where floor area is designated as the standard for
determining parking space requirements, gross floor area shall be used for
all land uses.



   (B)   Seats. The number of seating units installed or indicated, or
each 24 lineal inches of benches, pews, or space for loose chairs or similar
seating facilities.



   (C)   Employees. Where employees are the standard for determining
parking space requirements, employees shall mean the maximum number of
employees or contract workers on any two successive shifts.



   (D)   Fractional Numbers. Where the computation results in a
fractional unit, one additional off-street parking space shall be provided.



   (E)   Parking for Mixed Uses. A building or group of buildings
containing 2 or more uses, operating normally during the same hours, and
which have different off-street parking requirements, may jointly provide
spaces for not less than the sum of the spaces required for each use. 
Planning Commission may reduce the total number of parking spaces required
for a mixed use building or buildings when the uses do not operate with the
same hours.  The Planning Commission may use calculations by the Urban Land
Institute or other studies to calculate the appropriate number of spaces.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05; Am. Ord. 16-2013, passed 11-6-13)



§ 151.3204  OFF-STREET PARKING STANDARDS.



   The number of off-street parking spaces for each facility or use shall
be determined by application of the standards noted in Schedule 151.3204. For
a use not specified in this Schedule, the Planning Commission shall apply the
standard for a specified use that the Planning Commission determines to be
most similar to the proposed use.



 

Schedule 151.3204
Required Off-Street Parking Spaces


Principal Building or Use
 
Minimum Spaces Required (a)
 
Maximum Spaces Permitted
 
Total Spaces with Earned Bonus Spaces (b)


Residential Uses




Dwelling, single-family unit (detached or attached)
 
2 enclosed spaces per unit
 
No restriction
 


Dwelling, two-family
 
2 enclosed spaces per unit
 
No restriction
 


Dwelling, multiple
 
2 unenclosed spaces per unit
 
3 unenclosed spaces per unit
 
4 unenclosed spaces per unit


Bed and Breakfast
 
1 space per each sleeping room + requirement for dwelling unit
 
1.5 spaces per each sleeping room + requirement for dwelling unit
 
2 spaces per each sleeping room + requirement for dwelling unit


Independent senior living facility
 
2 spaces per unit
 
2.5 spaces per unit
 
3 spaces per unit


Assisted living/ congregate
 
1 space for every 3 units + 1 per employee on maximum shift
 
1 space for every 2 units + 1 per employee on maximum shift
 
1 space per unit + 1 per employee on maximum shift


Nursing homes
 
1 space for every 3 beds
 
1 space for every 2 beds
 
1 space for every bed


Community Facilities/Schools


Convention, exhibition or meeting hall (without fixed seats)
 
1 space for every 100 square feet of floor area
 
1 space for every 75 square feet of floor area
 
1 space for every 65 square feet of floor area


Day care center (child and adult)
 
1 space per employee + 1 space per 3 persons enrolled at capacity
 
1 space per employee + 1 space per 4 persons enrolled at capacity
 
1 space per employee + 1 space per 5 persons enrolled at capacity


Library, museum, art gallery or similar public building
 
10 spaces + 1 space for every 300 square feet in excess of 2,000 square feet
 
10 spaces + 2 spaces for every 300 square feet in excess of 2,000 square feet
 
10 spaces + 3 spaces for every 300 square feet in excess of 2,000 square feet


Places of worship
 
1 space for every 3 seats
 
1 space for every 2.5 seats
 
1 space for every 2 seats


Elementary or Junior High School
 
2 spaces for each classroom + 1 space for every 4 seats in auditorium
 
2 spaces for each classroom + 1 space for every 3 seats in auditorium
 
2 spaces for each classroom + 1 space for every 2 seats in auditorium


High School
 
1 space for every 2 employees + 1 space for every 4 seats in auditorium + 1
space per 10 students
 
1 space for every 1.5 employees + 1 space for every 3 seats in auditorium + 1
space per 10 students
 
1 space for every employees + 1 for every 2 seats in auditorium + 1 space per
10 students


College, University
 
1 space for every 2 employees + 1 space for every 4 seats in auditorium + 1
space for every 4 students
 
1 space for every 1.5 employees + 1 space for every 3 seats in auditorium + 1
space for every 4 students
 
1 space for every employee + 1 space for every 2 seats in auditorium + 1
space for every 4 students


Commercial/trade school (excluding outdoor activities)
 
1 space for every 2 employees + 1 space for every 2 students
 
1 space for every 1.5 employees + 1 space for every 1.5 students
 
1 space per employee + 1 space per student


Office, Professional, Medical Facilities


Administrative, executive and professional offices, banking and financial
institutions (excluding medical and dental)
 
1 space for every 350 square feet of floor area
 
1 space for every 200 square feet of floor area
 
1 space for every 175 square feet of floor area


Medical and dental offices and clinics
 
5 spaces for every 1,000 square feet of floor area
 
6.5 spaces for every 1,000 square feet of floor area
 
8 spaces for every 1,000 square feet of floor area


Hospitals
 
2.5 spaces per bed
 
3.5 spaces per bed
 
4.5 spaces per bed


Outpatient (Hospital)
 
1.5 spaces per exam/treatment room + 1 per employee on maximum shift
 
2 spaces per exam/treatment room + 1 per employee on maximum shift
 
2.5 spaces per exam/treatment room + 1 per employee on maximum shift


Research or testing laboratory
 
1 space for every 400 square feet of floor area
 
1 space for every 300 square feet of floor area
 
1 space for every 250 square feet of floor area


Retail/Service Uses


Retail sales or personal service establishments in completely enclosed
buildings (except as otherwise specified below)
 
1 space for every 250 square feet of floor area
 
1 space for every 200 square feet of floor area
 
1 space for every 150 square feet of floor area


Animal boarding facility
 
1 space for every 250 square feet of floor area
 
1 space for every 200 square feet of floor area
 
1 space for every 150 square feet of floor area


Animal hospital or clinic; grooming facility (excluding open kennels or open
runs)
 
1 space for every 400 square feet of floor area + 1 space for every 2
employees
 
1 space for every 350 square feet of floor area + 1 space for every 1.5
employees
 
1 space for every 300 square feet of floor area + 1 space for every employee


Funeral homes, mortuaries
 
1 space for every 50 square feet of floor area + 1 for each vehicle
maintained on the premises
 
1 space for every 30 square feet of floor area + 1 for each vehicle
maintained on the premises
 
1 space for every 25 square feet of floor area + 1 for each vehicle
maintained on the premises


Greenhouse, nurseries
 
1 space for every 50 square feet of floor area
 
1 space for every 30 square feet of floor area
 
1 space for every 25 square feet of floor area


Hotel, motel
 
1.2 spaces per sleeping room
 
1.35 spaces per sleeping room
 
1.5 spaces per sleeping room


Eating Establishments


Restaurant - Sit down without drive-through
 
1 space for every 65 square feet of gross leaseable area
 
1 space for every 40 square feet of gross leaseable area
 
1 space for every 30 square feet of gross leaseable area


Restaurant - Sit down with drive-through
 
1 space for every 85 square feet of gross leaseable area
 
1 space for every 65 square feet of gross leaseable area
 
1 space for every 55 square feet of gross leaseable area


Restaurant - Carry-out only
 
1 space for every 200 square feet of gross leaseable area
 
1 space for every 160 square feet of gross leaseable area
 
1 space for every 135 square feet of gross leaseable area


Automotive/Transportation


Automobile, truck, trailer sales and rental
 
1 space for every 400 square feet of floor area + 1 space for every service
stall
 
1 space for every 250 square feet of floor area + 1 space for every service
stall
 
1 space for every 200 square feet of floor area + 1 space for every service
stall


Vehicle repair facility
 
2 space for every service bay + 1 space for every employee
 
2.5 space for every service bay + 1 space for every employee
 
3 space for every service bay + 1 space for every employee


Car Wash
 
1 space for every employee
 
1 space for every employee
 
1 space for every employee


Gasoline Station
 
1 space for every employee
 
1 space for every employee
 
1 space for every employee + applicable retail space


Entertainment/Recreation


Bowling alley
 
4 spaces for each lane
 
5 spaces for each lane
 
6 spaces for each lane


Golf course (9 holes or more)
 
8 spaces for each green
 
9 spaces for each green
 
10 spaces for each green


Health, fitness facility
 
1 space for every 250 square feet of exercise area (includes locker and
equipment rooms)
 
1 space for every 165 square feet of exercise area (includes locker and
equipment rooms)
 
1 space for every 125 square feet of exercise area (includes locker and
equipment rooms)


Indoor theater or auditorium (except school auditorium), sports arena,
stadium, gymnasium
 
1 space for every 3 seats
 
1 space for every 2.5 seats
 
1 space for every 2 seats


Private clubs, lodges
 
1 space for every 100 square feet of assembly
 
1 space for every 75 square feet of assembly
 
1 space for every 50 square feet of assembly


Swimming pools, public or private (not associated with residences)
 
1 space for every 50 square feet of active recreation area
 
1 space for every 45 square feet of active recreation area
 
1 space for every 40 square feet of active recreation area


Tennis courts
 
4 spaces per court
 
5 spaces per court
 
6 spaces per court


Notes to Schedule 151.3204
(a)   A minimum of five spaces is required for each facility other than a
single-family detached, single-family attached or two-family dwelling.
(b)   Bonus spaces shall be approved by the Community Development Director
or the Planning Commission when part of a Development Plan.  Bonus spaces
shall be in a pervious material.




 



(Am. Ord. 2-2009, passed 3-4-09; Am. Ord. 16-2013, passed 11-6-13; Am. Ord.
19-2014, passed 12-3-14)



§ 151.3205  ALLOWANCE FOR SHARED PARKING.



   The Planning Commission and/or Council may accept a development plan
that satisfies the off-street parking requirements by use of off-site shared
parking with the city or another non-residential user. A copy of the proposed
off-site agreement must be submitted with the application for development
plan approval. The Director of Law must review and approve the agreement. In
determining whether to accept such proposed plan, Planning Commission and/or
Council may consider the proximity and accessibility of the off-site location
to the proposed development site, the hours of operation of the two users,
the number of spaces available and required for each business, and the
compatibility of uses.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.3206  ALLOWANCE FOR PARKING RESERVES.



   (A)   The Planning Commission may allow the applicant to delineate a
number of the minimum parking spaces required by this chapter as a reserve
area that is available to be constructed for parking in the future, if the
applicant can provide documentation showing that the proposed use of the
property at the time of the application does not require the minimum number
of spaces specified in § 151.3204.  The proposed reserve area shall be
dedicated for future parking only and shall remain as open space until such
time that it is necessary to develop the area as parking.  In any case in
which the Planning Commission permits an applicant to create a reserve
parking area, in lieu of development of the minimum required parking, then
the Planning Commission shall require, as a condition of approval, that the
development be monitored by the Community Development Director on a periodic
basis in order to ensure the adequacy of the parking as constructed meets the
current needs of the development or that there is a need to construct all or
part of the reserve area for parking.  Upon recommendation from the
Community Development Director that additional parking is needed within the
reserve area, the Planning Commission  may require that all or a portion of
the reserve area be constructed for parking. 



   (B)   If the parking area requires stormwater detention/retention,
the applicant shall either design the detention/retention facilities to
accommodate the reserve area or demonstrate what stormwater best management
practices they will incorporate in the reserve area in lieu of
detention/retention to compensate for the additional stormwater runoff, if
the reserve area is developed.  The City Engineer shall determine if the
detention/retention and/or stormwater BMP's shall be required to be built
during the initial construction phase or may be delayed until the reserve
parking area is required to be developed.



(Ord. 2-2009, passed 3-4-09)



§ 151.3207  SPECIFIC STANDARDS FOR THE OLD MONTGOMERY DISTRICT.



   (A)   No off-street parking shall be permitted between the
established building setback and the public right-of-way.



   (B)   In recognition of the historic, compact character of buildings
in the Old Montgomery District, as well as the less efficient use of the
floor area of those buildings, the number of off-street parking spaces for
each facility or use in the Old Montgomery District shall be determined
according to the following:



      (1)   The number of off-street parking spaces shall be 50% of
the standards set forth in § 151.3204.



      (2)   However, due to unique building and site characteristics
that may be present in the Old Montgomery District, the Planning Commission
and/or Council may approve a development plan with fewer parking spaces than
50% of the requirements set forth in § 151.3204. In order for the Planning
Commission to consider a reduction of the required spaces, the applicant must
demonstrate that such a reduction is warranted based on the following
criteria.



         (a)   The character of the proposed use, the design of
the building and the ability of the proposed use to reinforce the main street
environment;



         (b)   The availability and accessibility of public
parking spaces, both on-street and within public parking lots to meet the
needs of the development;



         (c)   The availability of parking areas on adjacent
sites, considering the hours of operation of the proposed use compared to
adjacent uses to meet the needs of the development; and



         (d)   The potential negative impact to the character of
the district if the requisite number of parking spaces is provided.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.3208  OFF-STREET WAITING SPACES FOR DRIVE-THRU FACILITIES.



   Drive-thru establishments and other establishments which, by their
nature, create lines of customers waiting to be served within automobiles
shall provide off-street waiting areas, on the same lot as the use, in
addition to the required number of parking spaces specified in Schedule
151.3204, in accordance with the following:



   (A)   Minimum Number of Waiting Spaces.



 

(1)   Establishments serving and/or selling food and/or drinks:
 
10 waiting spaces


(2)   Automatic car wash facilities where a chain conveyor or other
similar method is used to move the vehicle through the structure:
 
10 waiting spaces


(3)   Facilities with service windows or service entrances such as banks,
ticket booths, and other similar facilities:
 
5 waiting spaces, plus an additional 2 spaces for each additional window or
stall


(4)   Self-serve car wash facilities:
 
2 waiting spaces per stall


(5)   Gasoline stations:
 
2 waiting spaces per accessible side of a gasoline pump island



 



   (B)   Vehicles Prohibited within the Public Right-of-Way. In any
case, vehicles shall not be permitted to wait within the public right-of-way
for service at such drive-in or drive-thru facilities.



   (C)   Waiting Space Dimensions. Each required off-street waiting
space shall have an area not less than 144 square feet (measuring 8 feet by
18 feet) exclusive of access drives and shall not interfere with parking or
circulation..



§ 151.3209  PARKING SPACES FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES.



   In accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1990,
all new construction and alterations to places of public accommodation and
commercial facilities shall provide parking spaces that are designed and
constructed to be readily accessible to persons with disabilities. The
required spaces and their dimensions shall be in accordance with the
Montgomery Code of Ordinance § 76.11 and the Ohio Basic Building Code,
respectively.



§ 151.3210  PARKING DESIGN STANDARDS.



   (A)   Design standards.  Off-street parking areas for full size
vehicles, which are motor vehicles 17 feet in length or longer, shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with the following minimum dimensions
set forth in Schedule 151.3210(a), based on the angle of the spaces.  Figure
151.3210(a) illustrates the requirements for each angle scenario.



   (B)   Compact car design standards.  Up to 30% of the minimum
required parking spaces may be designed for use by compact cars, which are
motor vehicles smaller than 17 feet in length.  Any reduction in the total
parking area obtained as a result of using compact-sized spaces may be
landscaped and will count towards the total required landscaping for the
parking lot as specified in § 151.3408.  Compact-sized parking spaces shall
be located in one or more continuous areas and shall not be intermixed with
spaces designed for full size cars.  Compact-size spaces shall be labeled as
"Compact Cars Only" and  clearly marked with pavement marking.  The minimum
parking dimensions for full size and compact vehicles are set forth in
Schedule 151.3210(A) and 151.3210(B) based on the angle of spaces.



 

Schedule 151.3210(A)
Parking Design Standards for Full Size Vehicles


 
45
 
60
 
90
 
Parallel




(A)   Width of Parking Space
 

9 ft

 

9 ft

 

9 ft

 

9 ft



(B)   Length of Parking Space
 

18 ft (a)

 

18 ft (a)

 

18 ft (a)

 

23 ft



(C)   Width of Parking Aisle
 

13 ft

 

18 ft

 

24 ft

 

12 ft



(D)   Width of Double-loaded Parking Module
 

51 ft

 

56 ft

 

60 ft

 

30 ft



(E)   Circulation Aisle (one way)
 

17 ft

 

14 ft

 

14 ft

 

14 ft



Notes to Schedule 151.3210:
(a)   When a parking space is adjacent to a landscaped area that has a
width greater than 6 feet, the length of the parking space may be reduced by
not more than 2 feet




 



 

Schedule 151.3210(B)
Parking Design Standards for Compact Vehicles


 
45
 
60
 
90
 
PARALLEL


(A)   Width of Parking Space
 

8 ft

 

8 ft

 

8 ft

 

8 ft



(B)   Length of Parking Space
 

16 ft (1)

 

16 ft (1)

 

16 ft (1)

 

18 ft



(C)   Width of Parking Aisle
 

11 ft

 

16 ft

 

22 ft

 

12 ft



(D)   Width of Double-loaded Parking Module
 

47 ft

 

52 ft

 

54 ft

 

28 ft



(E)   Circulation Aisle (one way)
 

17 ft

 

14 ft

 

14 ft

 

14 ft




 



Figure 151.3210
Illustration of Parking Design Standards







 



(Am. Ord. 2-2009, passed 3-4-09; Am. Ord. 16-2013, passed 11-6-13)



§ 151.3211  REGULATIONS FOR ACCESS DRIVES.



   The driveway for a single or two-family dwelling shall be in
conformance with § 151.1009(F) and Chapter 94 of the Montgomery Codified
Ordinances.  In all other cases, the location, width, and number of entrance
and exit access drives to accessory parking spaces shall be in accordance
with the following:



   (A)   Location.  The location and width of entrance and exit
driveways to parking facilities shall be planned to interfere as little as
possible with the use of nearby property and with pedestrian and vehicular
traffic on the nearest streets. Access driveways shall be located at least 50
feet from the right-of-way line of the nearest intersecting street and no
less than ten feet from the side property line, unless there is a shared
easement with the abutting property.



   (B)   Number of Drives.



      (1)   Each lot shall be permitted one two-way access drive per
street frontage, or, upon review of the site plan, the Planning Commission
and/or Council may permit a pair of one-way drives. Planning Commission
and/or Council may permit an additional entrance on lots with a street
frontage exceeding 250 feet.



      (2)   Entrances and exits shall be limited to two lanes,
except where one driveway provides the sole access to the property and serves
as both an entrance and exit, and then it shall be limited to three lanes.



      (3)   Width of Access Drives. The width of such entrance and
exit lanes shall be not less than 12 feet or more than 15 feet per lane and
shall not exceed a total of 40 feet.



   (C)   Radius. The radius of the edge of the access drive apron shall
be at least 30 feet so that a vehicle may enter from or exit onto the curb
lane without obstructing vehicles in other traffic lanes.



(Ord. 6-2010, passed 7-7-10; Am. Ord. 16-2013, passed 11-6-13)



§ 151.3212  OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS.



   When off-street loading spaces are provided for business and commercial
buildings, they shall comply with the following regulations:



   (A)   No loading space shall be located closer than 50 feet to a lot
in any residential district, unless wholly within a completely enclosed
building or unless enclosed on all sides by a wall or fence no less than six
feet in height.



   (B)   No loading spaces shall face a street right-of-way unless the
Planning Commission determines that loading spaces facing the street
right-of-way minimizes the impact on adjoining properties. Such loading
spaces, if approved, shall be enclosed on all sides by a wall or fence no
less than six feet in height.



   (C)   Screening for all loading areas shall be provided along any
perimeter that faces a street right-of-way or adjoining property according to
the screening requirements of Chapter 151.34.



   (D)   All loading spaces shall be located on the same lot as the use
served and no part of any required yard, off-street parking area, or access
drive thereto, shall be used for loading or unloading purposes unless
permitted by Planning Commission and/or Council.



   (E)   Access to truck loading and unloading space shall be provided
directly from a public street or alley or from a right-of-way that will not
interfere with public convenience and that will permit the orderly and safe
movement of trucks.



   (F)   Streets, sidewalks, alleys or other public rights-of-way or
other public property shall not be used for loading purposes nor shall
vehicles be parked on such areas during loading and unloading.



   (G)   Off-street loading spaces shall not be used for repair or
servicing of motor vehicles.



(Ord. 6-2010, passed 7-7-10)



§ 151.3213  IMPROVEMENT AND MAINTENANCE STANDARDS.



   All driveways, parking areas, curbs, and bumper guards shall be
constructed in accordance with standards established by the City Engineer and
the following:



   (A)   Paving. All parking and loading areas and access driveways
shall have asphalt or other similar hard surface approved by the City
Engineer.  Pervious pavement may be used for all driveways, parking areas,
curbs and bumper guards if reviewed and approved by the City Engineer.  All
interior landscaped areas shall have protective curbs along the edges to
protect the landscaping from vehicles; however, the curbs shall be perforated
or have caps or breaks to allow for stormwater runoff to pass through them,
unless determined to be inappropriate by the City Engineer.



   (B)   Drainage.  Parking areas shall be graded to provide for
drainage so that injury will not be caused to adjacent properties or water
will not drain across a public sidewalk. All new parking areas over 2,000
square feet in area, excluding access drives, shall be designed so that all
storm water runoff from the parking area shall be directed through a minimum
of one stormwater best management practice (BMP) as approved by the City
Engineer prior to being released from the site. The City Engineer will work
with the engineer for the applicant to identify which progressive
environmental design should be used, being sensitive to existing site
conditions and reasonable technical specifications. Any addition to an
existing parking lot which would make the total square footage of the parking
area 2,000 square feet or more, excluding access drives, shall install a
minimum of one stormwater BMP to capture the additional volume of runoff
generated by the additional parking area. The Community Development Director
and the City Engineer may approve the reconfiguration of any parking area
which reduces the amount of impervious surface or in which at least one
stromwater BMP is installed; otherwise, the reconfiguration of the parking
area shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission. Drainage will be
consistent with all other applicable standards of the city.



   (C)   Lighting.  Parking areas shall be illuminated whenever
necessary to protect the public safety. Light sources utilized for such
illumination shall comply with the following regulations:



      (1)   Height: The height of all light poles for parking and
other public areas for permitted and conditional uses in all residential
districts and the OM Core District, shall not exceed 20 feet. The height of
all light poles in the O, OC, L-B, G-B, OMG and OM Outer Business Districts
shall not exceed 25 feet. Institutional uses in residential, office and
office commercial districts may be permitted a higher pole for accessory
recreational uses as part of the approval of a conditional use permit when it
can be shown that there will not be a significant impact on surrounding
properties. Lighting inside or directly adjacent to a stadium which is
intended to light the playing field will be the only pole lighting which may
be exempted by the Planning Commission from the height and full cut off
requirement. The height of a light pole shall be measured from the ground,
including any bases upon which the light pole sits, up to the highest
extension of the pole or structure, regardless of the position of the light
source.



      (2)   Fixture:  All light poles shall use luminares with a 90
degree full cutoff with a flat lens. Light poles under 15 feet in height
using incandescent lighting or which produce light directly by the combustion
of fossil fuels, such as kerosene or gas lamps may be exempted from the full
cutoff requirement. When a business or public institution uses a high
intensity (HID) type of bulb on an exterior wall mounted fixture, the bulb
must be housed in a full cut off fixture mounted at a 90 degree plane from
the ground and may not be directly visible from five feet beyond the property
line.



      (3)   Type of Light:  Lamp types for parking areas may be
high pressure sodium, metal halide or light emitting diode (L.E.D). When
appropriate, incandescent and lighting produced directly by the combustion of
fossil fuels may be approved. Low pressure sodium and mercury vapor lamps are
prohibited.



      (4)   Light Trespass: The height and location of poles shall
be designed such that the maximum light spillage onto the ground of any
adjoining private property shall not exceed .01 footcandles at any point five
feet from the property line.



      (5)   Illumination levels: The maximum lighting levels for
parking, and outdoor activities for institutional uses in residential
districts shall be established by the Planning Commission as part of the
conditional use permit. The maximum lighting levels for parking areas,
outdoor seating, and inventory display areas in the Office, Retail, Old
Montgomery Gateway and Old Montgomery Districts are set forth in Schedule
151.3212(C).  Lighting levels are determined by the average maintained
number of foot-candles at the ground level.



      (6)   Light poles used for public roadway illumination are
exempt from the requirements of this § 151.3212(C).



 

SCHEDULE 151.3213(C)(i)
Maximum Average Illumination Levels for Exterior Parking, Pedestrian and
Storage Areas in Office, Office Commercial, Business, Old Montgomery Gateway
and Old Montgomery Districts


Use
 
O, OC, LB, GB, OM(Outer), OMG
 
OM (Core)


Administrative/Professional Office
 
2fc
 
1.5fc


Medical Facilities (clinics with 24 hour operation)
 
3fc
 
2fc


Retail Stores, Shopping Centers
 
2fc
 
1.5fc


Restaurants, Bars, Nightclubs
 
2fc
 
1.5fc


Professional Services (grooming, dry cleaning, repair services)
 
2fc
 
1.5fc



 



 

SCHEDULE 151.3213(C)(ii)
Maximum Average Illumination Levels for Outdoor Display/Storage in the
Office, Office Commercial, Business, Old Montgomery Gateway and Old
Montgomery District


 
O, OC, GB
 
LB, OMG & OM




Indoor Recreational/Entertainment
 
2fc
 
1fc


Auto Dealerships (New, Used, Sales, Rental)
 
 


   Front Row and Feature Display
 
Day/Evening   25fc

Overnight*   10fc
 
Day/Evening   10 fc

Overnight*   5 fc


   Balance of Display/Storage Area
 
Day/Evening   12fc

Overnight*   3fc
 
Day/Evening   5fc

Overnight*   3fc


   Other Permanent/Temporary Outside Storage/Display
 
Day/Evening   8fc

Overnight*   3fc
 
Day/Evening   5fc

Overnight*   3fc


Restaurants (Bars) with Outdoor Seating
 
Day/Evening   3fc

Overnight*   1fc
 
Day/Evening   3fc

Overnight*   1fc


Gasoline Stations/Convenience Stores

with Pumps
 
 


   Under Canopy within 15 of Pump
 
Day/Evening   20fc

Overnight*   5fc
 


   Balance of Vehicle Access/Parking/Display
 
Day/Evening   5fc

Overnight*   2fc
 


Drive-Up Windows as Part of Principal Building with 10 feet of Window
 
Day/Evening   10fc

Overnight*   3fc
 
Day/Evening   10fc

Overnight*   3fc


Automated Teller Machines, Restaurant Menu Boards within 8 feet of ATM or
Board
 
Day/Evening   10fc

Overnight*   3fc
 
Day/Evening   10fc

Overnight*   3fc


*   Overnight is defined as starting one hour after close of business or
11:00 p.m., whichever is earlier. Drive-up windows for 24-hour restaurants,
24-hour gas stations and convenience stores, and 24-hour ATM’s are exempt
from the overnight restriction and may maintain day and evening lighting at
all hours.




 



   (D)   Curbs and Wheel/Bumper Guards. Appropriate bumper guards and
markings shall be provided in order to define parking spaces or limits of
paved areas and to prevent vehicles from projecting into required yards,
walkways or alleys.



   (E)   Marking.  Any off-street parking area for five or more
parking spaces shall indicate the location of each parking space, the
location of spaces for persons with disabilities, and the location and
direction or movement along the aisles and access drives providing access
thereto by painting upon the surface, by raised directional signs, or by
markers or other similar measures placed in the surface.



   (F)   Signs. Signs shall be provided in accordance with Chapter
151.30.



   (G)   Maintenance. A parking area or loading space shall be
maintained in a safe condition to keep it as free as practicable from
rubbish, paper and other loose particles, and free of any dangerous
accumulation of water, snow and ice. All adjacent sidewalks shall be kept in
a safe condition for use by pedestrians and free as practicable from rubbish,
paper and other loose particles and weeds, and the dangerous accumulation of
water, snow and ice. All signs, markers or any other methods used to indicate
direction of traffic movement and location of parking and/or loading spaces
shall be maintained in a neat and legible condition. Any walls, trees and
shrubbery, as well as surfacing of the parking lot, shall be maintained in
good condition throughout its use for parking purposes.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05; Am. Ord. 7-2006, passed 4-19-06; Am. Ord.
12-2008, passed 9-3-08; Am. Ord. 2-2009, passed 3-4-09; Am. Ord. 16-2013,
passed 11-6-13; Am. Ord. 2-2014, passed 3-5-14)



§ 151.3214  PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING.



   All screening and buffering of parking areas shall be in conformance
with the regulations set forth in Chapter 151.34.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.3215  DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW.



   Detailed drawings showing the features of off-street parking and
loading areas shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for development
plan review as required by Chapter 150.14. Any application made which
necessitates compliance with the off-street parking provision of this chapter
and involves 2 or more tax parcels shall not be considered until the Zoning
Administrator is provided with proof that the tax parcels are or will be
combined into a single tax parcel or an appropriately recorded easement.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



CHAPTER 151.34:  LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING REGULATIONS



Section



   151.3401   Intent



   151.3402   Flexibility in the arrangement and placement of
landscaping and screening



   151.3403   Landscape materials determined by zoning administrator



   151.3404   Definitions



   151.3405   General landscaping and maintenance of yards



   151.3406   Landscaping requirements for front yards



   151.3407   Screening and buffering when lot abuts a residential
district or residential use



   151.3408   Screening and landscaping of parking lots



   151.3409   Screening of accessory uses



   151.3410   Requirements for fences and walls in office, office
commercial and commercial districts



   151.3411   Approval process for required landscaping, fences and
walls



§ 151.3401  INTENT.



   Visual screening or landscape buffers for office, commercial,
institutional, and multifamily residential properties shall be provided for
the following purposes:



   (A)   To remove, reduce, lessen or absorb the impact between certain
land uses by the proper utilization of landscaped and screened buffers;



   (B)   To minimize potential noise, glare and visual clutter of
parking and loading areas, trash receptacles and outdoor storage by obscuring
the view with landscaping and screening;



   (C)   To protect, preserve and promote the aesthetic appeal,
character and value of the City of Montgomery's neighborhoods, particularly
by providing interest along the streetscape;



   (D)   To soften the appearance of building masses and to break up
and reduce the impact of large paved areas;



   (E)   To reduce heat generation, stormwater run-off and soil
erosion; and



   (F)   To establish a minimum standard for the consistent appearance
of plant material in the community landscape.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.3402  FLEXIBILITY IN THE ARRANGEMENT AND PLACEMENT OF LANDSCAPING AND
SCREENING.



   The standards and criteria in this Chapter establish the city's
objectives and levels of landscaping intensity expected. However, it should
be recognized that existing vegetation and other natural features may also
adequately achieve the intended standards and objectives of each section, and
precise compliance with all of the numerical standards may be preempted or
unnecessary because of existing or proposed conditions on the site or
adjacent property. Therefore, when complying with this Chapter, the city may
permit the flexible arrangement of the plant material to best achieve the
intent of this Chapter and the purposes of the numerical standards, to
preserve existing natural features, and to assure that other health and
safety objectives and standards of the city are not compromised.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.3403  LANDSCAPE MATERIALS DETERMINED BY ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.



   The Zoning Administrator, subject to approval by the Planning
Commission, shall adopt certain rules and regulations setting forth
acceptable landscape materials including, but not limited to, trees, shrubs,
groundcover, fill, fencing or other decorative landscape materials necessary
for the enforcement of this Chapter and any other landscape requirements of
this Code.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.3404  DEFINITIONS.



   Terms related to required landscaping and screening shall have the
following meanings:



   BERM. An earthen mound designed to provide visual interest, screen
undesirable views, and/or decrease noise.



   CALIPER. The caliper of a tree shall be determined at 4½ feet from the
ground, commonly known as Diameter at Breast Height (DBH).



   DECIDUOUS. A plant with foliage that is shed annually.



   EVERGREEN. A plant with foliage that persists and remains green
year-round.



   ORNAMENTAL TREE. A deciduous tree planted primarily for its ornamental
value or for screening purposes; tends to be smaller at maturity than a shade
tree.



   SHADE TREE. A tree with foliage that usually sheds annually and is
planted primarily for its high crown of foliage or overhead canopy. A shade
tree must be a species that has a minimum height at maturity of at least 30
feet.



   SHRUB. A woody plant, smaller than a tree, consisting of several small
stems from the ground or small branches near the ground.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.3405  GENERAL LANDSCAPING AND MAINTENANCE OF YARDS.



   Required yards and all other portions of the lot not covered by
permitted structures shall be landscaped with grass, trees, shrubbery and/or
other appropriate ground cover or landscaping material, which at all times
shall be maintained in good and healthy condition.



   (A)   All screening shall be free of advertising or other signs,
except for directional signs and other signs for the efficient flow of
vehicles, consistent with Chapter 151.30.



   (B)   Trees and shrubs shall be arranged to create varied and
attractive views and plant material should provide a variety of color
displayed throughout the year.



   (C)   The required landscaping shall be maintained in healthy
condition by the current owner and replaced when necessary. Replacement
material shall conform to the original intent of the landscape plan.



   (D)   Vehicle parking shall not be permitted in landscaped areas and
is restricted to paved surfaces.



   (E)   All interior landscaped areas shall have protective curbs
along the edges to protect the landscaping from vehicles; however, the curbs
shall be perforated or have caps or breaks to allow for stormwater runoff to
pass through them, unless determined to be inappropriate by the City Engineer.



   (F)   Bioretention areas, rain gardens, filter strips and swales
constructed to function as a stormwater best management practices shall be
allowed in the required landscaped areas; however, the existence of a
stormwater BMP does not eliminate the requirement for major shade trees as
outlined in this section.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05; Am. Ord. 2-2009, passed 3-4-09)



§ 151.3406  LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS FOR FRONT YARDS.



   All areas, except lots devoted to single-family detached and two-family
dwellings, within the required building and parking setback, excluding
driveway openings, shall be landscaped and maintained in compliance with the
following minimum standards:



   (A)   One major shade tree shall be provided for every 30 linear
feet of lot frontage, not including drive entrances. Each tree, at the time
of installation, shall have a clear trunk height of at least 6 feet and a
minimum caliper of 2 inches.



   (B)   One shrub shall be provided for every 5 linear feet of lot
frontage or fraction thereof, not including drive entrances. In the yard area
in front of a parking lot, the requirements of § 151.3408(B) shall also
apply. Each shrub shall have a minimum height of 18 inches at the time of
installation.



   (C)   All areas not devoted to trees and shrubs shall be planted
with ground cover plants, which may include grasses.  Mulch, landscaping
stones, and similar landscape treatment shall not be a substitute for ground
cover plants.



   (D)   The landscaping may be flexible in its arrangement by
appropriately aggregating the required plant materials.



   (E)   Landscaping requirements in the OM and OMG Districts may be
modified by the Zoning Administrator.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05; Am. Ord. 2-2009, passed 3-4-09; Am. Ord.
16-2013, passed 11-6-13)



§ 151.3407  SCREENING AND BUFFERING WHEN LOT ABUTS A RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
OR RESIDENTIAL USE.



   Screening and buffering along the common boundary or portion thereof
shall be provided in accordance with the following regulations and shall be
approved as part of the development plan required by Chapter 150.14.



   (A)   When Required. Screening and buffering shall be required for
parking lots, access drives or loading and service areas when adjacent to a
residential use or district.



      (1)   When a property in the LB, GB or OMG District is
adjacent to a residential use or district, the screening requirements shall
be extended along the entirety of the shared property line.



   (B)   Width of Buffer Yard. Each required buffer yard shall have the
minimum width equal to the parking setback required for the district.



   (C)   Type of Screening. A brick, stone, or decorative masonry wall
of acceptable design along the common boundary or portion thereof, shall be
required. The spaces between the wall and the lot line of the adjoining
premises in any residential district shall be landscaped with grass, hardy
shrubs, or evergreen ground cover and maintained in good condition. In lieu
of a wall, a solid, continuous, visual screen along the common boundary or
portion thereof with one or more of the items listed below can be
substituted, only when it is determined by the Planning Commission that such
screening can be equally as effective as the solid wall.



      (1)   Existing natural vegetation; or



      (2)   New screening materials consisting of one or a
combination of the following:



         (a)   A landscaped mound or berm at least 3 feet in
height, and planted with an evergreen hedge or dense planting of evergreen
shrubs not less than 6 feet in height measured from the natural grade.



         (b)   A dense vegetative planting incorporating trees
and/or shrubs of a variety which shall be equally effective in winter and
summer; or



         (c)   A solid fence.



   (D)   Location. The location of the wall, fence, or vegetation shall
be placed within the buffer yard to maximize the screening effect as
determined by the Planning Commission and/or Council.



   (E)   Height of Screening. The height of the screening, measured
from the natural grade, shall not be less than 6 feet in height and shall be
maintained in good condition without any advertising thereon. When the
screening or a portion thereof is intended to be achieved with vegetation,
the required height shall be a minimum of 42 inches at planting with a 6-foot
height achieved no later than 24 months after the initial installation.
Whenever the required screening is located along the common side lot line in
the area extending from the front building line of the residential use to the
street, the required screening shall not exceed a height of 4 feet.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05; Am. Ord. 12-2008, passed 9-3-08; Am. Ord.
16-2013, passed 11-6-13)



§ 151.3408  SCREENING AND LANDSCAPING OF PARKING LOTS.



   (A)   Landscaping on the Interior of Parking Lots. Interior
landscaping of parking lots shall be provided in accordance with the
following requirements:



      (1)   When any parking area is designed to accommodate ten or
more vehicles, a minimum of 10% of the parking surface area shall be planted
as landscaped island areas, developed and reasonably distributed throughout
the parking surface areas so as to provide visual and climatic relief from
broad expanses of pavement. The total parking surface area for such
calculation shall not include parking area in a parking garage other than the
top level which is open and exposed for parking whether at ground surface or
the roof level of an above ground parking structure. The total parking
surface area shall also include any impervious surface area intended for
stopping, standing, traveling, display or inventory of motor vehicles.



         (a)   Landscaped islands shall be developed and
distributed throughout the parking lot to define major circulation aisles and
driving lanes and provide visual and climatic relief from the broad expanses
of pavement.



         (b)   Each island shall be a minimum of 6 feet in any
horizontal dimension.



         (c)   Within the landscaped islands, there shall be
provided one major shade tree for the first 20 parking spaces and one
additional shade tree for every 10 additional parking spaces, provided there
is no impairment to the visibility of motorists or pedestrians. Each tree, at
the time of installation, having a clear trunk height of at least 6 feet and
a minimum caliper of 2 inches.



         (d)   Shrubs or low, spreading plant materials may be
planted within the required landscaped islands provided there is no
impairment to the visibility of motorists or pedestrians.



         (e)   Landscaping needed to meet the perimeter landscape
requirement shall not be counted toward interior landscaping.



      (2)   For the purpose of this section, the area of a parking
lot shall be the total vehicular surface area including circulation aisles.



   (B)   Screening Along Public Streets and Perimeter of Parking Areas.
Whenever parking areas consisting of 5 spaces or more are located such that
the parked cars will be visible from a public or private street, screening,
in addition to the interior landscaping required in division (A) above, shall
be provided and maintained between the parking area and the street
right-of-way.



      (1)   All shrubs, berms, walls, and fences, shall have a
minimum height of 3 feet, and shall cover 100% of the perimeter of the
parking area. When the screening or a portion thereof is intended to be
provided with landscaping, the minimum height at installation must be 24
inches.



      (2)   Such landscaping and/or screening shall be located
parallel to and within 5 feet of the edge of the parking lot.



   (C)   Interior landscaping islands shall be designed to serve as
bioretention areas, unless determined to be inappropriate by the City
Engineer.  A minimum of one tree shall be installed for every 435 square
feet and one shrub shall be installed for every 30 square feet of interior
landscape areas.  Figure 151.3408(F) illustrates an example of an interior
parking lot bioretention area.



   (D)   Shrubs or low, spreading plant materials may be planted within
the required landscaped islands provided there is no impairment to the
visibility of motorists or pedestrians.



   (E)   Landscaping needed to meet the perimeter landscape requirement
shall not be counted toward interior landscaping.



Figure 151.3408(F)
Bioretention Area Example







(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05; Am. Ord. 2-2009, passed 3-4-09; Am. Ord.
16-2013, passed 11-6-13)



§ 151.3409  SCREENING OF ACCESSORY USES.



   For single-family attached and multi-family developments, Office,
Office Commercial, Business, Old Montgomery Gateway, Old Montgomery
Districts, and for non-residential conditional uses in residential districts,
screening of accessory uses shall be provided according to the following:



   (A)   Trash Receptacles.  Trash receptacles shall be enclosed on
all four sides by a wall or fence with a gate or landscaping that creates a
continuous visual screen and matches or compliments the principal building. A
chain link fence shall not be permitted. The screening shall have a minimum
height of six feet or the height of the receptacle, whichever is greater. The
gate shall be enclosed at all times, except during collection.



   (B)   Loading and Service Areas. Each loading area shall be screened
along any perimeter that faces a street right-of-way or adjoining property
according to the screening requirements of § 151.3406(C).



(Ord. 6-2010, passed 7-7-10; Am. Ord. 2-2014, passed 3-5-14)



§ 151.3410  REQUIREMENTS FOR FENCES AND WALLS IN OFFICE, OFFICE COMMERCIAL
AND COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Fences and walls, when not used for screening and buffering as
required by § 151.3407, may be used in commercial districts for the
following purposes:



      (1)   For decorative purposes in the front yard, not to exceed
a height of four feet; or



      (2)   For security and/or containment of equipment or vehicles
in the side or rear yard. Fences shall be of chain link, picket, split rail,
sapling, louver, board on board, or other design, and, if painted, shall be
one color. The maximum height of the fence is six feet. The smooth finished
side of the fence or wall shall be the side of the fence that faces outward
from the lot or yard being fenced.



   (B)   All fences and walls shall be approved with appropriate
landscaping as part of a final development plan.



(Ord. 6-2010, passed 7-7-10; Am. Ord. 2-2014, passed 3-5-14)



§ 151.3411  APPROVAL PROCESS FOR REQUIRED LANDSCAPING, FENCES AND WALLS.



   (A)   Proposed landscaping, fences or walls required to fulfill the
standards and criteria of this Chapter shall be reviewed and approved as part
of a development plan pursuant to Chapter 150.14.



   (B)   When a fence or wall is proposed at a separate time from any
other development for new construction, additions or site renovation, a fence
or wall may be approved administratively by the Zoning Administrator when the
Zoning Administrator determines that the proposal:



      (1)   Complies with the requirements of this section;



      (2)   Is consistent with any previously approved plan;



      (3)   Is compatible with the current site development if there
is no approved plan; and



      (4)   Will have a minimal adverse impact to the surrounding
areas.



   (C)   If, because of the nature and location of the proposed fence
or wall, the Zoning Administrator does not make such a determination, the
request shall be referred to the Planning Commission and considered by the
Commission according to the development plan review procedures in Chapter
150.14.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



CHAPTER 151.36:  REGULATIONS FOR WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES



Section



   151.3601   Purpose



   151.3602   Definitions



   151.3603   Permitted locations



   151.3604   Locations requiring conditional use approval



   151.3605   Standards applicable to all wireless telecommunication
facilities



   151.3606   Development plan review required



   151.3607   Removal of telecommunication facilities



§ 151.3601  PURPOSE.



   These regulations are established to provide for the construction and
use of wireless telecommunication facilities, which shall include all
antennas, towers, and support structures, within areas of the city as
permitted herein. The intent of these regulations is to balance the competing
interests created by the Federal Telecommunication Act of 1996, Public Law
104-104, and the interests of the city in regulating wireless
telecommunication towers and related facilities for the following purposes:



   (A)   To protect residential areas and avoid potential damage to
adjacent properties from wireless telecommunication antennas, towers, support
structures and facility failure;



   (B)   To protect property values;



   (C)   To regulate a commercial use so as to provide for orderly and
safe development within the city;



   (D)   To provide for and protect the health, safety, and general
welfare of the residents of the city;



   (E)   To encourage the joint use of any new and existing wireless
telecommunication towers and related facilities to minimize the number of
such structures within the city; and



   (F)   To minimize the adverse visual effects of wireless
telecommunication towers and related facilities.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.3602  DEFINITIONS.



   COLLOCATION. The use of a wireless telecommunication facility by more
than one wireless telecommunication provider.



   LATTICE TOWER. A support structure constructed of vertical metal struts
and cross braces forming a triangular or square structure, which often tapers
from the foundation to the top.



   MONOPOLE. A support structure constructed of a single, self-supporting
hollow metal tube securely anchored to a foundation.



   PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES. Commercial mobile services, wireless
services and common carrier wireless exchange access services, including
cellular and digital services.



   TECHNICALLY SUITABLE. The location of a wireless telecommunication
antenna that reasonably serves the purpose for which it is intended within
the band width of frequencies for which the owner or operator of the antenna
has been licensed by the FCC to operate without a significant loss of
communication capability within developed areas of the city.



   TELECOMMUNICATION. The technology which enables information to be
exchanged through the transmission of voice, video or data signals by means
of electrical or electromagnetic systems.



   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION ANTENNA.  A physical device used to receive
or transmit electromagnetic, wireless telecommunication signals authorized by
the Federal Communications Commission between cellular phones, pagers,
commercial mobile services, wireless services and ground-wired
telecommunication systems including, but not limited to, directional
antennas, such as panels, microwave dishes and satellite dishes, and
omnidirectional antennas, such as whips. Antennas used by amateur radio
operators are excluded from this definition.



   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY.  A facility consisting of the
equipment and structures involved in receiving telecommunication or radio
signals from a mobile radio communications source and transmitting those
signals to a central switching computer which connects the mobile unit with
the land-based telephone lines or relays signals to another land based or
mobile receiver



   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION SUPPORT STRUCTURE.  Any building or
structure accessory to but necessary for the proper functioning of the
wireless telecommunication antennas.



   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION TOWER.  A structure intended to support
equipment used to transmit and/or receive telecommunication signals including
monopoles, guyed and lattice construction steel structures.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05; Am. Ord. 2-2014, passed 3-5-14)



§ 151.3603  PERMITTED LOCATIONS.



   A wireless telecommunication tower or facility is permitted in the
following areas, when in compliance with these regulations and approved by
the Planning Commission according to the procedures set forth in Chapter
150.14, Development Plan Review:



   (A)   In the O, OC, L-B, and G-B zoning districts, a new wireless
antenna may collocate on an existing tower, in compliance with the
requirements set forth in § 151.3605(A).



   (B)   In the O, OC, L-B, and G-B zoning districts, a new wireless
antenna may collocate on an existing structure that has been constructed for
other purposes, such as but not limited to water towers, church steeples,
chimneys and cooling towers, in compliance with the requirements set forth in
§ 151.3605(A).



   (C)   A new wireless telecommunication tower may be located in an O,
OC, L-B, or G-B zoning district, in compliance with the requirements set
forth in § 151.3605.



   (D)   A new wireless antenna may collocate on an existing tower in a
residential zoning district, in compliance with the requirements set forth in
§ 151.3605(A).



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05; Am. Ord. 2-2014, passed 3-5-14)



§ 151.3604  LOCATIONS REQUIRING CONDITIONAL USE APPROVAL.



   A new wireless telecommunication tower and facility may be located in a
residential zoning district as a conditional use only on sites where a
conditional use already exists. Such facilities require approval of the
Planning Commission according to the procedures outlined in Chapter 150.16
for conditional uses as well as the requirements set forth in Chapter 151.20.
In order for the Planning Commission to consider the location of a new
wireless telecommunication tower and facility as a conditional use in a
residential zoning district, the applicant must demonstrate that there is no
technically suitable space available in the O, OC, L-B, and G-B zoning
districts and the reasons why such space has been determined not to be
technically suitable.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05; Am. Ord. 2-2014, passed 3-5-14)



§ 151.3605  STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO ALL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION
FACILITIES.



   All wireless telecommunication towers and facilities shall comply with
the following standards and conditions:



   (A)   Before a new wireless telecommunication tower and facility may
be considered for approval in the O, OC, L-B, G-B, or residential zoning
districts, the applicant must demonstrate that:



      (1)   A technically suitable location is not available on an
existing tower or on an existing structure, as permitted in § 151.3603. The
applicant shall list the location of every tower, building or structure that
could support the proposed antenna(s) so as to allow it to serve its intended
function, and the reasons why such tower, building or structure has been
determined not to be technically suitable; or



      (2)   If other towers, buildings or structures are technically
suitable, the applicant must show that it has requested to collocate on all
existing towers, buildings or structures and the collocation requests were
denied by the owners of the towers, buildings or structures.



   (B)   The owner/operator of a new telecommunication tower shall
agree to allow collocation when technologically feasible and/or until said
tower has reached full antenna capacity, but in no event shall the
owner/operator agree to allow fewer than three additional antenna platforms
for three additional providers unrelated to the owner/operator. Applicants
are required to bear an equitable share of capital operating and other
expenses in connection with such shared use.  Agreement to this provision
must be included in the applicant's lease with the landowner, if different
from the owner/operator of the tower. Written documentation shall be
presented to the Zoning Administrator evidencing that the owner of the
property on which the tower is to be located has agreed to the terms of this
division as well as all other applicable requirements, regulations and
standards set forth in this section.



   (C)   All towers shall be of monopole design. Lattice-type towers
are prohibited.



   (D)   The applicant shall demonstrate that the antenna and/or tower
must be placed as proposed in order to satisfy a necessary function in the
company's grid system.



   (E)   The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed tower and
related facilities are safe and shall be located, to the extent possible, to
minimize any adverse impacts on surrounding properties including, but not
limited to tower failure, falling ice or other debris, electromagnetic fields
or radio frequency interference.



   (F)   The applicant shall agree to accommodate the
telecommunications of the local police, fire, ambulance and other city
departments at no charge.



   (G)   The minimum distance between the base of the tower and the
property lines shall be as follows:



      (1)   The distance required from any residential lot shall be
equal to 110% of the height of the tower.



      (2)   The distance required from any nonresidential lot shall
be equal to 40% of the height of the tower, the minimum setback required in
the underlying zoning district or 50 feet, whichever is greater.



   (H)   The applicant of a proposed tower shall demonstrate that the
tower is the minimum height necessary to accommodate the antennae and is no
higher than existing towers housing similar antennae.



   (I)   Prior to approving a new tower with a tower height greater
than those prevailing in the area, or a tower in a location not in compliance
with these regulations, the applicant shall demonstrate to the city that such
new tower or additional height is needed to meet the reasonable service
requirements of the applicant. This assessment shall include consideration of
alternative sites and the operational implications of such alternatives with
respect, but not limited, to: height, opportunities for collocation, impact
on residents, impact on service levels, etc. The city may retain
consultant(s) to review the information with the reasonable costs for such
consultation being borne by the applicant(s).



   (J)   Unless otherwise permitted in the zoning district in which the
wireless telecommunication tower or facility is located, all other accessory
uses to the wireless telecommunication tower or facility including, but not
limited to, business office use, maintenance depot use, and materials and
vehicle storage are prohibited from the site.



   (K)   The base of the tower and its support structures, shall be
completely enclosed with a secure fence having a minimum height of 8 feet and
shall be erected to prevent access by nonauthorized personnel.



   (L)   Landscaping shall be required to screen the fence and should
soften the appearance of the wireless telecommunication facility. At least
one row of evergreens planted five feet on center maximum and a minimum
height of 6 feet at planting shall be required to completely screen the fence
from view. Existing vegetation surrounding the fenced area shall be preserved
to the maximum extent possible. The city may permit a combination of existing
vegetation, topography, walls, decorative fences or other features instead of
landscaping, if they achieve the same degree of screening as the required
landscaping.



   (M)   The tower shall be painted a non- contrasting gray or similar
color to reduce visual impact, unless otherwise required by the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) or Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). All
accessory buildings and structures shall be aesthetically and architecturally
compatible with the surrounding environment and adjacent buildings and
structures.



   (N)   “No Trespassing” signs may be posted on the required fence
in a clearly visible location with a telephone number of who to contact in
the event of an emergency. No other signs or advertising shall be located
anywhere on the facility.



   (O)   If the wireless telecommunication site is completely
automated, adequate parking shall be required for maintenance workers. If the
site is not fully automated, the number of required parking spaces shall
equal the number of employees working on the largest shift. All parking
specifications and requirements shall be consistent with the applicable
parking requirements as established in this Zoning Code.



   (P)   Unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA),
no artificial lighting shall be permitted on any wireless telecommunication
tower or related facility.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05; Am. Ord. 2-2014, passed 3-5-14)



§ 151.3606  DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW REQUIRED.



   All wireless telecommunication towers and facilities subject to these
regulations shall comply with the procedures for development plan review set
forth in Chapter 150.14. In addition to the submission requirements set forth
in § 150.1407, the applicant shall submit the following items:



   (A)   The proposed location of the wireless telecommunication tower,
antenna and support structures, including guy wires, as well as the
dimensions, height, and where applicable, the gross floor area of the
buildings. All materials for buildings and structures shall be specified in
the plan.



   (B)   A written statement and a pictorial presentation by the
applicant as to the visual and aesthetic impacts of the proposed wireless
communication tower or facility on all adjacent residential zoning districts.



   (C)   Documentation supporting that the proposal has been approved
by the Ohio Department of Transportation, the Federal Aviation
Administration, and the Federal Communications Commission, if applicable.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.3607  REMOVAL OF TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES.



   (A)   All wireless telecommunication towers, structures and
equipment that have discontinued service for a period of 6 months shall be
removed by the owner of the tower or facility. Any structure that has not
been maintained, has been abandoned, has become obsolete, has been unused or
ceased its daily activities or operations shall be considered "discontinued".



   (B)   Any tower that has had no antenna mounted upon it for a period
of six months, or if the antenna mounted thereon are not operated for a
period of three months, shall be considered abandoned, and the owner thereof
shall remove the tower within 180 days after receipt of a notice from the
Zoning Administrator to do so.



   (C)   In the event more than one wireless communication service
provider is using the antenna support structure, the antenna support
structure shall not be considered abandoned until all such users cease using
the structure as provided in this section.



   (D)   The site shall be restored to its original state, as it
existed prior to the installation of the wireless telecommunication tower or
facility, within 6 months after the wireless telecommunication tower or
facility has discontinued service.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



CHAPTER 151.50:  NONCONFORMING USE REGULATIONS



Section



   151.5001   Purpose



   151.5002   Nonconforming use of buildings and land



   151.5003   Nonconforming buildings or structures



   151.5004   Nonconforming parking facilities



   151.5005   Nonconforming signs



   151.5006   Nonconforming lots



   151.5007   Nonconforming use due to reclassification



   151.5008   Change from nonconforming use



   151.5009   Certificate of nonconforming use required



   151.5010   Existing use deemed conditional use; permit required for
change



   151.5011   Completion of construction with zoning certificate



§ 151.5001  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of this Chapter is to recognize the existence of
uses, buildings, lots and structures that lawfully existed at the time of
this Code's enactment, or amendment thereto, but which now do not conform
with one or more of the regulations contained in this Code. Nonconforming
status is considered to be incompatible with permitted uses in the zoning
district in which it exists. Therefore, nonconforming uses, buildings, lots,
and structures are subject to regulations limiting their use, restoration,
reconstruction, extension, and substitution. Such nonconforming status shall
be continued only in conformance with this Chapter.



   (B)   A nonconforming lot, use, building or structure does not
include nonconformity with regulations pursuant to a legally granted variance
from a zoning regulation.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.5002  NONCONFORMING USE OF BUILDINGS AND LAND.



   A use of building or land, or building and land in combination,
existing lawfully on the effective date of this Zoning Code, or any amendment
thereto, but which does not conform to the use regulations of the district in
which it is located, is a lawful nonconforming use. A nonconforming use may
continue so long as it remains otherwise lawful and does not constitute a
public nuisance, subject to the following provisions:



   (A)   Alteration, Reconstruction, of a Building Occupied by a
Nonconforming Use. No building or structure occupied by a nonconforming use
shall be reconstructed or structurally altered unless the use thereof is
changed to a use permitted in the district in which the building is located.



   (B)   Enlargement or Expansion of Nonconforming Use of Buildings or
Land. A nonconforming use of a building or land shall not be physically
enlarged, expanded, or relocated to a part of the lot that was not occupied
by the use at the time it became nonconforming.



   (C)   Change or Substitution of Use. A nonconforming use of a
building, structure or land shall not be changed or substituted to another
nonconforming use unless the Board of Zoning Appeals, on appeal, finds that
the use proposed is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district
than the existing nonconforming use, and that the use proposed is in less
conflict with the character of uses permitted in the applicable zoning
district than the existing nonconforming use. In permitting such change, the
Board of Zoning Appeals may require appropriate conditions and safeguards in
accordance with other provisions of this Code to lessen or minimize the
impact of the nonconforming use.



Whenever a nonconforming use is changed to a less intensive use, such use
shall not thereafter be changed to a more intensive nonconforming use.



   (D)   Discontinuance of Use. Discontinuance of the nonconforming use
of a building, part of a building, lot or part of a lot for a continuous
period of six months or longer shall constitute voluntary abandonment of such
use and thereafter any use of the premises shall conform to the use
regulations of the district in which the building or lot is located.



   (E)   Damage or Destruction. In the event a building or structure
that is occupied by a nonconforming use is destroyed by any means to the
extent of 60% or more of the total market value of the improvements, as
currently listed by the Hamilton County Auditor, it shall not be rebuilt,
restored or re-occupied for any use unless such use conforms to the use
regulations of the district in which the building or structure is located or
upon prior approval of the Board of Zoning Appeals.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.5003  NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES.



   A building or structure existing lawfully on the effective date of this
Zoning Code, or any amendment thereto, but which does not conform to the area
or width of the lot, yard dimensions, lot coverage, height of building or
other regulations of the district in which it is located, is a lawful,
nonconforming building or structure. A nonconforming building or structure
may continue to be used or occupied by a use permitted in the district in
which it is located so long as it remains otherwise lawful and does not
constitute a public nuisance, subject to the following provisions:



   (A)   Maintenance and Repair. Ordinary repairs, or repair or
replacement of non-bearing walls, fixtures, wiring, residential driveways or
plumbing may be performed on a nonconforming structure or on any portion
thereof provided, however, no structural parts shall be replaced except when
required by law to restore such building or structure to a safe condition or
to make the building or structure conform to the regulations of the district
in which it is located.



   (B)   Enlargements or Extensions. A nonconforming building or
structure shall not be enlarged or extended unless:



      (1)   The original building or structure is made to conform to
the regulations of the district in which it is located; or



      (2)   The proposed extension is in compliance with the
regulations of the district is which it is located, and will not increase any
existing nonconformity in any other portion of the building or structure; or



      (3)   The building extension will reduce a nonconforming
condition; or



      (4)   As otherwise permitted in § 151.5003(F).



   (C)   Moving. A nonconforming building or structure shall not be
moved in whole or in part to any other location on the lot or to another
premises unless the building is made to conform to the regulations of the
district in which it is to be located, or as otherwise permitted in §
151.5003(F).



   (D)   Change in Principal Use of Building. The principal use of a
nonconforming building or structure may be changed to any other use permitted
in the district in which it is located, so long as the new use complies with
all the regulations of this Zoning Code specified for such use.



   (E)   Restoration of Damaged Building or Structure. If a
nonconforming building or structure is damaged or destroyed by any cause to
the extent of less than 60% of the total market value of the improvements, as
currently listed by the Hamilton County Auditor, those portions so destroyed
or damaged may be restored to the original footprint and floor area of the
building or structure. Any restoration that exceeds the original footprint
and/or floor area must be made to conform to the regulations of the district
in which the building is located. All repairs and restorations shall be in
compliance with the following conditions:



      (1)   A zoning certificate authorizing such restoration shall
be obtained.



      (2)   Such restoration shall be completed within a period of
one year from the date of damage or destruction.



      (3)   Such restoration shall not cause a new nonconformity,
nor shall it increase the degree of nonconformity or noncompliance existing
prior to such damage or destruction.



      (4)   Any nonconforming building destroyed by any means to the
extent of more than 60% of the total market value of the improvements, as
currently listed by the Hamilton County Auditor, shall require approval by
the Board of Zoning Appeals prior to restoration.



   (F)   Reducing a Nonconforming Site Condition on a Single-Family
Lot. If an enlargement, extension or relocation of a nonconforming building
or structure on a single-family lot is proposed that will result in a
reduction in the existing nonconformity, then such enlargement, extension or
relocation may be permitted. A Zoning Certificate authorizing the reduction
of a nonconforming site condition shall be approved by the Zoning
Administrator.



   (G)   Existing Nonconforming Site Condition on a Lot with a
Nonresidential Use. If any nonconforming site condition(s) exists when a
revised development plan is required pursuant to § 150.1402, then such site
condition(s) must be brought into compliance with district regulations,
unless the Planning Commission and/or Council determines that such
conformance cannot be reasonably achieved because of existing site
conditions. In such case, the Planning Commission and/or Council shall
approve a development plan that reduces the existing nonconforming site
condition(s) to the maximum extent practicable.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.5004  NONCONFORMING PARKING FACILITIES.



   A building or use existing lawfully on the effective date of this
Zoning Code, or an amendment thereto, that does not comply with the
off-street parking regulations, may be occupied by the existing building or
use without modifying such parking facilities. In the event that an existing
building is altered or a use is changed or substituted in accordance with
these regulations, then off-street parking shall be provided in accordance
with the numerical and design requirements of Chapter 151.32 for the intended
use.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.5005  NONCONFORMING SIGNS.



   A sign, lawfully existing on the effective date of this Zoning Code, or
any amendment thereto, but which fails to conform to the sign regulations of
the district in which it is located is a nonconforming sign. Nonconforming
signs shall comply with the regulations set forth in §§ 151.3018 and
151.3020.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.5006  NONCONFORMING LOTS.



   A lot of record that does not comply on the effective date of this
Zoning Code, or any amendment thereto, with the lot area or lot width
regulations of the district in which the lot is located may be used as
follows:



   (A)   Existing Dwelling on a Residential Lot. If the lot is occupied
by a dwelling, such dwelling shall be maintained and may be repaired,
modernized or altered, provided that the building shall not be enlarged in
floor area unless the enlarged section(s) complies with all regulations of
this Zoning Code, except the lot area and lot width regulations of the
district in which the lot is located. The number of dwelling units shall not
be increased unless all regulations, including lot area, are complied with.



   (B)   Vacant Single Nonconforming Lot of Record. A vacant
non-conforming lot that is in separate ownership and not of continuous
frontage with other lots in the same ownership shall be permitted to be
developed or redeveloped as a site for a single-family dwelling provided that
the dwelling and its accessory uses comply with all regulations of this
Zoning Code, except the lot area and lot width regulations of the district in
which the lot is located. Notwithstanding the above, existing landlocked
parcels without any frontage on a public right-of-way may not be developed or
redeveloped without obtaining the frontage required for a panhandle lot as
specified in § 151.1004(D).



   (C)   Lots in Combination. If a vacant nonconforming lot adjoins one
or more lots, all of which are controlled or pending control of an individual
intending to redevelop the property jointly, then on the effective date of
this Code or applicable amendment thereto, such lot shall be replatted to
create conforming lots as a prerequisite for development.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.5007  NONCONFORMING USE DUE TO RECLASSIFICATION.



   The provisions of this Chapter shall also apply to any building,
structure, land or other use hereafter becoming nonconforming as a result of
amendments made to this Zoning Code or Zoning Map.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.5008  CHANGE FROM NONCONFORMING USE.



   A nonconforming building or use shall cease to be considered as such
whenever it first comes into compliance with the regulations of the district
in which it is located. Upon such compliance, no nonconforming use shall be
made, resumed or reinstated.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.5009  CERTIFICATE OF NONCONFORMING USE REQUIRED.



   At the time of application for a zoning certificate or request for
variance, or upon the request of the Zoning Administrator regarding a
nonconforming lot, building, structure or use, the property owner shall
submit sufficient evidence to verify that such lot, building, structure, or
use was lawfully created or established in accordance with the zoning
regulations in existence at that time. If the evidence submitted indicates
the lot, building, structure or use was legally established and has since
become nonconforming because of the establishment of or amendment to this
Code, the Zoning Administrator shall issue a Certificate of Nonconforming
Use. This certificate shall specify the reason why the use, building,
structure or lot is nonconforming, and for nonconforming uses shall also
include a description of the extent and kind of use made of the property in
question, the portion of the structure or land used for the nonconforming
use, and the extent that dimensional requirements are nonconforming.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.5010  EXISTING USE DEEMED CONDITIONAL USE; PERMIT REQUIRED FOR CHANGE.



   Any lawfully existing use that, at the time of its establishment, was
not classified as a conditional use, but which now, because of the passage of
this Zoning Code or amendment thereto, is listed as a conditional use in the
district in which it is located, shall be deemed without further action to be
a conforming conditional use. Any change, modification, enlargement or
alteration of such use, site development conditions or signs, or change in
ownership shall only be permitted upon review and approval by the Planning
Commission and/or Council according to the procedures for conditional uses
set forth in Chapter 150.16.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



§ 151.5011  COMPLETION OF CONSTRUCTION WITH ZONING CERTIFICATE.



   Nothing in this Zoning Code shall prohibit the completion of the
construction and use of buildings for which a zoning certificate has been
issued prior to the effective date of this Zoning Code, or amendments
thereto, provided that construction is commenced within 6 months after the
issuance of such certificate, with the ground story framework including
structural parts of the second floor completed within one year, and the
entire building completed within two years after the issuance of the zoning
certificate. Actual construction is hereby defined to include the placing of
construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent
manner. Where demolition or removal of an existing building has begun
preparatory to rebuilding, such demolition or removal shall be deemed to be
actual construction.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



APPENDIX A



The land situated within the City of Montgomery, Ohio and described more
particularly as follows, shall be subject to the provision of § 151.1216.



Situated in the City of Montgomery, Hamilton County, Ohio, and in Section 5,
T 4, ER 1, Sycamore Township and in Section 35, T 5, ER 1, Symmes Township,
and more particularly described as follows:



Beginning at the southwest corner of Section 35 of Symmes Township, which
point is also the southeast corner of Section 5 of Sycamore Township; thence
N 89° 33' 50" E, along the south line of said Section 35, a distance of
640.80 feet to a point; thence N 0° 19' 20" E 1122.32 feet to a point;
thence S 89° 36' 20" W a distance of 82.50 feet to point; thence N 6° 40'
40" W a distance of 637.30 feet to a point; thence S 89° 38' 50" W a
distance of 477.32 feet to a point; thence S 0° 08' 50" W, 91.75 feet to
point; thence S 82° 28' 30" W a distance of 1334.50 feet to a point; thence
S 0° 08' 50" W a distance of 160.50 feet to a point; thence S 81° 40' 30" W
a distance of 358.70 feet to a point; thence S 0° 25' E a distance of 479.40
feet to a point; thence S 6° 57' W a distance of 1031.88 feet more or less
to a point in the south line of said Section 5, thence N 82° 46' E, along
the south line of said Section 5, a distance of 1803.04 feet to the southeast
corner of Section 5 and the place of the beginning.



(Ord. 5-2005, passed 3-23-05)



CHAPTER 152: BUILDING CODE



Section



   152.01   Adoption of building codes



   152.02   Building Department; administration thereof



   152.03   Procedures and administration



   152.04   Fees



   152.05   Revocation of permit; deemed void



   152.06   Compliance with Commissioner required



   152.07   Construction time limitation after approval of building
permit



   152.08   Final inspections; certificate of occupancy



   152.09   Residential code adopted



 



   152.99   Penalty



§ 152.01  ADOPTION OF BUILDING CODES.



   (A)   The 1992 Ohio Basic Building Code (OBBC) and the 1992 edition
of the CABO (Council of American Building Officials) One and Two Family
Dwelling Code, with the Hamilton County Supplements known as the Hamilton
County Building Code, are adopted by the city along with all codes,
references and addenda included therein by reference as the same are
constituted on the effective date of this section and as the same may be
hereafter amended or recodified by the State of Ohio or Hamilton County. Said
codes shall regulate the standards of construction and the materials employed
for all types of buildings for which provision is made therein. The city
shall adopt its own fee schedule for the various building permits which may
differ from the schedule set forth in the codes herein adopted.



   (B)   The phrases BUILDING OFFICIAL and BUILDING COMMISSIONER as
they may appear in the Ohio Basic Building Code and the Hamilton County
Building Code shall be understood as the Montgomery Building Commissioner or,
as the context may require, as his or her inspectors, agents or designees.



   (C)   The Building Commissioner may designate any qualified city
employee to administer duties that are assigned to him or her by this code of
ordinances, unless such duties are reserved solely to the Commissioner under
the Ohio Basic Building Code. An employee so designated shall have full power
to act in the Commissioner's stead.



(‘67 Code, § 152.01; Am. Ord. 27-1979, passed 9-5-79; Am. Ord. 22-1987,
passed 11-4-87; Am. Ord. 35-1993, passed 11-3-93)



§ 152.02  BUILDING DEPARTMENT; ADMINISTRATION THEREOF.



   (A)   The Building Commissioner shall, in addition to all duties
imposed by the city and state building codes and not in limitation thereof,
inspect all plans, issue all building permits and enforce all building and
zoning regulations. A Deputy Building Commissioner shall have such duties as
are delegated to him or her by the Building Commissioner and shall have full
power to act in his or her stead.



      (1)   The Building Commissioner shall not inspect plans,
specifications, or work in progress in which he or she as an individual has
an interest. In case of any conflict of interest, the Deputy Building
Commissioner shall exercise the duties of the Building Commissioner.



      (2)   The Building Commissioner and Deputy Building
Commissioner who shall both be architects (with five years experience in home
and commercial construction) and registered to practice in Ohio, shall be
appointed by the City Manager with the advice and consent of Council and
serve at the pleasure of the City Manager.



   (B)   Building inspectors.



      (1)   There is created the position of one or more building
inspectors whose duties it shall be to make no less than three inspections on
every structure built within the municipality, in pursuance to permits issued
by the Building Commissioner to assure compliance with the city Building Code
and the city Zoning Code.



      (2)   The building inspectors shall be persons qualified to
enforce the requirements of the city Building Code and the city Zoning Code
and must receive certification of the Building Commissioner that they are so
qualified. No building inspector shall inspect construction of any structure
upon which such building inspector performed work.



(‘67 Code, § 152.02) (Am. Ord. 26-1981, passed 10-7-81; Am. Ord. 11-2012,
passed 12-5-12)



§ 152.03  PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   The Building Commissioner is empowered to make preliminary
examinations of any plans, specifications, or plats, which may be submitted
to him or her prior to making formal application for a building permit. As a
result of such examination, the Building Commissioner may state his or her
opinion as to whether or not the preliminary plans are in conformance with
the city Building Code or the city Zoning Code. This opinion shall not be
binding on the municipality and the Building Commissioner may change his or
her opinion during his or her consideration of the formal application for a
building permit.



   (B)   The municipality shall provide the Building Commissioner with
forms of application for building permits. These forms shall set forth spaces
for information as the Building Commissioner deems appropriate. Upon filing
of this application and a deposit of $25, the Building Commissioner shall
inspect the application, plans, plats, etc., submitted to him or her and make
his or her opinion as to whether or not the construction as contemplated
conforms to the applicable provisions of the city Building Code and the city
Zoning Code. The Building Commissioner shall upon being satisfied that the
plans do conform with the provisions of the city Building Code and the city
Zoning Code, stamp such plans as "approved" by the Building Department.



   (C)   In the event proffered plans are disapproved, or in the event
no action is taken upon such plans by the Building Commissioner within 30
days, which inaction shall be deemed disapproval, the person, firm, or
corporation, having submitted such plans, shall thereafter have such rights
as are established under the Zoning Code of this municipality. Applicants for
permits shall be obligated for 50% of the required permit fees, when, upon
notification that the permit has been approved, the applicant fails to secure
the same.



   (D)   Where the Building Commissioner finds that a building is a
serious hazard or constitutes a public nuisance, and the owner of such
building fails in the time specified in a written notice from the Building
Commissioner to eliminate such hazard or nuisance, or to vacate or raze the
building, the Building Commissioner may proceed under R.C. § 3781.15.



   (E)   No amendment of the standards for construction established by
the city Building Code shall be permitted except and until the following
requirements are met.



      (1)   There is filed with the Building Commissioner a petition
as required by 1202.37 (A) through (F) and 1202.38 of the Ohio Building Code,
which sections are incorporated herein by reference.



      (2)   The Building Commissioner certifies the petition for
amendment to the Municipal Council as:



         (a)   Being in the best interest of the public of the
municipality.



         (b)   Being in conformity with the minimum standards
established by the Ohio Building Code.



(‘67 Code, § 152.03) (Am. Ord. 12-1979, passed 6-6-79; Am. Ord. 26-1981,
passed 10-7-81)



§ 152.04  FEES.



   (A)   No permit shall be issued by the Building Commissioner until
the prescribed and posted fee shall have been paid to him or her. Each permit
shall show the owner's name, the location of the premises, the operation
involved, and a receipt for the total amount paid.



   (B)   Where the work for such a permit as required by this code is
started, or proceeded with, prior to obtaining the permit, the fees
hereinafter specified shall be doubled. Such fees shall be the fees for the
entire project and the payment of double fees shall not relieve any person
from fully complying with the requirements of this code in the execution of
the work nor from any other penalty prescribed herein.



(‘67 Code, § 152.04) (Am. Ord. 12-1979, passed 6-6-79)



§ 152.05  REVOCATION OF PERMIT; DEEMED VOID.



   (A)   If the owner of a building fails to comply with an order of
the Building Commissioner, the Building Commissioner may forthwith revoke or
suspend the building permit or grant such owner a period of time, not to
exceed 15 days, in which to comply, and such owner shall have such rights as
are established under the city Zoning Code.



   (B)   In the event that such owner fails to avail himself or herself
of his or her rights under the city Zoning Code, then the building permit
issued to him or her by the Building Department shall be deemed void, and
shall not be reinstated; provided, however, that such owner may refile such
plans and apply for issuance of a new building permit upon payment of the
required fees.



(‘67 Code, § 152.05)



§ 152.06  COMPLIANCE WITH COMMISSIONER REQUIRED.



   No owner shall fail to file plans as required, or fail to comply with
an order of the Building Commissioner.



(‘67 Code, § 152.06) Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.07  CONSTRUCTION TIME LIMITATION AFTER APPROVAL OF BUILDING PERMIT.



   (A)   Construction under an approved building permit shall have
started within six months and the ground story framework, including the roof
or structural parts of a second floor, shall have been completed within one
year, and the entire building completed within two years.



   (B)   All driveways, parking lots and related construction shall
have been permanently surfaced within two years from the date of approved
building permit.



   (C)   Exceptions. Buildings that, due to their size or the immense
proportions of the project, cannot comply to the above requirements shall
have their completion time extended, marked and set by the Building
Commissioner.



(‘67 Code, § 152.07)



§ 152.08  FINAL INSPECTIONS; CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.



   (A)   No person shall occupy any new building, existing remodeled or
altered building or structural improvement or represent to any owner,
purchaser, or tenant that a new building, existing remodeled or altered
building or structural improvement may be occupied unless that person has
secured a certificate of occupancy for same.



   (B)   The Building Commissioner shall, upon the application of any
owner or representative thereof, and the payment of the fee as posted in the
Building Department, inspect a new building, phases of a new building,
remodeled or altered building or structural improvement and shall, upon
determination that the construction, remodeling or alteration complies with
the building regulations set forth in this chapter, issue certificate or
certificates of occupancy therefor.



(Ord. 3-1973, passed 2-7-73; Am. Ord. 6-1979, passed 4-4-79)  Penalty, see
§ 152.99



§ 152.09  RESIDENTIAL CODE ADOPTED.



   (A)   Council hereby adopts the Residential Code of Ohio for one-,
two-, and three-family dwellings as adopted by the Ohio Board of Building
Standards and as codified in O.A.C. §§ 4101:8-1 to 4101:8-43 (effective May
27, 2006), a copy of which is attached hereto and which is incorporated
herein by reference.  Further, Council does adopt any modifications and
amendments to such residential code as may be adopted in the future by the
Ohio Board of Building Standards unless expressly excluded by separate
legislation approved by Council in the future.



   (B)   Council does hereby adopt the applicable regulations for
swimming pools, spas and hot tubs as a supplement to the Residential Code. 
A copy of the regulations governing swimming pools, spas and hot tubs is
attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference.  Any modifications to
these regulations governing swimming pools, spas and hot tubs as adopted in
the future by the Ohio Board of Building Standards shall be included as an
amendment to this section unless it is specifically excluded in separate
legislation approved by Council in the future.



   (C)   In addition to any other remedy provided herein, a violation
of any section of the Residential Building Code as supplemented and adopted
herein shall constitute a misdemeanor.  Upon conviction of such violation,
the responsible person or party shall be fined not more than $1,000 nor
imprisoned for more than 180 days, or both.  Each day such violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense.  Any other person who commits,
participates in, or assists in the continuation of such violation may each be
found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties provided herein.



(Ord. 15-2006, passed 10-4-06)



§ 152.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates § 152.06 or § 152.08 shall be fined $50. Each days
violation shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 3-1973, passed 2-7-73)



CHAPTER 153:  LAND USE FEES



Section



General Provisions



   153.01   (Reserved)



   153.02   Land use fees; publication, posting and collection



Environmental Impact Fund



   153.05   Environmental Impact Fund; creation and purpose



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 153.01  (RESERVED)



§ 153.02  LAND USE FEES; PUBLICATION, POSTING AND COLLECTION.



   (A)   Whenever land use fees, charges and rates are amended as to
amount or method of payment, such amendment shall be published once in a
newspaper of general circulation in the municipality.



   (B)   Prevailing land use fees shall be posted conspicuously in or
outside of the office of the Building Commissioner and copies of the same
shall be made available without charge.



   (C)   The Building Commissioner shall collect and account for all
fees, charges and rates established in these chapters or prescribed by the
Land Use Fees Commission. No permit or certificate shall be issued and no
privilege shall be afforded until all such fees and charges are paid in full.



(Ord. 10-1979, passed 6-6-79)



ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT FUND



§ 153.05  ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT FUND; CREATION AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   Council accepts the recommendation of the staff to
re-establish environmental impact fees to be assessed against teardown and
in-fill residential development.  To accomplish this purpose, the city is
hereby divided into four residential stormwater impact districts as depicted
in Schedule A, attached to Ordinance No. 2-2015, and respectively identified
as Residential Impact Area I, II, III and IV.



   (B)   In addition to any other building permit or zoning fees which
may be assessed in conjunction with the reconstruction of residential
teardown and in-fill development, there shall be assessed a fee of $1,500 per
building site, applicable to residential in-fill or teardown construction,
payable at the time of the application for permit, which fee shall be an
environmental impact fee collected by the city to be able to fund the
reconstruction and repair of stormwater infrastructure within the specific
Residential Impact Area in which such construction occurs. The fee as
collected shall be deposited to a separate fund matched to the environmental
impact area within which such construction occurs. The Council annually shall
appropriate from other municipal revenue sources a sum not less than an
amount equal to the impact fees collected under this division (B) during the
preceding calendar year. Such sum shall be irrevocably appropriated to the
Environmental Impact Area Fund for the impact area from which such fees were
collected. Thereafter, the funds may be used for stormwater infrastructure
improvements, including reconstruction or repair of stormwater systems and/or
green solutions consistent with stormwater management best practices, which
improvements may only be funded and constructed within the impact area from
which such funds were collected. Any unexpended funds in any tax year shall
be carried forward to the next year, but shall not diminish nor relieve the
requirement of an appropriation to be made pursuant to this section for any
ensuing or subsequent tax year.



   (C)   There are hereby established four separate funds to be known
as Impact Area I Fund, Impact Area II Fund, Impact Area III Fund, and Impact
Area IV Fund into which such collected funds shall be segregated and from
which such funds shall be appropriated consistent with division (B) of this
section.



   (D)   Nothing contained in this section shall relieve any person,
firm or corporation from complying with all other ordinances, laws, rules,
regulations or fee requirements of the city, or of any other governmental
agency which now or hereafter regulate or govern the issuance of permits for
the construction of structures within the city.  Further, nothing contained
in this section shall prohibit City Council from establishing appropriate
fees and charges for any review to be undertaken in conjunction with the
issuance of building permits or in conjunction with other applications and
municipal procedures.



(Ord. 24-1979, passed 7-11-79; Am, Res. 39-1981, passed 11-18-81; Am. Ord.
23-1982, passed 10-6-82; Am. Ord. 25-1992, passed 11-4-92; Am. Ord. 2-2015,
passed 1-7-15)



CHAPTER 154: WATER MANAGEMENT, SEDIMENT CONTROL AND FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION



Section



General Provisions



   154.01   Definitions



   154.02   General provisions



   154.03   Performance principles and standards



Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction



   154.04   General standards



   154.05   Specific standards



   154.06   Approval procedures



   154.07   Variance procedure



Hamilton County Storm Water District



   154.20   Rules and regulations adopted by reference



 



   154.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Flood Damage Prevention, see Chapter 157



§ 154.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the words and phrases shall have the
meanings ascribed to them as defined in Chapter 150.03 or as defined
herein.  If there is a conflict in the definitions between the two chapters,
the definition ascribed in this chapter shall control:



   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE.  A structure on the same lot with, and of a
nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal structure.



   APPEAL.  A request for a review of the city's interpretation of any
provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.



   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.  The land in the flood plain within a
community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.



   BASE FLOOD.  The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year.  The base flood may also be referred to as the 100-year
flood.



   BASEMENT.  Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.



   CUT, (AN EXCAVATION). The difference between a point on the original
ground and a designated point of lower elevation on the final grade. Also,
the materials removed in excavation.



   DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.



   DEVELOPMENT PLAN.  Includes, as appropriate, a general development
plan, final development plan, or application for zoning permit.



   EROSION. The wearing away of the land surface by the action of wind,
water, or gravity.



   EXCAVATION. Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any other
similar material is dug into, cut, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced,
relocated, or bulldozed; the term shall include the conditions resulting
therefrom.



   FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA).  The agency with the
overall responsibility for administering the National Flood Insurance Program.



   FILL. Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any other material
is placed, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported, or moved to a new location
above the natural surface of the ground or on top of the stripped surface and
shall include the conditions resulting therefrom. The difference in elevation
between a point on the original ground and a designated point of higher
elevation on the final grade. The material used to make a fill.



   FLOOD or FLOODING.  A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:



      (1)   The overflow of inland waters; and/or



      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source.



   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM).  An official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency has delineated the areas of special flood hazard.



   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY.  The official report in which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency has provided flood profiles, floodway boundaries
and the water surface elevations of the base flood.



   FLOODWAY.  The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than
one foot rise.



   GRADING. Any stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling, or any
combination thereof; the term shall include the land in its cut or filled
condition.



   HISTORICAL STRUCTURE.  Any structure that is:



      (1)   Designated and listed as a city landmark property as
provided in Chapter 150.18;



      (2)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of the Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listings on the National Register;



      (3)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary
of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a
registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;



      (4)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic
places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved
by the Secretary of the Interior; or



      (5)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic
places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:



         (a)   By an approved state program as determined by the
Secretary of the Interior; or



         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in
states without approved programs.



   LOWEST FLOOR.  The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement).  An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor; providing that
such enclosure is built in accordance with the applicable design requirements
specified in this chapter for enclosures below the lowest floor.



   MANUFACTURED HOME.  A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. 
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a recreational vehicle.



   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK.  A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent.  This definition
shall exclude any manufactured home park as defined in R.C. § 3733.01, for
which the Public Health Council has exclusive rule-making power.



   MOBILE HOME.  A structure, transportable in one or more section, which
is at least eight feet in width and 32 feet in length, which is built on a
permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling unit, with or without
a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.



   MULCHING. The application of suitable materials on the soil surface to
conserve moisture, hold soil in place, and aid in establishing plant cover.



   NATURAL VEGETATION. The ground cover in its original state before any
grading, excavation, or filling.



   NEW CONSTRUCTION.  Structures for which the "start of construction"
commenced on or after the initial effective date of the city's Flood
Insurance Rate Map, and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.



   PERMANENT VEGETATION. Long term vegetative cover, i.e. bluegrass, tall
fescue, crown vetch, etc.



   PLAN.  The water management, erosion or sediment control plan.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.  A vehicle which is built on a single chassis
400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection,
designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck,
and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.



   SEDIMENT.  Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its original site or
origin by air, water, or gravity, as a product of erosion.



   SEDIMENT BASIN. A barrier or dam built across a waterway or at other
suitable locations to retain rock, sand, gravel silt, or other materials.



   SLOPE. The face of an embankment or cut section; any ground whose
surface makes an angle with the plane of the horizon. Slopes are usually
expressed in a percentage based upon vertical difference in feet per 100 feet
of horizontal distance.



   START OF CONSTRUCTION.  The date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement,
or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date.  The actual
start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation.  Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a
basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms;
nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the
main structure.  For a substantial improvement, the actual start of
construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other
structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of a building.



   SUBDIVISION. The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels, or other divisions
of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, transfer of ownership, or building or lot
development.



   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE.  Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.  Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition
or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the
market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement.  This term includes structures which have incurred substantial
damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed.  The term does not,
however, include:



      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct
existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions;



      (2)   Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
historic structure; or



      (3)   Any improvement to a structure which is considered new
construction.



   SURFACE DRAINAGE PATTERN.  The natural or man-made pattern for the
collection and transport of surface storm water across and through a
property.  It includes, but is not limited to, swales, watercourses, and
surface runoff.



   SURFACE RUNOFF. The natural, unconcentrated runoff of water moving in
sheet flow across any given area.



   SWALE. A low-lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface
water runoff.



   TEMPORARY VEGETATION. Short term vegetation cover used to stabilize the
soil surface until final grading and installation of permanent vegetation,
i.e. oats, rye, or wheat.



   TOPSOIL. Surface soils and subsurface soils which presumably are
fertile soils and soil material, ordinarily rich in organic matter or humus
debris. Topsoil is usually found in the uppermost soil layer.



   VARIANCE.  A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter
which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by
this chapter.



   WATERCOURSE. A permanent stream, intermittent stream, river, brook,
creek, channel, or ditch for water, whether natural or man-made.



(Ord. 13-1988, passed 3-2-88; Am. Ord. 5-1993, passed 2-3-93; Am. Ord.
5-2006, passed 4-5-06)



§ 154.02  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   The administrative staff of the city shall be responsible for
the administration and implementation of the standards specified in this
chapter, unless specifically exempted herein.



   (B)   No grading, excavation, removal, or destruction of the
topsoil, trees, or other vegetative cover of the land shall be commenced
until such time that a plan for minimizing erosion and sedimentation has been
approved or there has been a determination that such plans are not required.



   (C)   No development plan shall be approved unless:



      (1)   There has been a plan approved that provides for
minimizing erosion and sediment consistent with the intent of this chapter,
and a performance bond or other acceptable securities are deposited with the
city in the form of an escrow guarantee in an amount as determined by the
Public Works Director or Community Development Director which will insure
installation and completion of the required improvements; or



      (2)   There has been a determination that such plans are not
required as set forth in division (D) of this section.



   (D)   No water management, erosion or sedimentation control plan
shall be required under this chapter for the following:



      (1)   An excavation or fill which meets the following criteria:



         (a)   The grade change from existing natural ground
surface does not exceed 12 inches at any point and does not impair the
surface drainage pattern; and



         (b)   Is certifed by the applicant that it will not
impair existing surface drainage, block or interfere with swales or
watercourses, constitute a potential erosion hazard, or act as a source of
sedimentation to any adjacent land or watercourse.



      (2)   Accepted agricultural land management practices such as:
plowing, construction of agricultural structures, and nursery operations such
as the removal and/or transplanting of cultivated sod, shrubs, and trees and
tree cuttings on or above existing ground;



      (3)   Grading, as a maintenance measure, or for landscaping
purposes on existing developed lots or parcels, provided:



         (a)   The aggregate of area(s) affected, or stripped at
any one time does not exceed 5,000 square feet, and there is no damaging,
erosive, or sediment-laden drainage coming into or discharged from the
subject area;



         (b)   The grade change does not exceed 12 inches at any
point and does not impair the existing surface drainage pattern;



         (c)   All bare earth is promptly seeded, sodded, or
otherwise effectively protected from erosive actions.



      (4)   Maintenance work such as roofing, painting, and basement
sealing, or for small development activities (except for filling and grading)
valued at less than $1,000.



   (E)   The areas of special flood hazard have been identified by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report
entitled "Flood Insurance Study for the City of Montgomery."  This study,
with accompanying Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps and/or Flood Insurance
Rate Maps dated March 2, 1993 and any revisions thereto is hereby adopted by
reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.  The Flood Insurance
Study is on file at 10101 Montgomery Road.  A plan shall be required for any
proposed development activity located in an area of special flood hazard
except as provided in division (D)(5) of this section.



   (F)   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering consideration.  Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions.  Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. 
This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages.  This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the
city, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or
any administrative decisions lawfully made thereunder.



   (G)   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair
any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this
chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction
conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall
prevail.



   (H)   If the applicant, developer or property owner shall fail to
construct and/or maintain the development site in accordance with the
approved plan for water management, erosion and sediment control, the city
shall notify in writing the developer and/or property owner, by either
ordinary mail or conspicuously posting such notice upon the development site,
that the developer and/or property owner must bring the site into compliance
with the approved plan within a reasonable period of time not to exceed seven
days, or such shorter period of time as determined by the Public Works
Director, and if in his or her opinion there is imminent danger to persons or
property by the owner and/or developer failing to comply with the approved
plan.  If the owner and/or developer fails to bring the property into
compliance with the approved plan in the time allowed within the notice, then
the city or its authorized agent may enter upon the property with further
notice and take all steps necessary to bring the property into compliance
with the approved plan or to abate any condition which poses an imminent
danger to persons or property, and the cost of such corrective action shall
be charged against the bond or other security as required herein.  To the
extent such cost of corrective action exceeds the available bond or security,
the costs shall be taxed as a lien upon the property and collected as a part
of the real property taxes for such real estate.



(Ord. 13-1988, passed 3-2-88; Am. Ord. 5-1993, passed 2-3-93; Am. Ord.
5-2006, passed 4-5-06)



§ 154.03  PERFORMANCE PRINCIPLES AND STANDARDS.



   (A)   The following principles are effective in minimizing erosion
and sedimentation and shall be included where applicable in the plan both
during and after development.



      (1)   Stripping of vegetation, regrading, or other development
shall be done in a way that will minimize erosion. Whenever feasible, natural
vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented;



      (2)   Development plans shall preserve salient natural
features, keep cut-fill operations to a minimum and ensure conformity with
topography so as to create the least erosion potential;



      (3)   Development plans shall not impair existing surface
drainage, constitute a potential erosion hazard, or act as a source of
sedimentation to any adjacent land or watercourse;



      (4)   The smallest practical area of land shall be exposed at
any one time and the duration of exposure shall be kept to a practical
minimum, the topsoil shall be preserved and returned to the surface of areas
to be revegetated;



      (5)   Disturbed soils shall be stabilized as quickly as
practicable with temporary vegetation and/or mulching to protect exposed
critical areas during development;



      (6)   The permanent final vegetation and structural erosion
control and drainage measures shall be installed as soon as practicable in
the development;



      (7)   Provisions shall be made to accommodate effectively the
increased runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and
after development;



      (8)   Sediment in the runoff water shall be trapped by the use
of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures, until the
disturbed area is stabilized.



   (B)   The following standards shall be followed in all water
management, erosion and sediment control plans.



      (1)   All lots, tracts, or parcels shall be graded to provide
proper drainage away from buildings and dispose of it without ponding, and
all land within a development shall be graded to drain and dispose of surface
water without ponding;



      (2)   All drainage provisions shall be of such design to
handle the surface runoff adequately and carry it to the nearest suitable
outlet such as a curbed street, storm drain, or watercourse. Where drainage
swales are approved to divert surface waters away from buildings, they shall
be sodded, planted, or paved as required, and shall be of such slope, shape,
and size as to conform with the requirements of the city. Drainage swales
must be maintained continuously per plan by the owner of the property upon
which constructed;



      (3)   The installation of the specified water management and
sediment control measures shall be accomplished in accordance with the
standards and specifications contained in water management and sediment
control for urbanizing areas on file with the office of the Public Works
Director, the Hamilton County Soil and Water Conservation Service, and the
Hamilton County Stormwater District unless otherwise recommended by the
Building Commissioner;



      (4)   During the construction phase, further consultive
technical assistance will be furnished, if necessary, by the city, or by the
local representative of the U.S. Soil Conservation Service.



   (C)   The approved plan for water management and sedimentation
control required of the landowner or his or her agent under this chapter,
shall include, but not be restricted to, the following requirements:



      (1)   A vicinity sketch and boundary line survey of the site
for which the permit is sought and on which the work is to be performed;



      (2)   The location of any buildings, structures, utilities,
sewers, water and storm drains on site where the work is to be performed;



      (3)   The location of all trees with a trunk diameter of
greater than four inches measured at a point five feet from the ground, or in
the alternative, at the option of the city, a report on the trees from an
arborist approved by the city;



      (4)   The location and elevation of any building or structure
on land of adjacent property owners within 100 feet of the site;



      (5)   The elevations, and/or contours, dimensions, location,
and extent of all work proposed to be done, and the existing elevations
and/or contours of the land, all in one-foot increments;



      (6)   Detailed plans of all drainage provisions, storm water
detention (if required), retaining walls, cribbing, vegetative practices,
erosion and sediment control measures, location of proposed fences around
sediment basins, steep excavations, or ponding areas, and other protective
devices to be constructed in connection with, or as a part of, the proposed
work together with a map showing the drainage area of land tributary to the
site, and estimated cubic foot per second runoff, when developed, of the area
served by any drainage provisions, computed in accordance with minor and
major storm runoff hydrology as established in storm drainage calculations
meeting Hamilton County Rules and Regulations for storm water runoff in
urbanized areas;



      (7)   A timing schedule and sequence indicating the
anticipated starting and completion dates of the development sequence,
stripping and/or clearing, rough grading and construction, final grading and
vegetative establishment, and maintenance, and the time of exposure of each
area prior to the completion of effective erosion and sediment control
measures;



      (8)   The estimated cost of the grading and/or filling and the
cost of the required erosion and sedimentation controls; and,



      (9)   In any area of special flood hazard where base flood
elevation data are available, the following information is required:
elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed
structures; elevation to which any structure will be floodproofed; and
certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the criteria of
§ 154.05(B)(1).



(Ord. 13-1988, passed 3-2-88; Am. Ord. 5-1993, passed 2-3-93; Am. Ord.
5-2006, passed 4-5-06)



PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION



§ 154.04  GENERAL STANDARDS.



   In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are
required:



   (A)   Anchoring.  All new construction and substantial improvements
shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the
effects of buoyancy.



   (B)   Construction materials and methods.



      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage.



      (2)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.



      (3)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.



   (C)   Utilities.



      (1)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
systems;



      (2)   New and replacement sanitary sewerage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
systems and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and



      (3)   Individual waste water treatment systems shall be
located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding.



   (D)   Subdivision proposals.



      (1)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the
need to minimize flood damage;



      (2)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities
and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;



      (3)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage
provided to reduce exposure to flood damage; and



      (4)   Base flood elevation data shall be provided for
subdivision proposals, and other proposed developments which contain at least
five acres.



   (E)   Certain structures prohibited.  For purposes of these
regulations, no recreational vehicles, manufactured homes nor mobile homes,
as herein defined, shall be permitted to be located within any area of
special flood hazard in accordance with § 154.02(E).



(Ord. 13-1988, passed 3-2-88; Am. Ord. 5-1993, passed 2-3-93; Am. Ord.
5-2006, passed 4-5-06)



§ 154.05  SPECIFIC STANDARDS.



   In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data
have been provided as set forth in § 154.02(E) or § 154.06(C), the
following provisions are required:



   (A)   Residential construction.  New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation.



   (B)   Nonresidential construction.  New construction and
substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential
structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to
the level of the base flood elevation; or, together with attendant utility
and sanitary facilities, shall:



      (1)   Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the
structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage
of water;



      (2)   Have structural components capable of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and



      (3)   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the standards of this section.



   (C)   Accessory structures.  An exemption to the elevation or dry
floodproofing standards may be granted by the city for accessory structures
(e.g., sheds, detached garages) containing 576 square feet or less in gross
floor area.  Such structures must meet the encroachment provisions of
division (D)(1) of this section and the following additional standards:



      (1)   They shall not be used for human habitation;



      (2)   They shall be designed to have low flood damage
potential;



      (3)   They shall be constructed and placed on the building
site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of flood waters;



      (4)   They shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation; and



      (5)   Service facilities, such as electrical and heating
equipment, shall be elevated or floodproofed.



   (D)   Floodways; areas with floodways.  The Floodway Insurance
Study referenced in § 154.02(E) identifies a segment within areas of special
flood hazard known as a floodway.  Floodways may also be delineated in other
sources of flood information as specified in § 154.06(C).  The floodway is
an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry
debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential.  The following
provisions apply within all delineated floodway areas.



      (1)   Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements, and other development unless a
hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with standard
engineering practices demonstrates that the proposed encroachment would not
result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base
flood discharge.



      (2)   If division (D)(1) of this section is satisfied, all new
construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable
flood hazard reduction provisions of this section.



      (3)   Any encroachment within the floodway that would result
in an increase in base flood elevations can only be granted upon the prior
approval by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.  Such requests must be
submitted by the City Manager to the Federal Emergency Management Agency and
must meet the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program.



   (E)   Enclosures below the lowest floor.  The following standards
apply to all new and substantially improved residential and nonresidential
structures which are elevated to the base flood elevation using pilings,
columns, or posts.  Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are
useable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing
for the entry and exit of floodwaters.  Designs for meeting this requirement
must:



      (1)   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect; or



      (2)   Must meet or exceed the following criteria:



         (a)   A minimum of two openings having a total net area
of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided.



         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than
one foot above grade.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or
other openings provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.



      (3)   Any enclosure which meets these criteria shall be
considered as having met the requirements of § 154.04(A).



(Ord. 5-2006, passed 4-5-06)



§ 154.06  APPROVAL PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Four copies of complete plans shall be filed with the city.
The city shall review and recommend such changes or modifications as are
deemed necessary and may, when it deems appropriate, refer a copy of
preliminary plans or extension of previously approved plans requiring water
management and sediment control measures to the county soil and water
conservation district for review and recommendation as to adequate water
management and sediment control measures to prevent damage to other
properties.



   (B)   The city shall:



      (1)   Review all permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.



      (2)   Review all permits to assure that all necessary permits
have been received from those federal, state or local governmental agencies
from which prior approval is required. The applicant shall be responsible for
obtaining such permits as required.



      (3)   Review all development permits to determine if the
proposed development is located within a designated floodway.  Floodways may
be delineated in other sources of flood information.  If the proposed
development is located within a designated floodway, assure that the
encroachment provision of § 154.05(D)(1) is met.



      (4)   Where base flood elevation data are utilized within
areas of special flood hazard on a  community's Flood Insurance Rate Map,
regardless of the source of such data, the following provisions apply:



         (a)   Obtain from the applicant and record the actual
elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor, including
basement, of all new or substantially improved structures, and whether or not
such structures contain a basement.



         (b)   For all new or substantially improved floodproofed
structures:



            1.   Obtain from applicant, verify and record the
actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure was
floodproofed; and



            2.   Maintain the floodproofing certifications
required in § 154.03(C)(10).



         (c)   Maintain for public inspection all records
pertaining to the provisions of this chapter.



      (5)   Notify adjacent communities and the Ohio Department of
Natural Resources, Division of Water, prior to any alteration or relocation
of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.  A watercourse is considered to be altered if
any change occurs within its banks.  Maintain engineering documentation that
the flood carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of said
watercourse will not be diminished.  Required that necessary maintenance
will be provided for the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse
will not be diminished.  Require that necessary maintenance will be provided
for the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood
carrying capacity will not be diminished.



      (6)   Require that necessary maintenance will be provided by
the applicant for the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so
that the flood carrying capacity will not be diminished.



      (7)   Make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact
location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for
example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions).  A person contesting the location of the boundary
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as
provided in § 154.07.



   (C)   Areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data
have not been provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency are
designated as Zone A on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map. Within
these areas, the city shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base
flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other
source in order to administer § 154.05(A), (B) and (D).



   (D)   If the city approves the plans it shall issue a permit and
shall ensure compliance by the applicant with the plans as finally approved.



   (E)   In order to ensure that emergency measures could be taken by
the city if the water management and sediment control measures were not
implemented according to the agreed-upon plan and schedule, a performance
bond in the amount of the cost of the water management and sediment control
measures may be required to be filed with the city. The performance bond
shall authorize immediate payment to the city upon certification that
necessary emergency work must be done immediately to ensure  proper water
management and sediment control as a result of the landowner's failure to
complete or adhere to the approved water management and sediment control plan.



   (F)   The city shall undertake continuing review and evaluation of
the methods used and overall effectiveness of the storm water management and
sediment control program.



(Ord. 13-1988, passed 3-2-88; Am. Ord. 5-1993, passed 2-3-93; Am. Ord.
5-2006, passed 4-5-06)



§ 154.07  VARIANCE PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Appeal.



      (1)   The Planning Commission shall hear and decide appeals
and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.



      (2)   The Planning Commission shall hear and decide appeals
when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or
determination made by the city in the enforcement or administration of this
chapter.



      (3)   In passing upon such applications, the Planning
Commission shall consider all technical evaluation, all relevant factors, and
standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:



         (a)   Any danger that materials may be swept onto other
lands to the injury of others;



         (b)   Any danger to life and property due to flooding or
erosion damage;



         (c)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and
its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;



         (d)   The importance of the services provided by the
proposed facility to the community;



         (e)   The availability of alternative locations on the
applicant's property for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding
or erosion damage;



         (f)   The compatibility of the proposed use with
existing and anticipated development;



         (g)   The relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan and flood plain management program for that area;



         (h)   The safety of access to the property in times of
flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;



         (i)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of
rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at this site; and



         (j)   The costs of providing governmental services
during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems,
and streets and bridges.



      (4)   Upon consideration of the factors contained in division
(A)(3) of this section and the purposes of this chapter, the Planning
Commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it
deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.



      (5)   The city shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency
upon request.



   (B)   Conditions for variances.



      (1)   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction
and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre in size
contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed
below the base flood level providing divisions (A)(3)(a) through (j) have
been fully considered.  As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre,
the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.



      (2)   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation
of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure.



      (3)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated
floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge
would result.



      (4)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that
the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to
afford relief.



      (5)   Variances shall only be issued upon:



         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;



         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance
would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and



         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance
will not result in increased flood heights beyond that which is allowed in
this chapter, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public
expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public as
identified in § 154.07(A)(3) or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.



      (6)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be
given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a
lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from
the reduced lowest floor elevation.



(Am. Ord. 5-2006, passed 4-5-06)



HAMILTON COUNTY STORM WATER DISTRICT



§ 154.20  RULES AND REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   (A)   City Council hereby approves and adopts the “Determinations
and Background Pertinent to Storm Water Management in Hamilton County”,
which are attached to Ordinance No. 15-2013 as Exhibit A and hereby fully
incorporated herein.



   (B)   City Council hereby adopts, establishes and implements within
the city, the Rules and Regulations of the Hamilton County Storm Water
District, which are attached to Ordinance No. 15-2013 as Exhibit B and hereby
fully incorporated herein.



(Ord. 15-2013, passed 11-6-13)



§ 154.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty
of a minor misdemeanor. Each day such violation is committed or is permitted
to continue shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 13-1988, passed 3-2-88; Am. Ord. 5-1993, passed 2-3-93; Am. Ord.
5-2006, passed 4-5-06)



CHAPTER 155: RENEWAL AND REDEVELOPMENT



Section



Urban Renewal



   155.01   Legislative finding



   155.02   Definitions



   155.03   Urban renewal areas designated by City Council



   155.04   Urban renewal agent



   155.05   Submission of urban renewal plan 



   155.06   Council action: public hearings



   155.07   Approval of the urban renewal plan



   155.08   Acquisition of property; rehabilitation; site preparation
and project improvements



   155.09   Conforming agreements



   155.10   Modification of urban renewal plan; hearing



   155.11   Disposition of property



   155.12   Antidiscrimination provisions



Blight Elimination



   155.20   Legislative finding



   155.21   Definitions



   155.22   Determination of blighted premises



   155.23   Public hearing



   155.24   Procedure



   155.25   Legislative determination



   155.26   Acquisition and blight elimination



   155.27   Terms of sale; prohibition of recurrence of blight



   155.28   Consultation with neighborhood organizations



   155.29   Chapter provisions not limitation



   155.30   Inconsistent statutes inoperative



URBAN RENEWAL



§ 155.01  LEGISLATIVE FINDING.



   It is hereby found and determined that there may exist within the city
blighted, deteriorating, deteriorated or underutilized areas of the nature
defined in this chapter which constitute a serious and growing menace
injurious and inimical to the public health, safety, morals and general
welfare of the residents and occupants thereof; that the existence of such
areas:



   (A)   Contributes substantially and increasingly to the spread of
disease and crime, and to losses by fire and accident, necessitating
excessive and disproportionate expenditures of public funds for the
preservation of the public health and safety, for crime prevention,
correction, prosecution and punishment, for the treatment of juvenile
delinquency, for the maintenance of adequate police, fire and accident
protection and for other public services and facilities;



   (B)   Constitutes an economic and social liability; or



   (C)   Substantially impairs and arrests the sound growth of the
community; that this menace is beyond remedy and control solely by regulatory
processes and exercise of the police power, and cannot be dealt with
effectively by the ordinary operation of private enterprise without the aids
herein provided; that the elimination by the city, in whole or in part, of
blighted or underutilized and deteriorating areas by urban renewal as defined
herein is necessary for the public welfare and is a public use and purpose
for which public money may be expended and private property acquired.



(Ord. 31-1988, passed 11-2-88)



§ 155.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BLIGHTED AREA.  An area in which a majority of the structures are
detrimental to the public health, safety, morals and general welfare by
reason of age, obsolescence, dilapidation, overcrowding, faulty arrangement,
mixture of incompatible land uses, a lack of ventilation or sanitary
facilities or any combination of these factors.



   DETERIORATING AREA.  An area which is not a blighted area but which
because of incompatible land uses, nonconforming uses, lack of adequate
parking facilities, faulty street arrangement, inadequate community
facilities, increased density of population, without commensurate increases
in new residential buildings and community facilities, high turnover in
residential or commercial occupancy, lack of maintenance and repair of
buildings, or any combination thereof is detrimental to the pubic health,
safety, morals and general welfare, and which will deteriorate, or is in
danger of deteriorating, into a blighted area.



   PRELIMINARY PLAN.  A plan prepared by the Planning Commission for an
urban renewal area.



   PROJECT AREA.  A blighted or deteriorating area for which an urban
renewal plan has been prepared. A project area shall consist of or be located
within one or more urban renewal areas.



   PROJECT IMPROVEMENTS.  Public improvements within or serving the
project area which are necessary for carrying out the urban renewal
objectives provided for in the urban renewal plan or Council-approved design
plans.



   REDEVELOPMENT.  The acquisition of property in a blighted area, the
demolition of the structures thereon, site preparation, the making of project
improvements and the sale of such property for use in accordance with an
urban renewal plan. Redevelopment shall not include the construction or
improvement by the city of any buildings other than municipal buildings,
except as provided in rehabilitation hereunder.



   REDEVELOPER.  Any person, firm, public agency or corporation
purchasing property within a project area for use in accordance with the
urban renewal plan.



   REHABILITATION.  The restoration, rehabilitation or conservation of a
deteriorating or blighted area by:



      (1)   Formulating and carrying out a plan for a program of
voluntary improvement, modernization, repair or rehabilitation of privately
owned structures;



      (2)   The acquisition of real estate and the demolition or
removal of buildings thereto where necessary to eliminate unhealthful,
unsanitary or unsafe conditions, lessen density or eliminate blight or
incompatible land uses detrimental to the public health and welfare;



      (3)   Otherwise removing or preventing the spread of blight or
deterioration;



      (4)   Constructing or reconstructing necessary streets,
playgrounds, utilities, parks and other public improvements;



      (5)   Acquiring and clearing land for development of privately
owned community facilities;



      (6)   Disposing, for uses in accordance with the urban renewal
plan, of property acquired; and



      (7)   Purchasing, repairing and rehabilitating for guidance
purposes and reselling of buildings which are located in the urban renewal
area and which, under the urban renewal plan, are to be repaired or
rehabilitated for dwelling use or related facilities, provided, that there
shall not be acquired for such purposes, in any urban renewal area, buildings
which contain or will contain more than 100 dwelling units, or five percent
of the total number of dwelling units in such area which under the urban
renewal plan are to be repaired or rehabilitated, whichever is the lesser.



      (8)   Rehabilitation shall not include the construction or
improvement by the city of any building other than municipal buildings,
except as provided in subsection (7) of this definition.



   SITE PREPARATION.  The demolition, clearance and removal of structures
and abandoned utility facilities from a site and the necessary filling,
grading and relocation or adjustment of utility facilities necessary to
prepare the site for resale to a redeveloper or to carry out the city's
contractual obligations under contracts for sale of lands.



   UNDERUTILIZED.  An area that has aging structures, lack of coordinated
or compatible development, lack of parking facilities, obsolete buildings or
small lots that individually preclude coordinated redevelopment, or any
combination of these factors.



   URBAN RENEWAL.  The redevelopment of a blighted area or areas or the
rehabilitation of a deteriorating or blighted area or areas, or a combination
thereof, by the acquisition of real estate and the demolition or removal of
buildings and the resale of such property to public or private agencies for
redevelopment or rehabilitation in accordance with an urban renewal plan.



   URBAN RENEWAL AREA.  A blighted or deteriorating area which is
appropriate for redevelopment or rehabilitation as defined in urban renewal
hereof.



   URBAN RENEWAL PLAN.  A plan, as it exists from time to time, for the
urban renewal of a project area. The plan shall be in general conformance to
the preliminary plan and recommendations of the Planning Commission for the
urban renewal area or areas in which the project area is located.



(Ord. 31-1988, passed 11-2-88)



§ 155.03  URBAN RENEWAL AREAS DESIGNATED BY CITY COUNCIL.



   The City Manager shall, upon direction from the City Council, delineate
urban renewal areas and prepare and certify to the City Council preliminary
plans and recommendations for the urban renewal of such areas. A preliminary
plan shall be sufficiently comprehensive to show the general features of
development of the districts within which the urban renewal area lies and of
other districts adjacent to the urban renewal area to such extent, content
and particularity as may be necessary to show the coordination of the
preliminary plan with the proposed future development of the territory
surrounding the urban renewal area. The recommendation shall refer to future
land use, densities, traffic regulation and such other matters as the City
Manager deems advisable.



(Ord. 31-1988, passed 11-2-88)



§ 155.04  URBAN RENEWAL AGENT.



   (A)   The City Manager is hereby designated as the agent of the city
for planning and carrying out its programs of urban renewal.



   (B)   The City Manager shall select project areas from urban renewal
areas delineated and certified to the City Manager by the City Council, and
the City Manager is hereby authorized to cause to be undertaken either by
force account or by contract the necessary studies, plans and surveys in
connection with such project areas and shall cause an urban renewal plan to
be prepared covering each project area. An urban renewal plan shall include
but not be limited to the following:



      (1)   A description of the boundaries of the project area.



      (2)   A map or maps showing land uses proposed in the project
area after renewal thereof, the proposed street layout, and any publicly or
privately owned community facilities to be constructed in the project area.



      (3)   A statement indicating the uses and development
restrictions on property in the project area which is to be acquired by the
city.



      (4)   A statement as to the kind and number of additional
public facilities or utilities which will be required in the project area
after redevelopment or rehabilitation.



(Ord. 31-1988, passed 11-2-88)



§ 155.05  SUBMISSION OF URBAN RENEWAL PLAN.



   (A)   To Council.  When an urban renewal plan has been prepared,
the City Manager shall transmit such plan to Council, together with estimates
of the total cost of the urban renewal of the project area.



   (B)   To the Planning Commission.  Upon receipt of the urban
renewal plan, Council shall refer the plan to the Planning Commission for
review and recommendations.



(Ord. 31-1988, passed 11-2-88)



§ 155.06 COUNCIL ACTION: PUBLIC HEARINGS.



   (A)   Upon receipt of the recommendation of the Planning Commission,
Council shall hold a public hearing on the question of the adoption of the
urban renewal plan at which hearing an opportunity shall be provided to all
persons or organizations interested to be heard either in person or by
counsel. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the city once a week for not less than
two successive weeks immediately prior to the date of the hearing. The first
publication shall be not less than ten days prior to the date of the hearing,
inclusive of the date of publication but exclusive of the date of the hearing.



   (B)   Such notice shall contain a description of the project area by
its location in relation to highways, streets, streams or other landmarks,
and shall state that maps and plats and other materials describing the urban
renewal plan are available for public inspection at a place to be designated
in such notice.



(Ord. 31-1988, passed 11-2-88)



§ 155.07 APPROVAL OF THE URBAN RENEWAL PLAN.



   After the public hearing, Council may approve the urban renewal plan by
a majority vote. In the event that Council approves the urban renewal plan,
it must include in its approval the following findings:



   (A)   That the area described in the urban renewal plan is a
deteriorating or blighted area;



   (B)   That the urban renewal plan for the project area will afford
maximum opportunity consistent with the sound needs of the locality as a
whole for the redevelopment or rehabilitation of the project area by private
enterprise;



   (C)   That the urban renewal plan conforms to the master plan as it
then exists for the overall development of the city.



(Ord. 31-1988, passed 11-2-88)



§ 155.08  ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY; REHABILITATION: SITE PREPARATION AND
PROJECT IMPROVEMENTS.



   After the approval of the urban renewal plan by Council, the City
Manager shall proceed to carry out the redevelopment or rehabilitation of the
project area in accordance with the urban renewal plan. The City Manager is
hereby authorized to acquire any property in the project area, the
acquisition of which is necessary in carrying out the urban renewal plan, to
rehabilitate property, demolish the buildings and do other site preparation
work on property acquired by the city, to cause such studies, plans and
surveys to be made by force account or by contract which are necessary and
proper to carry out the project improvements in accordance with the urban
renewal plan or in accordance with Council-approved design plans, to do all
things necessary or appropriate to carry out such acquisition of property,
rehabilitation, demolition of buildings, to provide studies, plans or surveys
for project improvements, and to provide the services of architects to
residents of project areas.



(Ord. 31-1988, passed 11-2-88)



§ 155.09  CONFORMING AGREEMENTS.



   If the owner of property in an urban renewal area is willing to make
the use of his or her property conform to the urban renewal plan the City
Manager is of the opinion that the acquisition of such owner's property will
not be necessary to carry out the urban renewal plan if the owner makes his
or her property conform to the urban renewal plan, then in such case the City
Manager, in lieu of acquiring such property may, on behalf of the city, enter
into an agreement with such owner in which the owner agrees to conform his or
her land, the structures thereon and the use thereof to the urban renewal
plan within the time set forth in the agreement. The City Manager may require
as a condition to entering into such agreement that the owner furnish such
security for the performance of his or her obligations under the agreement as
the City Manager believes is necessary in order to protect the interests of
the city.



(Ord. 31-1988, passed 11-2-88)



§ 155.10  MODIFICATION OF URBAN RENEWAL PLAN; HEARING.



   (A)   The City Manager or any person interested may petition Council
to modify the urban renewal plan adopted for a project area. Such petition
shall be in writing and shall state in detail the modification desired. Upon
receipt of such petition, Council shall refer the same to the Planning
Commission for its recommendation. The Commission shall review such
modification and return the petition to Council, together with its
recommendations.



   (B)   In the event the proposed modification contemplates an
extension of the project area, the addition of a new type of urban renewal
activity which requires the acquisition of property, or a change in zoning
within the area, Council shall, before considering it, hold a public hearing
thereon, at which an opportunity shall be provided for all persons interested
to be heard, either in person or by counsel. Notice of such hearing shall be
given in the manner prescribed in § 155.06. Council may either approve or
reject the proposed modification by a majority vote. If the proposed
modification is adopted by Council it shall become a part of the urban
renewal plan



(Ord. 31-1988, passed 11-2-88)



§ 155.11  DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY.



   (A)   The City Manager is hereby authorized to negotiate for the
sale of property in a project area which is not to be retained by the city
for uses in accordance with the urban renewal plan. In connection therewith
the City Manager is hereby authorized to enter into necessary appraisal and
market analysis contracts. No land shall be sold by the City Manager except
pursuant to a special ordinance of Council authorizing such sale, which
ordinance shall prescribe in detail the terms and conditions upon which such
sale is to be made and the covenants to be contained in the deed from the
city to the redeveloper.



   (B)   Pending the use or sale of property in a project area it may
be temporarily rented for such uses and purposes as may be desirable, even
though not in conformity with the urban renewal plan.



(Ord. 31-1988, passed 11-2-88)



§ 155.12  ANTIDISCRIMINATION PROVISIONS.



   Each deed conveying title to property within a project area shall
contain a covenant or covenants prohibiting the restriction of the sale or
use of such property on the basis of race, religion or any other standard
that is not applicable to all persons or families irrespective of race,
religion or ancestry.



(Ord. 31-1988, passed 11-2-88)



BLIGHT ELIMINATION



§ 155.20  LEGISLATIVE FINDING.



   (A)   It is hereby found and determined that there exists within the
city premises that by reason of age, obsolescence, dilapidation,
deterioration, lack of maintenance or repair or a combination thereof
constitute a blight and a nuisance upon the surrounding neighborhood because
they are fire hazards, health hazards, places of retreat for immoral or
criminal purposes or for the breach of the public peace, substantial and
unreasonable interferences with the reasonable and lawful use and enjoyment
of other premises in the neighborhood, or factors seriously depreciating
property values in the area.



   (B)   It is further found that programs aimed at specific
elimination of the particular blights or nuisances involved in neighborhoods
of the city have sometimes proven inadequate or ineffective, have sometimes
failed to prevent recurrence of blight and have sometimes resulted merely in
the alteration of the nature or form of the nuisance or blight that
previously existed. It is further found that it therefore becomes necessary
in order to eliminate nuisance and blight and prevent recurrence of blight on
the premises for the city to obtain the title of the blighted premises and to
take direct action to remove or remedy the blight or provide for its removal
by others and to make further provisions for future development,
redevelopment or use of the premises in such a way as to prevent any
recurrence of blight or nuisance on the premises.



   (C)   It is further found and determined that acquisition of such
blighted property by the city in order to eliminate blight or nuisance and to
prevent its recurrence constitutes a public purpose.



(Ord. 31-1988, passed 11-2-88)



§ 155.21  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BLIGHTED PREMISES. Premises which because of their age, obsolescence,
dilapidation, deterioration, lack of maintenance or repair or any combination
thereof constitute a serious fire hazard, a serious health hazard, a
substantial and unreasonable interference with the reasonable and lawful use
and enjoyment of other premises within the neighborhood or a factor seriously
depreciating property values in the neighborhood.



   NEIGHBORHOOD. An area of the city comprised of all premises or parcels
of land which in whole or in part are located within a radius of 500 feet of
any one parcel or lot within the city.



   REDEVELOPMENT. The acquisition of blighted premises, the demolition of
a structure or structures thereon, the making of site improvements, including
the construction or reconstruction of structures thereon, or the sale of
property for use in accordance with the Zoning or Building Code of the city.
Redevelopment may include the construction or improvement by the city of any
buildings for public use or for resale to private persons.



   REHABILITATION.  The restoration, rehabilitation or conservation
blighted premises by improvement, modernization or repair of a structure or
structures thereon to bring it into conformance with applicable building and
zoning provisions of the city.



(Ord, 31-1988, pawed 11-2-88)



§ 155.22  DETERMINATION OF BLIGHTED PREMISES.



   The City Manager shall present to Council from time to time, a report
which shall list therein the location and ownership of premises which he or
she has reason to believe are blighted premises as defined in § 155.21(A),
and which are located in the city outside of urban renewal areas or blighted
areas as defined in § 155.21.  The report will state briefly the factors
which, in the City Manager's opinion, would warrant the determination that
the premises so listed in the report are blighted. The premises so listed in
the report shall be only those blighted premises which, in the opinion of the
City Manager, are such that, in order to eliminate the existing blight and to
prevent future blight, acquisition thereof will be necessary for one or more
of the following reasons:



   (A)   The owner of the premises cannot or will not:



      (1)   Eliminate the blighted condition, and/or



      (2)   Prevent recurrence of the blight; or



   (B)   The owner has not responded to a lawful order by the city for
him or her to take action to eliminate its recurrence within 30 days after
due notice of the request or order has been given him by:



      (1)   Posting such order or notice on the premises;



      (2)   Personal delivery;



      (3)   Mailing such order or notice to the last known address
of the owner; or



      (4)   Publishing once a week for three consecutive weeks in a
newspaper of general circulation a notice of the issuance of the order
relating to the premises and directing the owner to contact the City Manager
in regard to such order; and



   (C)   Direct action, short of acquisition by the city to eliminate
the blight, including but not limited to clearing the premises of the debris,
demolition of blighted structures, or barricading such structure has proved
to be unsuccessful:



      (1)   To eliminate the blight; or



      (2)   To prevent its recurrence; or



   (D)   In the opinion of the City Manager, based upon conditions
existing on the premises and in the neighborhood, such direct action would be
likely to prove inadequate to eliminate blight or prevent the recurrence.



(Ord. 31-1988, passed 11-2-88)



§ 155.23  PUBLIC HEARING.



   Upon receipt of a report from the City Manager, Council shall set a
date for a public hearing in regard to the existence of blight on the
premises and necessity for acquisition by the city in order to eliminate
blight and to prevent the recurrence thereof. Upon the filing of a day for a
public hearing, the Clerk of Council shall promptly cause notice to be given
to the owner or owners of record of the premises and the occupant thereof, if
any, or the person in charge of such premises, if any, notifying them of the
time and place of the hearing and apprising them of their right to appear at
such hearing to show cause why the premises should not be declared to be
blighted or why the city should not acquire such premises for the purpose of
eliminating blight thereon and preventing the recurrence of blight. Notice of
such hearing shall be given by:



   (A)   Posting the notice thereof on the premises;



   (B)   Personal service;



   (C)   Mailing such order or notice to the last known address of the
owner or person in charge of the premises or to the occupants thereof; or



   (D)   Publishing the notice once a week for three consecutive weeks
in a newspaper of general circulation within the city.



(Ord. 31-1988, passed 11-2-88)



§ 155.24  PROCEDURE.



   (A)   At the hearing required by § 155.23, the report of the City
Manager shall be read and shall constitute prima-facie evidence of blight on
the premises and need for the city to acquire such premises in order to
eliminate the blight and prevent recurrence of blight thereon. Thereafter,
the owner, person in charge, occupant of the premises or any person having an
interest thereon may proceed to show cause why the premises should not be
declared blighted or the city should not acquire such premises for the
purposes of eliminating blight or prevent its recurrence. At the hearing, the
owner, person in charge of the premises or occupant may cause to be presented
to Council any records of the city pertaining to issues relevant to the
hearing and may examine city employees in regard thereto; provided that the
production of such records or the presence of such employees is requested by
the owner, person in charge or occupant of the premises in writing at least
24 hours prior to the hearing.



   (B)   If the owner, person in charge or occupant of the premises
does not appear and presents testimony for the purposes of showing cause why
the premises should not be declared blighted or the city should not acquire
the premises for the purposes of eliminating the blight and preventing
recurrence of blight, the City Manager, or his duly appointed representative,
shall proceed to present evidence to Council of the existence of blight on
the premises and need to acquire the premises for elimination of the blight
and the prevention of recurrence of the blight thereon. Members of the public
residing in the neighborhood or who may otherwise have knowledge of the
condition of such premises may address Council at the hearing in regard to
the proposed action of the city.



   (C)   Council may adjourn the hearing from time to time, and grant
continuances to the City Manager or his representative or the owner, person
in charge or occupant of the premises, in order for them to present further
argument or evidence in regard to the existence of blight on the premises or
the need for the city to acquire such premises in order to eliminate blight
or prevent the recurrence of blight thereon.



(Ord. 31-1988, passed 11-2-88)



§ 155.25  LEGISLATIVE DETERMINATION.



   (A)   Council, upon completion of the hearing, shall at the same or
a subsequent meeting decide and make findings as to:



      (1)   Whether or not the premises are blighted in accordance
with this chapter, and



      (2)   Whether or not it is necessary for the city to acquire
the premises in order to eliminate blight thereon and to prevent the
recurrence of blight.



   (B)   Should Council determine that the premises are not blighted as
defined in this chapter, it may direct the City Manager to take action under
any other provisions of the Code of Ordinances, Building Code or Zoning Code
of the city in order to correct any illegal conditions on the premises.



   (C)   Should Council determine that the premises are blighted but
that it is not necessary for the city to acquire the premises in order to
eliminate the blight and prevent its recurrence in the future, it may direct
the City Manager to take appropriate action in regard thereto short of
acquisition.



   (D)   If Council finds that the premises are blighted as defined in
this chapter and that acquisition by the city is necessary in order to
eliminate the blight and prevent the recurrence of blight on the premises,
the City Manager shall be and hereby is authorized to proceed to take the
proper action to acquire the premises, eliminate the blight and prevent the
recurrence of blight in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 31-1988, passed 11-2-88)



§ 155.26  ACQUISITION AND BLIGHT ELIMINATION.



   Upon determination of Council that premises are blighted and that
acquisition by the city is necessary in order to eliminate the blight and
prevent recurrence of blight upon the premises, the City Manager is hereby
authorized to:



   (A)   Acquire the premises by purchase;



   (B)   Acquire the premises by court action exercising the city's
constitutional right of eminent domain.



   (C)   After acquisition, to eliminate the blight by:



      (1)   Demolition and clearance of the premises by an
independent contractor or city forces, or clearance if demolition of
structures is not necessary;



      (2)   Rehabilitation by an independent contractor or by city
forces;



      (3)   Sale of the blighted premises to a purchaser upon terms
providing for the elimination of the blight and prevention of its recurrence;



      (4)   Sale of the premises after demolition and clearance (if
not needed for municipal purposes) for use or development in accordance with
applicable Building Code and Zoning Code provisions; or



      (5)   Any combination of the above provisions.



(Ord. 31-1988, passed 11-2-88)



§ 155.27  TERM OF SALES: PROHIBITION OF RECURRENCE OF BLIGHT.



   (A)   Premises sold under the provisions of this chapter shall
provide in the instrument of conveyance that the purchaser, his or her
successor and assigns, shall rehabilitate or develop the premises in
accordance with all applicable Building Code and Zoning Code regulations of
the city and shall henceforth use the premises in accordance with all
applicable provisions of the Building Code and Zoning Code and shall
eliminate any blight thereon and prevent the recurrence of blight. Such
provisions shall eliminate any blight thereon and prevent the recurrence of
blight. Such provisions shall be both covenants and conditions of the
conveyance and the instrument of conveyance shall further provide for
reversion to the city if blight does recur upon the premises or the use,
development or rehabilitation thereof is not carried out in accordance with
the terms of the conveyance and the provisions of the Building Code and
Zoning Code and the Code of Ordinances and shall provide for a right of
immediate reentry by the city in such event.



   (B)   The City Manager is hereby authorized to negotiate for the
sale of premises acquired under the provisions of this chapter which are not
to be retained by the city. No land shall be sold by the City Manager except
pursuant to a special ordinance of Council authorizing such sale which
ordinance shall prescribe in detail the terms and conditions upon which such
sale is to be made and the covenants to be contained in the deed from the
city to the redeveloper.



(Ord. 31-1988, passed 11-2-88)



§ 155.28  CONSULTATION WITH NEIGHBORHOOD ORGANIZATIONS.



   The City Manager is authorized to consult with organizations and
persons in a neighborhood in regard to the existence of blighted premises
therein, means of eliminating such blight and possible purchase and
redevelopment of such property by responsible neighborhood organizations.



(Ord. 31-1988, passed 11-2-88)



§ 155.29  CHAPTER PROVISIONS NOT LIMITATION.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to limit the City Manager or
the city in any way to use any or all other means available to it to remove
existing blight or prevent future blight, or summarily eliminate immediate
hazards to the public health or safety or criminal activity on premises
regardless of whether or not acquisition of such premises has or has not been
commenced under any provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 31-1988, passed 11-2-88)



§ 155.30  INCONSISTENT STATUTES INOPERATIVE.



   The provisions of any statute of the state in conflict with provisions
of this chapter are hereby declared to be inoperative in the city.



(Ord. 31-1988, passed 11-2-88)



CHAPTER 156.01:  SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS: INTRODUCTION AND GENERAL
INTERPRETATION



Section



   156.0101   Preamble



   156.0102   General provisions



   156.0103   Appeal procedure



   156.0104   Penalty



§ 156.0101  PREAMBLE.



   Subdividing or platting is the usual means by which open land is
converted into building sites. It consists of laying out such land into
streets and lots and the installation of the street and sanitary improvements
necessary to provide for traffic access and for water, sewer and other
utility services. Subdividing is usually the first step in the process of
urbanization and urban expansion.



   (A)   The Subdivision Regulations set forth in considerable detail
the general principles of design and the minimum requirements for the layout
of subdivisions; the street and block layout; minimum right-of-way widths for
streets of various categories, alleys and easements for utilities; minimum
roadway widths, maximum street grades, minimum sight distances, the treatment
of intersections; the sizes, shapes and layout of lots; recommendations with
respect to recreational and other desirable open spaces; provisions for
drainage, storm water management and sedimentation control; street trees and
other improvements.



   (B)   An important general requirement stipulates that a subdivision
be so designed as to provide for all public facilities which directly affect
the tract to be platted. In general, these may include highways and
thoroughfares, sites for schools, parks, playgrounds and other public
facilities. The layout of a subdivision is required to conform also with the
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, as these will determine the kind of
street layout, lot sizes, and other features of interior design appropriate
for the subdivision.



   (C)   All existing and proposed thoroughfares shown on the
Thoroughfare Plan as crossing or bordering a proposed subdivision are
required to be provided in the general location and at the width designated
on the Plan.



   (D)   Other principles of design and minimum requirements and
standards pertain largely to the internal layout and development of the
subdivision. The location, alignment and width of the street; block length;
lot sizes and arrangements; and the extent and character of street and
utility improvements to be installed are mainly involved. The purpose of
these Regulations is to obtain, through compliance with widely recognized
up-to-date principles of design and the installation of street and utility
improvements of acceptable standards, healthful, safe and otherwise desirable
conditions for the future users of the subdivision.



   (E)   The requirement of the installation of street and sanitary
improvements prior to building construction is among the most important
provisions of the Subdivision Regulations. These installations are essential
to secure the health and safety of the future users of the subdivision, the
larger neighborhood, as well as the community.



§ 156.0102  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Policies.



      (1)   Public improvements included with and as a part of land
subdivision subject to these Regulations shall conform to the be properly
related to the Comprehensive Plan, all official land use maps, and the
"Design, Construction and Material Specification Handbook for Montgomery,
Ohio".



      (2)   Prior to the start of any construction, the developer
shall notify the Public Works Director and all utilities, including water,
sewer, gas, electric, cable and telecommunication utilities of such
construction in accordance with the requirements for notification listed in
the "Design, Construction and Material Specification Handbook".



   (B)   Purposes. These Regulations are adopted for the following
purposes:



      (1)   To protect and provide for the public health, safety and
general welfare of the city;



      (2)   To insure the future growth and development of the city
in accordance with the official plans and regulations;



      (3)   To secure safety from fire, flood and other danger, and
to prevent over crowding of the land and undue congestion of populations. All
subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage;



      (4)   To guide public and private policy  and action in order
to provide adequate and efficient transportation, water, sewerage, schools,
parks, playground, recreation and other public requirements and facilities;



      (5)   To provide the most beneficial relationship between the
uses of land and buildings and the circulation of traffic throughout the
city, having particular regard to the avoidance of congestion in the streets
and highways, and the pedestrian traffic movements appropriate to the various
uses of land and buildings, and to provide for the proper location and width
of streets and building lines;



      (6)   To establish reasonable standards of design and
procedures for subdivisions and resubdivisions, in order to further the
orderly layout and use of land; and to insure proper legal descriptions and
monumenting of subdivided land;



      (7)   To insure that public facilities are available and will
have a sufficient capacity to serve the proposed subdivision;



      (8)   To prevent the pollution of air, streams and ponds; to
assure the adequacy of drainage facilities; to safeguard the water table; and
to encourage the wise use and management of natural resources throughout the
city in order to preserve the integrity, stability and beauty of the
community and the value of the land.



   (C)   Authority and conditions.



      (1)   The Public Works Director, subject to the approval of
the Planning Commission, shall adopt and publish the "Design, Construction
and Material Specification Handbook" setting forth the standards to be used
in the design and development of property in the community.



      (2)   A proposed division of an original tract of land may be
approved by the Planning Commission without a plat provided the conditions in
Section 1105.06(a) are met.



      (3)   Until all applicable fees have been paid in full, no
action shall be taken on any application for approval of plats in regards to
these Regulations. In addition to such fees, the developer shall be
responsible for the actual cost to the city of all inspections, engineering
review and testing of materials and soil for the subdivision including final
inspections and certification for acceptance of public improvements whether
performed by city personnel or others. Such costs may be billed to the
subdivider periodically as the work progresses and/or the Development
Director may require a deposit to cover such costs. No plat shall be recorded
until all required fees are paid by the developer.



   (D)   Interpretation, conflict and separability.



      (1)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of these Regulations shall be held to be minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare.



      (2)   Conflict with public and private provisions shall be
alleviated as provided below:



         (a)   These Regulations are not intended to interfere
with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or
other provision of law. Where any provision of these Regulations imposes
restrictions different from those imposed by any other provision of these
Regulations or any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of
law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher standards
shall control.



         (b)   These Regulations are not intended to abrogate any
easement, covenant, or any other private agreement or restriction, provided
that where the provisions of these Regulations are more restrictive or impose
higher standards or regulations than such easement, covenant, or other
private agreement or restriction, the requirements of these Regulations shall
govern.



      (3)   These Regulations and various articles and sections are
hereby declared severable. If any article, section, subsection, paragraph,
sentence or phrase of these Regulations is adjudged unconstitutional, or
invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the
Regulations shall not be affected thereby.



   (E)   Resubdivision of land. Whenever a parcel of land is subdivided
and the subdivision plat shows one or more lots containing more than one acre
of land and there are indications that such lot or lots will eventually be
resubdivided into smaller building sites, the Planning Commission may require
that such parcel of land allow for the future widening of streets and the
ultimate extension of adjacent streets. Easements providing for the future
opening and extension of such streets may be made a requirement of the plat.



   (F)   Sale of land within subdivisions. No owner or agent of the
owner of any land located within a subdivision shall transfer or sell any
land by reference to, exhibition of, or by the use of a plat of the
subdivision before such plat has been approved and recorded in the manner
prescribed in these Regulations. The description of such lot or parcel by
metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other documents used in the
process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction from the
provisions of these Regulations.



§ 156.0103  APPEAL PROCEDURE.



   Any applicant whose subdivision plat has been disapproved by the
Planning Commission may within sixty days of such disapproval file a petition
appealing the disapproval in the Hamilton County Court of Common Pleas.



§ 156.0104  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of these Subdivision
Regulations, or any amendment or supplement thereto, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined
not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned not more than
sixty days or both.



   (B)   Each and every day during which such violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.



CHAPTER 156.02:  SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS: REQUIREMENTS FOR SUBDIVISION
APPROVAL



Section



   156.0201   Definitions



   156.0202   Platting procedure



   156.0203   Preliminary plat



   156.0204   Final or record plat



   156.0205   Modifications and exceptions



   156.0206   Construction and inspections



   156.0207   Subdivision bonds



   156.0208   Final inspection



   156.0209   Enforcement



§ 156.0201  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of these Regulations, certain terms and words used
herein shall be used, interpreted and defined as follows:



   ALLEY or SERVICE DRIVE.  A passage or way affording generally a
secondary means of vehicular access to abutting properties and not intended
for general traffic circulation.



   APPLICANT.  The owner of the land to be subdivided.



   BOND.  A form of security agreement in an amount and form, as provided
for herein. All bonds shall be approved by the Development Director on behalf
of the Planning Commission and approved as to form by the Director of Law.



   CITY.  The City of Montgomery, Ohio.



   CITY'S ENGINEER.  The Engineer of the city or his agent designated to
perform certain duties on his behalf.



   CONSTRUCTION PLANS or DRAWINGS. The maps or drawings accompanying a
final subdivision plat and showing the specific location and design of
improvements to be installed in the subdivision in accordance with these
Regulations and with the requirements of the Planning Commission as a
condition of the approval of the plat.



   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.  The official Comprehensive Plan of the city and
including any part of such plan separately adopted and any amendment to such
plan or parts thereof.



   COUNTY ENGINEER.  The County Engineer of Hamilton County, Ohio.



   CUL-DE-SAC.  A local street with only one outlet and having an
appropriate terminus for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement.



   DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION AND MATERIAL SPECIFICATION HANDBOOK.  As
referenced herein, the official standards for the city governing the design,
construction and materials used in all proposed improvements.



   DEVELOPER. The owner of land proposed to be subdivided.



   DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR. The Community Development Director as approved by
the City Manager or his agent designated to perform certain duties on his or
her behalf.



   DRAINAGE PLAN.  A plan for the control of storm water runoff in
accordance with the requirements of these Regulations.



   EASEMENT.  A right of a person or entity to use the property of
another, or part thereof, for a specific purpose or purposes.



   FINAL PLAT.  The plan or record of a subdivision intended to be
recorded with the Hamilton County Recorder's office and any accompanying
material, as prescribed in these Regulations.



   FRONTAGE.  The side of a lot abutting on a public street and as
defined in the Zoning Ordinance.



   FRONTAGE ACCESS or SERVICE ROAD.  A minor street or road generally
running parallel with a main street or thoroughfare and connected therewith
at infrequent intervals or placed at the rear of lots abutting a main street
or thoroughfare and which is designed to limit curb cuts on the main street
and segregate local traffic from higher speed through traffic.



   HEALTH OFFICER.  The Hamilton County Board of Health or other official
of the city or county or other individual appointed or officially designated
to perform the functions and duties of a health officer or sanitarian for the
city.



   LOCAL STREET or COLLECTOR STREET. A street intended to serve and to
provide access to neighborhoods or subneighborhoods.



   LOT.  A piece or parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by
a principal building or group of such buildings and accessory buildings, or
utilized for a principal use and uses accessory thereto, together with such
open spaces as required by the Zoning Ordinance of the City and having its
principal frontage on a public street.



   LOT, CORNER.  A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their
intersection or upon two parts of the same street. The point of intersection
of the street lines is the "corner".



   LOT, INTERIOR.  A lot other than a corner lot.



   MAINTENANCE BOND.  An agreement by the developer with the city to
maintain and keep in good repair all improvements of the subdivision for a
period of one year after approval by the Development Director of the
construction of such improvements and in an amount determined by the
Development Director to be sufficient to secure such maintenance and not less
than ten percent (10%) of the performance bond amount and which agreement
shall be secured by sufficient sureties or assets.



   MAJOR SUBDIVISION.  Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision.



   MINOR STREET.  Any street not a highway, primary or secondary
thoroughfare, or local or collector street, and intended to serve and to
provide access exclusively to the properties abutting thereon.



   MINOR SUBDIVISION.  A division of a parcel of land in accordance with
R.C. § 711.131 and with § 156.0205 of these Regulations; also known as lot
splits.



   PERFORMANCE BOND.  An agreement by the developer with the city
guaranteeing the completion of physical improvements according to approved
plans and specifications and in an amount determined by the City's Engineer
to be sufficient to secure the completion of such improvements and secured by
sufficient sureties or assets.



   PERMANENT MARKER.  A one-half inch diameter steel rod thirty inches in
length.



   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.  The type of land development defined in the
Zoning Ordinance, wherein standards and procedures are established for such
land use, including reference to these Regulations.



   PLANNING COMMISSION.  The Planning Commission of the city.



   PRELIMINARY PLAT.  The preliminary drawing described in these
Regulations, indicating the proposed manner or layout of the subdivision to
be submitted to the Planning Commission for approval.



   PUBLIC WAY.  An alley, avenue, boulevard, bridge, channel, ditch,
easement, expressway, freeway, highway, land, parkway, right-of-way, road,
sidewalk, street, subway, tunnel, viaduct, walk or other ways which the
general public or a public entity have a right to use, or which are dedicated
to public use, whether improved or not.



   REGISTERED ENGINEER.  An engineer properly licensed and registered in
the State of Ohio.



   REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR.  A land surveyor properly licensed and
registered in the State of Ohio.



   RESUBDIVISION.  A change in the plat or drawing of a recorded major or
minor subdivision if such change affects any street layout, lot line or
public way.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY.  Any parcel of land taken or dedicated for use as a
public way. In addition to the roadway, it normally incorporates the curbs,
lawn strips, sidewalks, lighting and drainage facilities and may include
special features such as separation, landscaped areas, viaducts and bridges.



   SEDIMENTATION PLAN.  A plan for the control of sedimentation in
accordance with the provisions of this Code.



   SIDEWALK BOND.  An agreement by the developer with the city
guaranteeing the construction of required sidewalks in a subject subdivision
or development.



   SUBDIVISION.



      (1)   The division of any parcel of land shown as a unit or as
continuous units on the last preceding tax roll, into two or more parcels,
sites or lots, any one of which is less than five acres for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership; provided, however,
that the division or partition of land into parcels of more than five acres
not involving any new streets or easements of access, and the sale or
exchange of parcels between adjoining lot owners, where such sale or exchange
does not create additional building sites, shall be exempted; or



      (2)   The improvement of one or more parcels of land for
residential, commercial or industrial structures or groups of structures
involving the division or allocation of land for the opening, widening,
extension of any street or streets, except private streets serving industrial
structures; the division or allocation of land as open spaces for common use
by owners, occupants or lease holders or as easements for the extension and
maintenance of public sewer, water, storm drainage or other public facilities.



   THOROUGHFARE. A major trafficway designated in the Thoroughfare Plan as
a regional thoroughfare, primary thoroughfare, secondary thoroughfare or
collector street.



   THOROUGHFARE PLAN. The official plan of proposed regional highways,
primary and secondary thoroughfares, and collector streets of the city.



   TREE PLAN.  A plan for the planting of desirable shade trees in public
areas in accordance with the provisions of this Code.



   Other pertinent terms shall be as defined in any current Zoning
Ordinance or other ordinance of the city or as their use and ordinary meaning
indicate.



§ 156.0202  PLATTING PROCEDURE.



   (A)   General provisions.



      (1)   No person, firm or corporation proposing to make or have
made a subdivision within the territorial limits of these Regulations shall
enter into any contract for the sale of or offer to sell such subdivision or
any part thereof, or proceed with any construction work on the proposed
subdivision, including grading, until he has obtained the approval of the
preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision by the Planning Commission and
the approval of construction drawings, sedimentation plans and drainage plans
by the Planning Commission, Public Works Director, and the City Engineer. The
Planning Commission may delegate final approval of construction drawings to
the Development Director.



      (2)   The approval of the final plat by the Planning
Commission shall not constitute or effect an acceptance by the public of the
responsibility for construction or maintenance of any street, other proposed
public way, space shown on such plat, or any other improvements.



      (3)   Approval of the final plat by the Planning Commission
shall not authorize a waiver of any officially adopted design and
construction requirements which may have been inadvertently omitted during
the technical review of the final plat.



   (B)   Procedure. In planning and developing a subdivision, the
subdivider and his agent shall comply with the general principles of design
and minimum requirements for the layout of subdivisions set forth herein and
in the "Design, Construction and Material Specification Handbook" and in
every case shall pursue the following procedures.



      (1)   Before preparing the preliminary plat of a subdivision
and while the plat is still in sketch form, the subdivider, his engineer,
surveyor, or other agent shall confer with the Development Director to
ascertain the location of existing and proposed highways, thoroughfares,
parks, playgrounds and other proposed public facilities, which may affect and
need to be taken into account in designing the layout and developing the
subdivision, and to inform himself of the requirements in these Regulations
and others applying to the design and development of his subdivision.



      (2)   The subdivider shall prepare and file a preliminary plat
of the proposed subdivision which shall conform with the requirements set
forth in § 153.04 and shall file with the Planning Commission an application
in writing for the approval of the plat.



It is requested that this information be submitted at least 30 days prior to
the consideration of the Planning Commission.



      (3)   The preliminary plat shall be checked by the Development
Director on behalf of the Planning Commission for compliance with other
applicable sections of the official Comprehensive Plan and the principles,
standards and requirements hereinafter set forth. The Development Director
shall submit technical checks after conferring with appropriate departments
concerning matters within their respective jurisdiction.



      (4)   Concerning matters covered in subsection (B)(3) hereof,
the Planning Commission shall approve or disapprove the preliminary plat, or
approve it with modification, as agreed to by the subdivider, noting any such
changes that shall be required. One copy shall be returned to the subdivider
with the date of the approval or disapproval endorsed thereon.



      (5)   The approval of the preliminary plat by the Planning
Commission is to be considered only as an approval of the layout with the
understanding that the Development Director, or other officials having
jurisdiction, may modify any engineering or construction details proposed by
the subdivider, whenever required for the protection of the public interest.
The approval or disapproval of the preliminary plat will be made within
thirty days of the official submission of the plat, which shall be the date
on which the Planning Commission first considers the plat at a meeting. The
approval shall be effective for one year. If the developer submits a final
plat or plats for part of the subdivision within one year after the
preliminary plat approval, the approval of the preliminary plat shall be
extended for one year from the date of the last such plat submission. The
Planning Commission in its discretion may extend its approval of a
preliminary plat, which has expired.



      (4)   Following the approval of the preliminary plat, the
developer may submit for approval any portion of the subdivision for final
plat approval in accordance with § 153.05. It is suggested that the final
plat be submitted to the Development Director at least two weeks prior to the
meeting of the Planning Commission at which consideration of the plat is
desired. The Development Director is not an agent of the Planning Commission
but provides a service to the subdivider in submitting plats to the Planning
Commission. The official submission of the plat to the Planning Commission is
the date on which the Planning Commission first considers the plat at a
meeting.



      (7)   After a copy of the final plat and any technical reports
from the City's Engineer have been received by the Planning Commission and
provided that the final plat is found to conform with the preliminary plat as
approved, the Commission shall approve or disapprove the final plat within
thirty days after official submission to the Commission, which is the date on
which the Planning Commission first considers the plat at a regular meeting.
If the Planning Commission fails to act within such time, the applicant, at
its option, may deem the plat to have been rejected and proceed to appeal the
decision of the Planning Commission to the Hamilton County Court of Common
Pleas. The Commission shall enter such approval or disapproval of any plat
submitted, by the signature of the Chairman on the plat. The minutes of the
Planning Commission shall include a citation or reference to the rules or
regulations violated by the plat, if the plat is disapproved.



      (8)   The City's Engineer shall establish the amount of the
performance bond at the time of the approval of the final plat. This
performance bond must be submitted and approved before the plat can be
recorded.



      (9)   After approval of the final plat by the Planning
Commission and after receipt and acceptance by the city of the performance
bond in accordance with § 156.0207, the plat shall be submitted by the
Development Director to the County Recorder.



   (C)   Public notice and hearing. Any procedure to approve a
subdivision plat shall be subject to the same administrative procedure
requirements for development plan review as outlined in Chapter 150.14.



§ 156.0203  PRELIMINARY PLAT.



   (A)   General submission requirements. The preliminary plat shall be
prepared in accordance with the provisions stated herein. An application for
preliminary plat approval must be submitted with the preliminary plat. A
filing fee is to be submitted with the application.



      (1)   Twelve black line prints along with a reproducible copy
prepared by a registered professional surveyor of the preliminary plat of the
proposed subdivision shall accompany an application in writing to the
Planning Commission for tentative approval of the subdivision.



      (2)   Construction drawings, sedimentation plans and drainage
plans shall be approved by the City's Engineer, Development Director and
Planning Commission before any construction begins.



      (3)   The preliminary plat shall show all existing
subdivisions and the street and tract lines or acreage parcels of land,
together with the names of record owners of such parcels immediately
adjoining the proposed subdivisions and between it and the nearest existing
highways or thoroughfares. It shall also show the streets and alleys in
neighboring subdivisions or unplatted property to produce the most
advantageous development of the entire neighborhood.



      (4)   The horizontal scale of the preliminary plat shall be
100 feet or less to the inch.



   (B)   Specific information required. The preliminary plat shall
clearly show the following features and information:



      (1)   A vicinity map at a scale of 200 feet or greater detail
to the inch shall be included on the plat showing all existing subdivisions,
roads, and tract lines and the nearest existing thoroughfares. It shall also
show the most advantageous connections between roads in the proposed
subdivision and those in the neighboring areas.



      (2)   The proposed name of the subdivision which shall not
duplicate or closely approximate the name of any other subdivision in the
county.



      (3)   The tract designation according to real estate records
of the County Records.



      (4)   The names and addresses of the owner of record, the
subdivider and the surveyor who prepared the plat. In the case where the
owner of record is a corporation, the principal officers shall be listed.



      (5)   The names of adjacent subdivisions and the names of
recorded owners of adjacent parcels of unplatted land.



      (6)   The boundary lines, accurate in scale, of the tract to
be subdivided and the approximate acreage of the tract.



      (7)   The location, widths and names of all existing or
platted streets or other public ways within or immediately adjacent to the
tracts, and other important features, such as railroad and utility rights of
way, public open spaces, existing permanent buildings and structures, large
trees, watercourses, section and corporation lines, etc. The boundary of any
floodway and/or floodway fringe area must be shown.



      (8)   The following information concerning utilities and
drainage shall be included on the preliminary plat:



         (a)   Existing sewers, water lines, culverts, and other
underground structures and power transmission poles and lines within and
adjacent to the tract with sizes shown.



         (b)   Approximate location of proposed water and
sanitary sewer lines, showing their connection with the existing system.



         (c)   Approximate location of storm sewer pipes, catch
basins and retention/detention area.



         (d)   Calculation of retention/ detention volume as
required in the "Design, Construction and Material Specification Handbook".



      (9)   Existing contours at an interval of not greater than two
feet.



      (10)   The layout, proposed names and widths of proposed
streets, alleys, and easements. The layout, numbers and approximate
dimensions of proposed lots. Proposed street names shall not duplicate or
closely approximate any existing street names in the county, except for
extensions of existing streets.



      (11)   Existing zoning of the tract and adjacent areas,
including zoning boundary lines, if any; proposed uses of property and
proposed front yard setback lines.



      (12)   All parcels of land intended to be dedicated or
temporarily reserved for public use, or to be reserved in the deeds for
public use, or to be reserved in the deed for the common use of property
owners in the subdivision, with the purpose, conditions or limitations of
such reservation indicated.



      (13)   North-point, scale and date.



      (14)   Proposed deed restrictions and Homeowners Association
Rules and Restrictions shall be submitted with the preliminary plat.



§ 156.0204  FINAL OR RECORD PLAT.



   (A)   General submission requirements. The final plat shall be
submitted within one year from the date of the approval of the preliminary
plat unless the Planning Commission extends the period of approval. All
information contained on the approved preliminary plat must also appear on
such submitted final plat.



      (1)   A filing fee is to be submitted along with the
application.



      (2)   The final plat, legibly drawn in waterproof ink and in
standard 18" x 24" size of cloth, mylar or similar durable reproducible
material and twelve black line or blue line prints shall accompany the
application for final plat approval. The final plat shall be at a scale of
100 feet or less to the inch.



      (3)   All plats shall conform to the minimum standards for
plats and surveys passed by the State Board of Registration for Professional
Engineers and Surveyors. If the regulations herein conflict with such
standards, the more restrictive provision shall apply.



   (B)   Specific information required.



      (1)   A vicinity sketch at a scale of 200 feet or greater
detail to the inch.



      (2)   All plat boundary lines with lengths of courses to
hundredths of a foot and bearings to half minutes; these boundaries to be
determined by an accurate survey in the field which shall be balanced and
closed with an error of closures not to exceed 1 to 10,000. A copy of the
closure calculations shall be submitted with the final plat.



      (3)   The exact location and width along the property line of
all existing recorded streets intersecting or paralleling the boundaries of
the tract.



      (4)   Bearings and distances to nearest established street
bounds, established survey lines, or other official monuments, which
monuments shall be located or accurately described on the plat. Any
established survey or corporation lines shall be accurately monument-marked
and located on the plat, and their names shall be located on them.



      (5)   The accurate location and material of all permanent
reference monuments.



      (6)   The exact layout of the following:



         (a)   Street alley lines; their names, bearings and
widths, including widths along the line of any obliquely intersecting street.



         (b)   The lengths of all arcs-radii, points of curvature
and tangent bearings.



         (c)   All easements, existing or proposed, both public
and private, delineated with limitation of the easements rights definitely
stated on the plat.



         (d)   All lot lines with dimensions in feet and
hundredths and with bearings to half minutes if other than right angles to
the street and alley lines.



      (7)   Lots and blocks in numerical order.



      (8)   Municipal, township, county or section lines if located
within or adjacent to the tract to be subdivided, accurately tied to the
lines of the subdivision by distances and bearings.



      (9)   The accurate outlines with dimensions and legal
description, when necessary, of all property which is offered for dedication
for public use, and of all property that may be reserved by covenant in the
deeds for the common use of the property owners in the subdivision, with the
purpose indicated thereon.



      (10)   In case the subdivision is traversed by a watercourse,
channel, stream or creek, show the prior or present location of such
watercourse, channel, stream or creek. The boundary of flood way and/or
floodway fringe area shall be shown, if applicable.



      (11)   Setback building lines as fixed by the applicable
Zoning Ordinance and any other setback lines or street lines established by
public authority, and those stipulated in the deed restriction.



      (12)   Private restrictions, if any:



         (a)   Boundaries of each type of use restrictions.



         (b)   Other private restrictions for each definitely
restricted section of the subdivision.



      (13)   Name of the subdivision and name or number of the
largest subdivision or tract of which the tract now subdivided forms a part.



      (14)   Names and locations of adjoining subdivisions and
location and ownership of adjoining unsubdivided property.



      (15)   Names and addresses of the owner of record, the
subdivider, and of the engineer or surveyor. In the case the owner is a
corporation, the principal officers shall be listed.



      (16)   North-point, numerical scale and date.



      (17)   The following statements shall be affixed as applicable
to the subdivision plat in addition to any additional notes pertinent to the
particular subdivision. The numbering of paragraphs, as below, is not
necessary.



         (a)   The undersigned, being owners of ___ acres of land
in Section ____, Town _____, Range _____, City of Montgomery, Hamilton
County, Ohio and also being known as part lot(s) #-    , in said City, do
hereby dedicate to the public forever, in accordance with the laws in such
cases made and provided, the streets and roadways as shown on said plat,
certifying the same to be free and unencumbered.



         (b)   Utility easements are provided on this plat and
designated as such. No improvement or impediment of any kind shall be made on
said utility easement which will interfere with access to the said utility.
The City of Montgomery, and/or the Utility Company shall not be responsible
to any present or future owner(s) of said lot for any damages done on said
easement to sod, shrubbery, or other improvements natural or artificial by
reason of entry for purposes of constructing, maintaining, replacing or
repairing the utility. The erection or placement of any structure and
planting or placement of any trees on said utility easement shall also be
prohibited.



Private drainage easements are provided on this plat and designated as such.
The City of Montgomery does not accept private drainage easements shown on
this plat and the City of Montgomery is not obligated to maintain or repair
any channels or installations in said easement. The easement area of each lot
and all improvements in it shall be maintained continuously by the owner of
the lot. Within these easements, no structure, planting or other material
shall be placed or permitted to remain which may obstruct, retard or change
the direction of the flow of the water through the drainage channel in the
easement.



         (c)   The lots are numbered from ______ to ______ 
inclusive.



Note: If the protective covenants are to be filed with the plat, the above
statement shall further state: "and shall be subject to the protective
covenants and restrictive provisions as set forth in deed book _____, page
_____ of the Hamilton County, Ohio records."



         (d)   All public improvements included as part of this
subdivision shall be constructed and designed in accordance with the current
requirements of the "Design, Construction and Material Specification Handbook
for Montgomery, Ohio" and all other applicable ordinances adopted by the City
of Montgomery.



      (18)   The plat shall also include the signature of the owners
or their authorized agent and a notarization of their signatures with the
following suggested format:



"In witness thereof we have hereunto set our hand this ________ day of
________, 20__.



WITNESS



______________________________      Signed
   ______________________________



______________________________            _________________________
_____



STATE OF OHIO, COUNTY OF HAMILTON, SS:



Be it known, that on this _____ day of _____, 20__, before me a Notary Public
in and for the State aforesaid, personally came ____________________, who
then and here did acknowledge the signing of the foregoing instrument to be
his voluntary act and deed for the uses and purposes therein mentioned.



IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and affixed my notarial seal
on the day and year aforesaid."



______________________________            _________________________
______



My Commission expires               Notary Public



                        State of Ohio



         (a)   A statement by a registered land surveyor:



I hereby certify that the accompanying plat is the correct return of a survey
made by me for _______________ subdivision, that all monuments have been set,
and Subdivision Regulations of the City of Montgomery, Ohio has been complied
with to the best of my knowledge.



________________________



Signature



Reg. Surveyor No.  _____ in Ohio



         (b)   The acceptance of the plat will  be provided for
by including the following statement:



"Approved by the  Planning Commission, City of Montgomery, Ohio, this _____
day of_____, 20__.



         (c)   Provisions for acknowledging the transfer and
recording the plat shall be provided for by the following:



"Entered for transfer __________, 20__



Transferred ____________, 20__



_____________________________



Auditor, Hamilton County, Ohio



by _______________ Deputy



Filed for record



_________________ at ____________



Recorded ________________________ 20__



Plat Book _________________________



Page ___________________________



_________________________________



Recorder, Hamilton County, Ohio



by  ____________________ Deputy



File ________________  Fee ______________



      (19)   A certificate of title for the platted property from an
attorney licensed to practice in the state showing ownership and any
encumbrances on the platted property.



      (20)   A plat of land of the dedicators in conformance with
R.C. § 711.02.



      (21)   Any mortgagee holding a mortgage on the property shall
sign the plat signifying his or its consent to the plat and any dedication of
lands to public use in the plat.



   (C)   Procedure for approved final plat. Upon receiving approval and
having the final plat signed by the chairman of the Planning Commission, the
applicant shall furnish the Development Director three reproducible copies of
the approved plat and twelve black line or blue line prints of the approved
final plat. These copies shall then be utilized by the Development Director
for recording the plat with the County Recorder.



§ 156.0205  MODIFICATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Minor subdivisions: lot splits. A proposed division of a
parcel of land along existing public street, not involving the opening,
widening or extension of any street or road, and involving no more than five
lots after the original tract has been completely subdivided, may be
submitted to the Planning Commission, for approval without plat. The Planning
Commission, acting through the Development Director, shall approve or
disapprove such proposed division within seven working days after submission.
The Development Director may also refer the application to the Planning
Commission for consideration at its next regular meeting. If the application
is not approved or referred to Planning Commission within seven days the
application shall be deemed denied. If satisfied that such proposed division
is not contrary to applicable platting, subdividing or zoning regulations,
the application shall be stamped "Approved by City Planning Commission,
Montgomery, Ohio, no plat required", and signed by the Development Director
and the Chair of the Planning Commission or in the absence of the Development
Director, the Public Works Director and in the absence of the Chair of the
Planning Commission, the Vice-Chair of the Planning Commission. Upon
approval, three copies of the plat of the proposed division and other
pertinent information shall be filed with the Planning Commission for record
keeping purposes.



   (B)   Preliminary plat exceptions. In the case of a minor
subdivision situated in a locality where conditions are well defined, the
Planning Commission may exempt the subdivider from complying with some or all
of the requirements stipulated in §§ 156.0203 and 156.0204 pertaining to
the preparation of the preliminary and final plats.



   (C)   Large development exceptions. The general principles of design
and the minimum requirements for the laying out of subdivision may be varied
by the Planning Commission in the case of a Planned Unit Development
authorized under provisions of the Zoning Ordinance of the City, to be
developed in accordance with a comprehensive plan safeguarded by appropriate
restrictions, which, in the judgment of the Commission make adequate
provisions for all essential community facilities; provided, however, that no
modification shall be granted by the Commission which would conflict with the
proposals of the Thoroughfare Plan, or with other features of the
Comprehensive Plan, or with the intent and purpose of the general principles
of design and minimum requirements.



   (D)   Modifications due to developmental hardships. In any
particular case where the subdivider may show that, by reason of exceptional
topographic or other physical conditions, strict compliance with any
requirement of these Regulations are practically difficult, the Planning
Commission may vary such requirements to the extent deemed just and proper
after reviewing the recommendation of the Development Director, so as to
relieve such difficulty; provided such relief may be granted without
detriment to the public good and without impairing the intent and purpose of
these Regulations or the desirable general development of the neighborhood
and the community in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan and the Zoning
Ordinance. Any modification thus granted shall be entered in the minutes of
the Planning Commission setting forth the reasons, which, in the opinion of
the Planning Commission, justified the modification.



[Factors to be considered - See Variances, § 150.2010, Zoning Code]



§ 156.0206  CONSTRUCTION AND INSPECTION.



   Construction of all improvements contained in the final plat, and the
inspection of such construction shall be done in accordance with the
requirements of the "Design, Construction and Material Specification
Handbook" and all other applicable ordinances.



§ 156.0207  SUBDIVISION BONDS.



   (A)   Performance bonds.



      (1)   After approval of the final plat by the Planning
Commission, the developer may secure from the proper authorities the
necessary permits to proceed with the construction and begin work on the
improvements. Work must commence within six (6) months of approval, unless
otherwise extended by the Planning Commission.



         (a)   Before commencing construction of any improvement,
the developer shall post a performance bond. This performance bond shall be
sufficient to cover the full cost of all improvements shown on the approved
construction drawings. This bond amount shall be set by the Development
Director based on the construction plans and cost estimates and shall insure
the satisfactory performance of all improvements during a fixed time set by
the City and in accordance with other of its requirements. Once the bond has
been posted, the final plat may be signed and recorded.



         (b)   The performance bond shall be reviewed and
approved by the Director of Law.



      (2)   After all construction work is completed, it shall be
inspected by the city to insure that the work has been correctly performed.
Any deficiencies shall be recorded and a list forwarded to the developer for
correction. Once the deficiencies have been corrected and checked by the
city, a maintenance bond shall be posted and the performance bond released.



   (B)   Maintenance bonds.



      (1)   After all construction is completed and approved by the
Public Works Director, the developer must maintain and keep in good repair
all improvements for a period of one year.



      (2)   The developer shall post with the city a maintenance
bond to secure the required maintenance of the improvements.



      (3)   The Development Director and the Public Works Director
are authorized to permit the subdivider, or his successors and assigns, to
transfer from the performance bond period to the maintenance bond period,
upon certification by the Public Works Director that the subdivision has been
completed in accordance with all of the conditions of the performance bond,
and applicable State statutes. In no case shall a subdivision be accepted for
maintenance without all improvements as shown on the construction drawings.



      (4)   In determining the amount of the maintenance bond to be
required by the Development Director, such amount shall be not less than ten
percent (10%) of the performance bond. The bond shall be reviewed and
approved by the Director of Law.



      (5)   At the termination of the one-year maintenance period,
the subdivision shall, again, be inspected by the city and all necessary
corrections recorded and forwarded to the developer. It shall be the
responsibility of the developer to request such inspection. Unless and until
the developer requests the inspection in writing, the maintenance period
shall not expire and the developer shall be responsible for all defects found
upon inspection of the subdivision whether or not the one-year period has
expired. Once these corrections are completed, a request shall be submitted
to Council for the acceptance of the subdivision. Any outside inspections or
testing which is required by the Public Works Director to assure the city
that the proposed improvements have been constructed and maintained to the
standards for acceptance shall be at developer's cost.



   (C)   Sidewalk bond.



      (1)   In the event that sidewalks are not completed at the
time that the subdivision should be put on the maintenance bond, then the
uncompleted sidewalks are to be placed on separate performance bonds, the
amount of which is to be determined by the City Engineer. In such event,
after the complete installation of sidewalks, there shall be established a
sidewalk maintenance bond, which shall not be less than ten percent (10%) of
the sidewalk performance bond, such bond to be for a period of one year from
the date of the complete installation of sidewalks.



      (2)   It shall be the responsibility of the City's Engineer to
delineate and determine the location of all such sidewalks not installed, for
the future purpose of releasing the sidewalk performance bond. All such
delineation is to be done on a copy of the subdivision plat or map, and such
is to be maintained in the office of the Public Works Director for future
reference.



§ 156.0208  FINAL INSPECTION.



   (A)   Upon completion of all improvements except sidewalks, the
developer shall submit a written request for final construction inspection.
The results of this inspection shall be forwarded to the developer in a
letter format. Immediately prior to the termination of the one-year
maintenance period, the developer shall submit a written request for the
final maintenance inspection and acceptance of the subdivision by the city.
All sidewalks must be complete prior to the final maintenance inspection or
secured by a sidewalk performance bond.



   (B)   The final release of all maintenance bonds shall be by
approval of Council after receiving a report and recommendation by the
Development Director and Public Works Director.



§ 156.0209  ENFORCEMENT.



   It shall be the duty of the Public Works Director and Development
Director to enforce these Subdivision Regulations. Pursuant to that duty, the
Public Works Director and Development Director shall have, in addition to all
other authority granted to them by these Subdivision Regulations, the
authority to issue stop work orders for any work being performed in violation
of these Subdivision Regulations or any other applicable ordinance of the
city.



CHAPTER 157: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION



Section



General Provisions



   157.01   Findings of fact



   157.02   Statement of purpose



   157.03   Methods of reducing flood loss



   157.04   Lands to which these regulations apply



   157.05   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard



   157.06   Abrogation and greater restrictions



   157.07   Interpretation



   157.08   Warning and disclaimer of liability



   157.09   Definitions



Use and Development Standards for Flood Hazard Reduction



   157.20   Use regulations



   157.21   Water and wastewater systems



   157.22   Subdivisions and large developments



   157.23   Residential structures



   157.24   Nonresidential structures



   157.25   Accessory structures



   157.26   Recreational vehicles



   157.27   Above ground gas or liquid storage tanks



   157.28   Assurance of flood carrying capacity



Administration



   157.40   Designation of Floodplain Administrator; duties and
responsibilities



   157.41   Floodplain development permits



   157.42   Application required



   157.43   Review and approval of a floodplain development permit
application; inspections



   157.44   Post-construction certifications required



   157.45   Revoking a floodplain development permit



   157.46   Exemption from filing a development permit



   157.47   Map maintenance activities



   157.48   Data use and flood map interpretation



   157.49   Substantial damage determinations



Appeals and Variances



   157.65   Appeals Board established; powers and duties



   157.66   Variances



   157.67   Appeal to the court



Enforcement



   157.80   Compliance required



   157.81   Notice of violation



   157.82   Violations and penalties



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 157.01  FINDINGS OF FACT.



   The City of Montgomery has special flood hazard areas that are subject
to periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health
and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base. Additionally, structures that are inadequately
elevated, flood proofed, or otherwise protected from flood damage also
contribute to the flood loss. In order to minimize the threat of such damages
and to achieve the purposes hereinafter set forth, these regulations are
adopted.



(Ord. 5-2004, passed 5-5-04; Am. Ord. 7-2004, passed 6-2-04)



§ 157.02  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of these regulations to promote the public health,
safety and general welfare, and to:



   (A)   Protect human life and health;



   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;



   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated
with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;



   (D)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;



   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as
water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges
located in areas of special flood hazard;



   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the proper
use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to protect
property and to minimize future flood blight areas;



   (G)   Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions;



   (H)   Minimize the impact of development on adjacent properties
within and near flood prone areas;



   (I)   Ensure that the flood storage and conveyance functions of the
floodplain are maintained;



   (J)   Minimize the impact of development on the natural, beneficial
values of the floodplain;



   (K)   Prevent floodplain uses that are either hazardous or
environmentally incompatible; and



   (L)   Meet community participation requirements of the National
Flood Insurance Program.



(Ord. 5-2004, passed 5-5-04; Am. Ord. 7-2004, passed 6-2-04)



§ 157.03  METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSS.



   In order to accomplish its purposes, these regulations include methods
and provisions for:



   (A)   Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health,
safety and property due to water hazards, or which result in damaging
increases in flood heights or velocities;



   (B)   Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction;



   (C)   Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream
channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
flood waters;



   (D)   Controlling filling, grading, dredging, excavating, and other
development which may increase flood damage; and



   (E)   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers
which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood
hazards in other areas.



(Ord. 5-2004, passed 5-5-04; Am. Ord. 7-2004, passed 6-2-04)



§ 157.04  LANDS TO WHICH THESE REGULATIONS APPLY.



   These regulations shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard
within the jurisdiction of the City of Montgomery as identified in § 157.05,
including any additional areas of special flood hazard annexed by the City of
Montgomery.



(Ord. 5-2004, passed 5-5-04; Am. Ord. 7-2004, passed 6-2-04)



§ 157.05  BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.



   For the purposes of these regulations, the following studies and/or
maps are adopted:



   (A)   Flood Insurance Rate Map Hamilton County, Ohio and
Incorporated Areas dated May 17, 2004. Flood Insurance Study Hamilton County,
Ohio and Incorporated Areas dated May 17, 2004.



   (B)   Any hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis authored by
a registered Professional Engineer in the State of Ohio which has been
approved by the City of Montgomery as required by Section 4.3, Subdivisions
and Large Scale Developments.



   (C)   Any revisions to the aforementioned maps and/or studies are
hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of these regulations.
Such maps and/or studies are on file at the Building and Development Office,
City of Montgomery, 10101 Montgomery Road, Montgomery, Ohio 45242.



(Ord. 5-2004, passed 5-5-04; Am. Ord. 7-2004, passed 6-2-04)



§ 157.06  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   These regulations are not intended to repeal any existing ordinances
including, subdivision regulations, zoning or building codes. In the event of
a conflict between these regulations and any other ordinance, the more
restrictive shall be followed. These regulations shall not impair any deed
restriction covenant or easement but the land subject to such interests shall
also be governed by the regulations.



(Ord. 5-2004, passed 5-5-04; Am. Ord. 7-2004, passed 6-2-04)



§ 157.07  INTERPRETATION.



   In the interpretation and application of these regulations, all
provisions shall be:



   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;



   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and



   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted
under state statutes. Where a provision of these regulations may be in
conflict with a state or federal law, such state or federal law shall take
precedence over these regulations.



(Ord. 5-2004, passed 5-5-04; Am. Ord. 7-2004, passed 6-2-04)



§ 157.08  WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   The degree of flood protection required by these regulations is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
These regulations do not imply that land outside the areas of special flood
hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damage. These regulations shall not create liability on the part of the
City of Montgomery, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, for any flood damage that results from reliance on these
regulations or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.



(Ord. 5-2004, passed 5-5-04; Am. Ord. 7-2004, passed 6-2-04)



§ 157.09  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE.  A structure on the same lot with, and of a
nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal structure.



   APPEAL.  A request for review of the Floodplain Administrator's
interpretation of any provision of these regulations or a request for a
variance.



   BASE FLOOD.  The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year. The base flood may also be referred to as the 1% chance
annual flood or 100-year flood.



   BASE (100-YEAR) FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE).  The water surface elevation of
the base flood in relation to a specified datum, usually the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 or the North American Vertical Datum of 1988,
and usually expressed in Feet Mean Sea Level (MSL). In Zone AO areas, the
base flood elevation is the natural grade elevation plus the depth number
(from 1 to 3 feet).



   BASEMENT.  Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.



   DEVELOPMENT.  Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.



   ENCLOSURE BELOW THE LOWEST FLOOR.  See "Lowest Floor."



   EXECUTIVE ORDER 11988 (FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT).  Issued by President
Carter in 1977, this order requires that no federally assisted activities be
conducted in or have the potential to affect identified special flood hazard
areas, unless there is no practicable alternative.



   FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA).  The agency with the
overall responsibility for administering the National Flood Insurance Program.



   FILL.  A deposit of earth material placed by artificial means.



   FLOOD OR FLOODING.  A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:



      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or



      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source.



   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM).  Usually the initial map, produced
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, or U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development, for a community depicting approximate special flood hazard
areas.



   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM).  An official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development has delineated the areas of special flood hazard.



   FLOOD INSURANCE RISK ZONES.  Zone designations on FHBMs and FIRMs that
indicate the magnitude of the flood hazard in specific areas of a community.
Following are the zone definitions:



      (1)   ZONE A.  Special flood hazard areas inundated by the
100-year flood; base flood elevations are not determined.



      (2)   ZONES A1-30 AND ZONE AE.  Special flood hazard areas
inundated by the 100-year flood; base flood elevations are determined.



      (3)   ZONE AO.  Special flood hazard areas inundated by the
100-year flood; with flood depths of 1 to 3 feet (usually sheet flow on
sloping terrain); average depths are determined.



      (4)   ZONE AH.  Special flood hazard areas inundated by the
100-year flood; flood depths of 1 to 3 feet (usually areas of ponding); base
flood elevations are determined.



      (5)   ZONE A99.  Special flood hazard areas inundated by the
100-year flood to be protected from the 100-year flood by a Federal flood
protection system under construction; no base flood elevations are determined.



      (6)   ZONE B AND ZONE X (SHADED).  Areas of 500-year flood;
areas subject to the 100-year flood with average depths of less than 1 foot
or with contributing drainage area less than 1 square mile; and areas
protected by levees from the base flood.



      (7)   ZONE C AND ZONE X (UNSHADED).  Areas determined to be
outside the 500-year floodplain.



   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS).  The official report in which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development has provided flood profiles, floodway boundaries (sometimes shown
on Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps), and the water surface elevations of the
base flood.



   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION  The Flood Protection Elevation, or FPE, is
the base flood elevation plus 2 feet of freeboard. In areas where no base
flood elevations exist from any authoritative source, the flood protection
elevation can be historical flood elevations, or base flood elevations
determined and/or approved by the Floodplain Administrator.



   FLOODWAY.  A floodway is the channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that have been reserved in order to pass the base
flood discharge. A floodway is typically determined through a hydraulic and
hydrologic engineering analysis such that the cumulative increase in the
water surface elevation of the base flood discharge is no more than a
designated height. In no case shall the designated height be more than one
foot at any point within the community. The floodway is an extremely
hazardous area, and is usually characterized by any of the following:
Moderate to high velocity flood waters, high potential for debris and
projectile impacts, and moderate to high erosion forces.



   FREEBOARD.  A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood
level for the purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and
floodway conditions, such as wave action, obstructed bridge openings, debris
and ice jams, and the hydrologic effect of urbanization in a watershed.



   HISTORIC STRUCTURE.  Any structure that is:



      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listings on the National Register;



      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary
of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a
registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; or



      (3)   Individually listed on the State of Ohio's inventory of
historic places maintained by the Ohio Historic Preservation Office.



      (4)   Individually listed on the inventory of historic places
maintained by the City of Montgomery whose historic preservation program has
been certified by the Ohio Historic Preservation Office.



   HYDROLOGIC AND HYDRAULIC ENGINEERING ANALYSIS.  An analysis performed
by a professional engineer, registered in the State of Ohio, in accordance
with standard engineering practices as accepted by FEMA, used to determine
flood elevations and/or floodway boundaries.



   LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC).  A Letter of Map Change is an official
FEMA determination, by letter, to amend or revise effective Flood Insurance
Rate Maps, Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps, and Flood Insurance Studies.



LOMC's are broken down into the following categories:



      (1)   Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA). A revision based on
technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a
designated special flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective
Flood Insurance Rate Map and establishes that a specific property is not
located in a special flood hazard area.



      (2)   Letter of Map Revision (LOMR).  A revision based on
technical data that, usually due to manmade changes, shows changes to flood
zones, flood elevations, floodplain and floodway delineations, and
planimetric features. One common type of LOMR, a LOMR-F, is a determination
concerning whether a structure or parcel has been elevated by fill above the
base flood elevation and is, therefore, excluded from the special flood
hazard area.



      (3)   Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR).  A formal
review and comment by FEMA as to whether a proposed project complies with the
minimum National Flood Insurance Program floodplain management criteria. A
CLOMR does not amend or revise effective Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Flood
Boundary and Floodway Maps, or Flood Insurance Studies.



   LOWEST FLOOR.  The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement) of a structure. This definition excludes an "enclosure below the
lowest floor" which is an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other
than a basement area, provided that such enclosure is built in accordance
with the applicable design requirements specified in these regulations for
enclosures below the lowest floor.



   MANUFACTURED HOME.  A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". For
the purposes of these regulations, a manufactured home includes manufactured
homes and mobile homes as defined in R.C. Chapter 3733.



   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK.  As specified in the Ohio Administrative Code
3701-27-01, a manufactured home park means any tract of land upon which three
or more manufactured homes, used for habitation are parked, either free of
charge or for revenue purposes, and includes any roadway, building,
structure, vehicle, or enclosure used or intended for use as part of the
facilities of the park. A tract of land that is subdivided and the individual
lots are not for rent or rented, but are for sale or sold for the purpose of
installation of manufactured homes on the lots, is not a manufactured home
park, even though three or more manufactured homes are parked thereon, if the
roadways are dedicated to the local government authority.



   NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP).  The NFIP is a Federal
program enabling property owners in participating communities to purchase
insurance protection against losses from flooding. This insurance is designed
to provide an insurance alternative to disaster assistance to meet the
escalating costs of repairing damage to buildings and their contents caused
by floods. Participation in the NFIP is based on an agreement between local
communities and the Federal government that states if a community will adopt
and enforce floodplain management regulations to reduce future flood risks to
all development in special flood hazard areas, the Federal government will
make flood insurance available within the community as a financial protection
against flood loss.



   NEW CONSTRUCTION.  Structures for which the "start of construction"
commenced on or after the initial effective date of the City of Montgomery
Flood Insurance Rate Map, June 25, 1976, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.



   PERSON.  Includes any individual or group of individuals, corporation,
partnership, association, or any other entity, including state and local
governments and agencies. An agency is further defined in R.C. § 111.15 as
any governmental entity of the state and includes, but is not limited to, any
board, department, division, commission, bureau, society, council,
institution, state college or university, community college district,
technical college district, or state community college. "Agency" does not
include the general assembly, the controlling board, the adjutant general's
department, or any court.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.  A vehicle which is:



      (1)   Built on a single chassis;



      (2)   400 square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;



      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by
a light duty truck; and



      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling
but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.



   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ARCHITECT.  A person registered to engage in
the practice of architecture under the provisions of R.C. §§ 4703.01 to
4703.19.



   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. A person registered as a professional
engineer under R.C. Chapter 4733.



   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL SURVEYOR.  A person registered as a
professional surveyor under R.C. Chapter 4733.



   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. Also known as "Areas of Special Flood
Hazard", it is the land in the floodplain subject to a 1% or greater chance
of flooding in any given year. Special flood hazard areas are designated by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency on Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Flood
Insurance Studies, Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps and Flood Hazard Boundary
Maps as Zones A, AE, AH, AO, Al-30, and A99. Special flood hazard areas may
also refer to areas that are flood prone and designated from other federal
state or local sources of data including but not limited to historical flood
information reflecting high water marks, previous flood inundation areas, and
flood prone soils associated with a watercourse.



   START OF CONSTRUCTION.  The date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days
of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab
or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any
work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home
on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation,
such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation
of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does
it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as
garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of a building.



   STRUCTURE.  A walled and roofed building, manufactured home, or gas or
liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.



   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE.  Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.  Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the "start of
construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include:



      (1)   Any improvement to a structure which is considered "new
construction,"



      (2)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct
existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been identified prior to the application for a
development permit by the local code enforcement official and which are the
minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or



      (3)   Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that
the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
"historic structure".



   VARIANCE.  A grant of relief from the standards of these regulations
consistent with the variance conditions herein.



   VIOLATION.  The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with these regulations.



(Ord. 5-2004, passed 5-5-04; Am. Ord. 7-2004, passed 6-2-04)



USE AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION



§ 157.20  USE REGULATIONS.



   The following use and development standards in this subchapter apply to
development wholly within, partially within, or in contact with any special
flood hazard area as established in § 157.05 or § 157.48(A).



   (A)   Permitted uses. All uses not otherwise prohibited in this
section or any other applicable land use regulation adopted by the City of
Montgomery are allowed provided they meet the provisions of these regulations.



   (B)   Prohibited uses.



      (1)   Private water supply systems in all special flood hazard
areas identified by FEMA, permitted under R.C. Chapter 3701.



      (2)   Infectious waste treatment facilities in all special
flood hazard areas, permitted under Section R.C. Chapter 3734.



      (3)   Storage or processing of materials that are hazardous,
flammable or explosive in the identified flood hazard area.



(Ord. 5-2004, passed 5-5-04; Am. Ord. 7-2004, passed 6-2-04)



§ 157.21  WATER AND WASTEWATER SYSTEMS.



   The following standards apply to all water supply, sanitary sewerage
and waste disposal systems not otherwise regulated by the Ohio Revised Code:



   (A)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems;



   (B)   New and replacement sanitary sewerage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
systems and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and,



   (C)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to or contamination from them during flooding.



(Ord. 5-2004, passed 5-5-04; Am. Ord. 7-2004, passed 6-2-04)



§ 157.22  SUBDIVISIONS AND LARGE DEVELOPMENTS.



   (A)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage and are subject to all applicable standards in these
regulations;



   (B)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;



   (C)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage
provided to reduce exposure to flood damage; and



   (D)   In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood
elevation data are not available, the applicant shall provide a hydrologic
and hydraulic engineering analysis that generates base flood elevations for
all subdivision proposals and other proposed developments containing at least
50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is less.



   (E)   The applicant shall meet the requirement to submit technical
data to FEMA in § 157.47(A)(1)(d) when a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
is completed that generates base flood elevations as required by division (D)
above of this section.



(Ord. 5-2004, passed 5-5-04; Am. Ord. 7-2004, passed 6-2-04)



§ 157.23  RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES.



   (A)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy. Where a structure, including its foundation members, is elevated on
fill to or above the base flood elevation, the requirements for anchoring
(this division (A)) and construction materials resistant to flood damage
(division (B) below of this section) are satisfied.



   (B)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with methods and materials resistant to flood damage.



   (C)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
elevated so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.



   (D)   New construction and substantial improvement of any
residential structure, including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated to or above the flood protection
elevation. Where flood protection data are not available, the structure shall
have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least 2 feet above the
highest adjacent natural grade.



   (E)   New construction and substantial improvements, including
manufactured homes, that do not have basements and that are elevated to the
flood protection elevation using pilings, columns, posts, or solid foundation
perimeter walls with openings sufficient to allow unimpeded movement of flood
waters may have an enclosure below the lowest floor provided the enclosure
meets the following standards:



      (1)   Be used only for the parking of vehicles, building
access, or storage; and



      (2)   Be designed and certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters; or



      (3)   Have a minimum of 2 openings on different walls having a
total net area not less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area, and the bottom of all such openings being no higher than one
foot above grade. The openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or
other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters.



   (F)   Manufactured homes shall be affixed to a permanent foundation
and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the
structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the
effects of buoyancy. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited
to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.



   (G)   Repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude
the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and is the
minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure, shall be exempt from the development standards of this § 157.23.



(Ord. 5-2004, passed 5-5-04; Am. Ord. 7-2004, passed 6-2-04)



§ 157.24  NONRESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES.



   (A)   New construction and substantial improvement of any
commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall meet the
requirements of § 157.23(A) - (C) and (E) - (G).



   (B)   New construction and substantial improvement of any
commercial, industrial or other non-residential structure shall either have
the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the level of the
flood protection elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, shall meet all of the following standards:



      (1)   Be dry floodproofed so that the structure is watertight
with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water to the level of
the flood protection elevation;



      (2)   Have structural components capable of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and,



      (3)   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, through the use of a Federal Emergency Management Floodproofing
Certificate, that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with divisions (B)(l) and (2) above of this section.



   (C)   Where flood protection elevation data are not available, the
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least
2 feet above the highest adjacent natural grade.



(Ord. 5-2004, passed 5-5-04; Am. Ord. 7-2004, passed 6-2-04)



§ 157.25  ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.



   Relief to the elevation or dry floodproofing standards may be granted
for accessory structures containing no more than 600 square feet. Such
structures must meet the following standards:



   (A)   They shall not be used for human habitation;



   (B)   They shall be constructed of flood resistant materials;



   (C)   They shall be constructed and placed on the lot to offer the
minimum resistance to the flow of flood waters;



   (D)   They shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation;



   (E)   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment
shall be elevated or floodproofed to or above the level of the flood
protection elevation; and



   (F)   They shall meet the opening requirements of Section 3.4(E)(3).



(Ord. 5-2004, passed 5-5-04; Am. Ord. 7-2004, passed 6-2-04)



§ 157.26  RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.



   Recreational vehicles must meet at least one of the following standards:



   (A)   They shall not be located on sites in special flood hazard
areas for more than 180 days; or



   (B)   They must be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or



   (C)   They must meet all standards of § 157.23.



(Ord. 5-2004, passed 5-5-04; Am. Ord. 7-2004, passed 6-2-04)



§ 157.27  ABOVE GROUND GAS OR LIQUID STORAGE TANKS.



   All above ground gas or liquid storage tanks shall be anchored to
prevent flotation or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads.



(Ord. 5-2004, passed 5-5-04; Am. Ord. 7-2004, passed 6-2-04)



§ 157.28  ASSURANCE OF FLOOD CARRYING CAPACITY.



   Pursuant to the purpose and methods of reducing flood damage stated in
these regulations, the following additional standards are adopted to assure
that the reduction of the flood carrying capacity of watercourses is
minimized:



   (A)   Development in Floodways.



      (1)   In floodway areas, development shall cause no increase
in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. Prior to
issuance of a floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a
hydrologic and hydraulic analysis, conducted by a registered professional
engineer, demonstrating that the proposed development would not result in any
increase in the base flood elevation; or



      (2)   Development in floodway areas causing increases in the
base flood elevation may be permitted provided all of the following are
completed by the applicant:



         (a)   Meet the requirements to submit technical data in
§ 157.47(A);



         (b)   An evaluation of alternatives which would not
result in increased base flood elevations and an explanation why these
alternatives are not feasible;



         (c)   Certification that no structures are located in
areas which would be impacted by the increased base flood elevation;



         (d)   Documentation of individual legal notices to all
impacted property owners within and outside the community, explaining the
impact of the proposed action on their property; and



         (e)   Concurrence of the City Manager of City of
Montgomery and the Chief Executive Officer of any other communities impacted
by the proposed actions.



   (B)   Development in riverine areas with base flood elevations but
no floodways.



      (1)   In riverine special flood hazard areas identified by
FEMA where base flood elevation data are provided but no floodways have been
designated, the cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined
with all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
base flood elevation more than 1.0 (one) foot at any point. Prior to issuance
of a floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a hydrologic
and hydraulic analysis, conducted by a registered professional engineer,
demonstrating that this standard has been met; or,



      (2)   Development in riverine special flood hazard areas
identified by FEMA where base flood elevation data are provided but no
floodways have been designated causing more than one foot increase in the
base flood elevation may be permitted provided all of the following are
completed by the applicant:



         (a)   An evaluation of alternatives which would result
in an increase of one foot or less of the base flood elevation and an
explanation why these alternatives are not feasible;



         (b)   Division (A)(2), items (a) and (c)-(e) above of
this section.



   (C)   Alterations of a watercourse. For the purpose of these
regulations, a watercourse is altered when any change occurs within its
banks. The extent of the banks shall be established by a field determination
of the "bankfull stage." The field determination of "bankfull stage" shall be
based on methods presented in Chapter 7 of the USDA Forest Service General
Technical Report RM-245, Stream Channel Reference Sites: An Illustrated Guide
to Field Technique or other applicable publication available from a Federal,
State, or other authoritative source. For all proposed developments that
alter a watercourse, the following standards apply:



      (1)   The bankfull flood carrying capacity of the altered or
relocated portion of the watercourse shall not be diminished. Prior to the
issuance of a floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a
description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of the proposed development, and certification by a
registered professional engineer that the bankfull flood carrying capacity of
the watercourse will not be diminished.



      (2)   Adjacent communities, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers,
and the Ohio Department of Natural Resources, Division of Water, must be
notified prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse. Evidence of
such notification must be submitted to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.



      (3)   The applicant shall be responsible for providing the
necessary maintenance for the altered or relocated portion of said
watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity will not be diminished. The
Floodplain Administrator may require the permit holder to enter into an
agreement with City of Montgomery specifying the maintenance
responsibilities. If an agreement is required, it shall be made a condition
of the floodplain development permit.



      (4)   The applicant shall meet the requirements to submit
technical data in § 157.47(A)(1)(c) when an alteration of a watercourse
results in the relocation or elimination of the special flood hazard area,
including the placement of culverts.



(Ord. 5-2004, passed 5-5-04; Am. Ord. 7-2004, passed 6-2-04)



ADMINISTRATION



§ 157.40  DESIGNATION OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR; DUTIES AND
RESPONSIBILITIES.



   (A)   Designation of the Floodplain Administrator.  The Zoning
Administrator is hereby appointed to administer and implement these
regulations and is referred to herein as the Floodplain Administrator.



   (B)   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator.
The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include
but are not limited to:



      (1)   Evaluate applications for permits to develop in special
flood hazard areas.



      (2)   Interpret floodplain boundaries and provide flood hazard
and flood protection elevation information.



      (3)   Issue permits to develop in special flood hazard areas
when the provisions of these regulations have been met, or refuse to issue
the same in the event of noncompliance.



      (4)   Inspect buildings and lands to determine whether any
violations of these regulations have been committed.



      (5)   Make and permanently keep all records for public
inspection necessary for the administration of these regulations including
Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Letters of Map Amendment and Revision, records of
issuance and denial of permits to develop in special flood hazard areas,
determinations of whether development is in or out of special flood hazard
areas for the purpose of issuing floodplain development permits, elevation
certificates, variances, and records of enforcement actions taken for
violations of these regulations.



      (6)   Enforce the provisions of these regulations.



      (7)   Provide information, testimony, or other evidence as
needed during variance hearings.



      (8)   Coordinate map maintenance activities and FEMA follow-up.



      (9)   Conduct substantial damage determinations to determine
whether existing structures, damaged from any source and in special flood
hazard areas identified by FEMA, must meet the development standards of these
regulations.



(Ord. 5-2004, passed 5-5-04; Am. Ord. 7-2004, passed 6-2-04)



§ 157.41  FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMITS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to begin construction or other
development activity including but not limited to filling; grading;
construction; alteration, remodeling, or expanding any structure; or
alteration of any watercourse wholly within, partially within or in contact
with any identified special flood hazard area, as established in §§ 157.05,
until a floodplain development permit is obtained from the Floodplain
Administrator. Such floodplain development permit shall show that the
proposed development activity is in conformity with the provisions of these
regulations. No such permit shall be issued by the Floodplain Administrator
until the requirements of these regulations have been met.



(Ord. 5-2004, passed 5-5-04; Am. Ord. 7-2004, passed 6-2-04)



§ 157.42  APPLICATION REQUIRED.



   An application for a floodplain development permit shall be required
for all development activities located wholly within, partially within, or in
contact with an identified special flood hazard area. Such application shall
be made by the owner of the property or his or her authorized agent, herein
referred to as the applicant, prior to the actual commencement of such
construction on a form furnished for that purpose. Where it is unclear
whether a development site is in a special flood hazard area, the Floodplain
Administrator may require an application for a floodplain development permit
to determine the development's location. Such applications shall include, but
not be limited to:



   (A)   Site plans drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions, and topography of the area in question; the location of existing
or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and
the location of the foregoing.



   (B)   Elevation of the existing, natural ground where structures are
proposed.



   (C)   Elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, of all
proposed structures.



   (D)   Such other material and information as may be requested by the
Floodplain Administrator to determine conformance with, and provide
enforcement of these regulations.



   (E)   Technical analyses conducted by the appropriate design
professional registered in the State of Ohio and submitted with an
application for a floodplain development permit when applicable:



      (1)   Floodproofing certification for non-residential
floodproofed structure as required in § 157.24.



      (2)   Certification that fully enclosed areas below the lowest
floor of a structure not meeting the design requirements of § 157.23(E) are
designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces.



      (3)   Description of any watercourse alteration or relocation
that the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be diminished,
and maintenance assurances as required in § 157.28(C).



      (4)   A hydrologic and hydraulic analysis demonstrating that
the cumulative effect of proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood by more than one foot in special flood hazard
areas where the Federal Emergency Management Agency has provided base flood
elevations but no floodway as required by § 157.28(B).



      (5)   A hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis showing
impact of any development on flood heights in an identified floodway as
required by § 157.28(A).



      (6)   Generation of base flood elevation(s) for subdivision
and large scale developments as required by § 157.22.



   (F)   A floodplain development permit application fee.



(Ord. 5-2004, passed 5-5-04; Am. Ord. 7-2004, passed 6-2-04)



§ 157.43  REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF A FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT
APPLICATION; INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Review.



      (1)   After receipt of a complete application, the Floodplain
Administrator shall review the application to ensure that the standards of
these regulations have been met. No floodplain development permit application
shall be reviewed until all information required in § 157.42 has been
received by the Floodplain Administrator.



      (2)   The Floodplain Administrator shall review all floodplain
development permit applications to assure that all necessary permits have
been received from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from
which prior approval is required. The applicant shall be responsible for
obtaining such permits as required including permits issued by the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers under Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act and Section
404 of the Clean Water Act, and the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency
under Section 401 of the Clean Water Act.



   (B)   Approval.  Within 30 days after the receipt of a complete
application, the Floodplain Administrator shall either approve or disapprove
the application. If an application is approved, a floodplain development
permit shall be issued. All floodplain development permits shall be
conditional upon the commencement of work within one year. A floodplain
development permit shall expire one year after issuance unless the permitted
activity has been substantially begun and is thereafter pursued to completion.



   (C)   Inspections.  The Floodplain Administrator shall make
periodic inspections at appropriate times throughout the period of
construction in order to monitor compliance with permit conditions.



(Ord. 5-2004, passed 5-5-04; Am. Ord. 7-2004, passed 6-2-04)



§ 157.44  POST-CONSTRUCTION CERTIFICATIONS REQUIRED.



   The following as-built certifications are required after a floodplain
development permit has been issued:



   (A)   For new or substantially improved residential structures, or
nonresidential structures that have been elevated, the applicant shall have a
Federal Emergency Management Agency Elevation Certificate completed by a
registered surveyor to record as-built elevation data. For elevated
structures in Zone A and Zone AO areas without a base flood elevation, the
elevation certificate may be completed by the property owner or owner's
representative.



   (B)   For all development activities subject to the standards of §
157.47(A), a Letter of Map Revision.



(Ord. 5-2004, passed 5-5-04; Am. Ord. 7-2004, passed 6-2-04)



§ 157.45  REVOKING A FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.



   A floodplain development permit shall be revocable, if among other
things, the actual development activity does not conform to the terms of the
application and permit granted thereon. In the event of the revocation of a
permit, an appeal may be taken to the Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance
with §§ 157.65 through 157.67 of these regulations.



(Ord. 5-2004, passed 5-5-04; Am. Ord. 7-2004, passed 6-2-04)



§ 157.46  EXEMPTION FROM FILING A DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.



   (A)   An application for a floodplain development permit shall not
be required for:



      (1)   Maintenance work such as roofing, painting, and basement
sealing, or for small nonstructural development activities (except for
filling and grading) valued at less than $5,000.



      (2)   Development activities in an existing or proposed
manufactured home park that are under the authority of the Ohio Department of
Health and subject to the flood damage reduction provisions of the Ohio
Administrative Code Section 3701.



      (3)   Major utility facilities permitted by the Ohio Power
Siting Board under R.C. Chapter 4906.



      (4)   Hazardous waste disposal facilities permitted by the
Hazardous Waste Siting Board under R.C. § 3734.



      (5)   Development activities undertaken by a federal agency
and which are subject to Federal Executive Order 11988 - Floodplain
Management.



   (B)   Any proposed action exempt from filing for a floodplain
development permit is also exempt from the standards of these regulations.



(Ord. 5-2004, passed 5-5-04; Am. Ord. 7-2004, passed 6-2-04)



§ 157.47  MAP MAINTENANCE ACTIVITIES.



   To meet National Flood Insurance Program minimum requirements to have
flood data reviewed and approved by FEMA, and to ensure that the City of
Montgomery flood maps, studies and other data identified in § 157.05
accurately represent flooding conditions so appropriate floodplain management
criteria are based on current data, the following map maintenance activities
are identified:



   (A)   Requirement to submit new technical data.



      (1)   For all development proposals that impact floodway
delineations or base flood elevations, the community shall ensure that
technical data reflecting such changes be submitted to FEMA within six months
of the date such information becomes available. These development proposals
include:



         (a)   Floodway encroachments that increase or decrease
base flood elevations or alter floodway boundaries;



         (b)   Fill sites to be used for the placement of
proposed structures where the applicant desires to remove the site from the
special flood hazard area;



         (c)   Alteration of watercourses that result in a
relocation or elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the
placement of culverts; and



         (d)   Subdivision or large scale development proposals
requiring the establishment of base flood elevations in accordance with §
157.22.



      (2)   It is the responsibility of the applicant to have
technical data, required in accordance with this division (A), prepared in a
format required for a Conditional Letter of Map Revision or Letter of Map
Revision, and submitted to FEMA. Submittal and processing fees for these map
revisions shall be the responsibility of the applicant.



      (3)   The Floodplain Administrator shall require a Conditional
Letter of Map Revision prior to the issuance of a floodplain development
permit for:



         (a)   Proposed floodway encroachments that increase the
base flood elevation; and



         (b)   Proposed development which increases the base
flood elevation by more than one foot in areas where FEMA has provided base
flood elevations but no floodway.



      (4)   Floodplain development permits issued by the Floodplain
Administrator shall be conditioned upon the applicant obtaining a Letter of
Map Revision from FEMA for any development proposal subject to division
(A)(1) above of this section.



   (B)   Right to submit new technical data. The Floodplain
Administrator may request changes to any of the information shown on an
effective map that does not impact floodplain or floodway delineations or
base flood elevations, such as labeling or planimetric details. Such a
submission shall include appropriate supporting documentation made in writing
by the City Manager of the City of Montgomery, and may be submitted at any
time.



   (C)   Annexation/Detachment. Upon occurrence, the Floodplain
Administrator shall notify FEMA in writing whenever the boundaries of the
City of Montgomery have been modified by annexation or the community has
assumed authority over an area, or no longer has authority to adopt and
enforce floodplain management regulations for a particular area. In order
that the City of Montgomery's Flood Insurance Rate Map accurately represent
the City of Montgomery boundaries, include within such notification a copy of
a map of the City of Montgomery suitable for reproduction, clearly showing
the new corporate limits or the new area for which the City of Montgomery has
assumed or relinquished floodplain management regulatory authority.



(Ord. 5-2004, passed 5-5-04; Am. Ord. 7-2004, passed 6-2-04)



§ 157.48  DATA USE AND FLOOD MAP INTERPRETATION.



   The following guidelines shall apply to the use and interpretation of
maps and other data showing areas of special flood hazard:



   (A)   In areas where FEMA has not identified special flood hazard
areas, or in FEMA identified special flood hazard areas where base flood
elevation and floodway data have not been identified, the Floodplain
Administrator shall review and reasonably utilize any other flood hazard data
available from a federal, state, or other source.



   (B)   Base flood elevations and floodway boundaries produced on FEMA
flood maps and studies shall take precedence over base flood elevations and
floodway boundaries by any other source that reflect a reduced floodway width
and/or lower base flood elevations. Other sources of data, showing increased
base flood elevations and/or larger floodway areas than are shown on FEMA
flood maps and studies, shall be reasonably used by the Floodplain
Administrator.



   (C)   When Preliminary Flood Insurance Rate Maps and/or Flood
Insurance Study have been provided by FEMA:



      (1)   Upon the issuance of a Letter of Final Determination by
the FEMA, the preliminary flood hazard data shall be used and replace all
previously existing flood hazard data provided from FEMA for the purposes of
administering these regulations.



      (2)   Prior to the issuance of a Letter of Final Determination
by FEMA, the use of preliminary flood hazard data shall only be required
where no base flood elevations and/or floodway areas exist or where the
preliminary base flood elevations or floodway area exceed the base flood
elevations and/or floodway widths in existing flood hazard data provided from
FEMA. Such preliminary data may be subject to change and/or appeal to FEMA.



   (D)   The Floodplain Administrator shall make interpretations, where
needed, as to the exact location of the flood boundaries and areas of special
flood hazard. A person contesting the determination of the location of the
boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation
as provided in §§ 157.65 through 157.67, appeals and variances.



   (E)   Where a map boundary showing an area of special flood hazard
and field elevations disagree, the base flood elevations or flood protection
elevations (as found on an elevation profile, floodway data table,
established high water marks, etc.) shall prevail.



(Ord. 5-2004, passed 5-5-04; Am. Ord. 7-2004, passed 6-2-04)



§ 157.49  SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE DETERMINATIONS.



   (A)   Damages to structures may result from a variety of causes
including flood, tornado, wind, heavy snow, fire, etc. After such a damage
event, the Floodplain Administrator shall:



      (1)   Determine whether damaged structures are located in
special flood hazard areas;



      (2)   Conduct substantial damage determinations for damaged
structures located in special flood hazard areas; and



      (3)   Make reasonable attempt to notify owners of
substantially damaged structures of the need to obtain a floodplain
development permit prior to repair, rehabilitation, or reconstruction.



   (B)   Additionally, the Floodplain Administrator may implement other
measures to assist with the substantial damage determination and subsequent
repair process. These measures include issuing press releases, public service
announcements, and other public information materials related to the
floodplain development permits and repair of damaged structures; coordinating
with other federal, state, and local agencies to assist with substantial
damage determinations; providing owners of damaged structures materials and
other information related to the proper repair of damaged structures in
special flood hazard areas; and assist owners of substantially damaged
structures with Increased Cost of Compliance insurance claims.



(Ord. 5-2004, passed 5-5-04; Am. Ord. 7-2004, passed 6-2-04)



APPEALS AND VARIANCES



§ 157.65  APPEALS BOARD ESTABLISHED; POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   Appeals Board established.  The Board of Zoning Appeals as
established per § 150.1006(A) and (C) of the Montgomery Codified Ordinances
shall serve as the Appeals Board for the administration of this Chapter.



   (B)   Powers and duties.



      (1)   The Appeals Board shall hear and decide appeals where it
is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the administration or
enforcement of these regulations.



      (2)   Authorize variances in accordance with § 157.66 of
these regulations.



   (C)   Appeals.  Appeals will be heard pursuant to the procedures
established in Chapter 150.20,  §§ 150.2001 through 150.2009.



(Ord. 5-2004, passed 5-5-04; Am. Ord. 7-2004, passed 6-2-04)



§ 157.66  VARIANCES.



   Any person believing that the use and development standards of these
regulations would result in unnecessary hardship may file an application for
a variance. The Appeals Board shall have the power to authorize, in specific
cases, such variances from the standards of these regulations, not
inconsistent with Federal regulations, as will not be contrary to the public
interest where, owning to special conditions of the lot or parcel, a literal
enforcement of the provisions of these regulations would result in
unnecessary hardship.



   (A)   Criteria for determination of variances.



      (1)   The applicant shall present such statements and evidence
as the Appeals Board requires. In considering such variance applications, the
Appeals Board shall consider and make findings of fact on all evaluations,
all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of these
regulations and the following factors:



         (a)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other
lands to the injury of others.



         (b)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or
erosion damage.



         (c)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and
its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner.



         (d)   The importance of the services provided by the
proposed facility to the community.



         (e)   The availability of alternative locations for the
proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage.



         (f)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront
location, where applicable.



         (g)   The compatibility of the proposed use with
existing and anticipated development.



         (h)   The relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area.



         (i)   The safety of access to the property in times of
flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles.



         (j)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of
rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site.



         (k)   The costs of providing governmental services
during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems,
and streets and bridges.



      (2)   Variances shall only be issued upon:



         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause.



         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance
would result in exceptional hardship due to the physical characteristics of
the property. Increased cost or inconvenience of meeting the requirements of
these regulations does not constitute an exceptional hardship to the
applicant.



         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance
will not result in increased flood heights beyond that which is allowed in
these regulations; additional threats to public safety; extraordinary public
expense, nuisances, fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with
existing local laws.



         (d)   A determination that the structure or other
development is protected by methods to minimize flood damages.



         (e)   A determination that the variance is the minimum
necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.



      (3)   Upon consideration of the above factors and the purposes
of these regulations, the Appeals Board may attach such conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of these
regulations.



   (B)   Other conditions for variances.



      (1)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated
floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge
would result.



      (2)   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction
and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, providing items in § 157.66(A)(1)(a)
through (k) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond
one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance
increases.



      (3)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be
given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a
lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the
reduced lowest floor elevation.



(Ord. 5-2004, passed 5-5-04; Am. Ord. 7-2004, passed 6-2-04)



§ 157.67  APPEAL TO THE COURT.



   Those aggrieved by the decision of the Appeals Board may appeal such
decision to the Hamilton County Court of Common Pleas, as provided in R.C.
Chapter 2506.



(Ord. 5-2004, passed 5-5-04; Am. Ord. 7-2004, passed 6-2-04)



ENFORCEMENT



§ 157.80  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, erected,
constructed, reconstructed, repaired, extended, converted, enlarged or
altered without full compliance with the terms of these regulations and all
other applicable regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of
these regulations, unless specifically exempted from filing for a development
permit as stated in § 157.46.



   (B)   Failure to obtain a floodplain development permit shall be a
violation of these regulations and shall be punishable in accordance with §
157.82.



   (C)   Floodplain development permits issued on the basis of plans
and applications approved by the Floodplain Administrator authorize only the
use, and arrangement, set forth in such approved plans and applications or
amendments thereto. Use, arrangement, or construction contrary to that
authorized shall be deemed a violation of these regulations and punishable in
accordance with § 157.82.



(Ord. 5-2004, passed 5-5-04; Am. Ord. 7-2004, passed 6-2-04)



§ 157.81  NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   Whenever the Floodplain Administrator determines that there has been a
violation of any provision of these regulations, he shall give notice of such
violation to the person responsible therefore and order compliance with these
regulations as hereinafter provided. Such notice and order shall:



   (A)   Be put in writing on an appropriate form;



   (B)   Include a list of violations, referring to the section or
sections of these regulations that have been violated, and order remedial
action which, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of these
regulations;



   (C)   Specify a reasonable time for performance;



   (D)   Advise the owner, operator, or occupant of the right to appeal;



   (E)   Be served on the owner, occupant, or agent in person. However,
this notice and order shall be deemed to be properly served upon the owner,
occupant, or agent if a copy thereof is sent by registered or certified mail
to the person's last known mailing address, residence, or place of business,
and/or a copy is posted in a conspicuous place in or on the dwelling affected.



(Ord. 5-2004, passed 5-5-04; Am. Ord. 7-2004, passed 6-2-04)



§ 157.82  VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.



   Violation of the provisions of these regulations or failure to comply
with any of its requirements shall be deemed to be a strict liability
offense, and shall constitute a misdemeanor of the first degree. Any person
who violates these regulations or fails to comply with any of its
requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined or imprisoned as provided
by the laws of the City of Montgomery. Each day such violation continues,
shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall
prevent the City of Montgomery from taking such other lawful action as is
necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. The City of Montgomery shall
prosecute any violation of these regulations in accordance with the penalties
stated herein.



(Ord. 5-2004, passed 5-5-04; Am. Ord. 7-2004, passed 6-2-04)



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



      Table




         I.   DESIGNATION OF LANDMARKS





         II.   ACCEPTANCE OF DEDICATED STREETS




TABLE I:  DESIGNATION OF LANDMARKS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date
 
Description




14-1977
 
7-6-77
 
Yost Tavern 7872 Cooper Road


15-1977
 
7-6-77
 
Pioneer Building Southwest corner of Montgomery Road and Sycamore Street


18-1977
 
8-5-77
 
Blackerby-Sheppard property 9370 Main Street


19-1977
 
8-3-77
 
Grover/Kjellenberg House 10305 Montgomery Road


20-1977
 
8-3-77
 
Bell House 9521 Montgomery Road


21-1977
 
8-3-77
 
Smethurst House 9501 Montgomery Road


22-1977
 
8-3-77
 
Former Village Hall 7816 Cooper Road


25-1977
 
9-7-77
 
Hopewell/Montgomery Presbyterian Church 9431 Shelly Lane


26-1977
 
9-7-77
 
Ayers House 9423 Montgomery Road


27-1977
 
9-7-77
 
Crain/Conklin Building 9467 Montgomery Road


28-1977
 
9-7-77
 
Weller House * 7795 Cooper Road


29-1977
 
9-7-77
 
Snider House * 7789 Cooper Road


30-1977
 
9-7-77
 
Universalist Church Southwest corner of Montgomery Road and Remington Avenue


31-1977
 
9-7-77
 
Blair/Barker House 7844 Remington Avenue


35-1977
 
11-2-77
 
Snider/Crain House 9462-64-66 Montgomery Road


36-1977
 
11-2-77
 
Taulman House (Somerset House) 7786 Cooper Road


 
 
 
 
*  Known collectively as the Terwilliger Saltboxes.


3-1978
 
3-1-78
 
Jonathan Crain House 9441 Main Street


11-1978
 
8-2-78
 
Wilder/Swain Farm House 7650 Cooper Road


12-1978
 
8-2-78
 
Patmore/Lumley House 7919 Cooper Road


4-1979
 
2-7-79
 
Hopewell Cemetery-pioneer section Junction of Deerfield and Montgomery Roads


8-1980
 
6-4-80
 
Wooley/Kelsch House 7967 Cooper Road


20-1980
 
10-1-80
 
1930's Pure Oil Station 9426 Shelly Lane


11-1984
 
5-2-84
 
Crist House 9854 Zig Zag Road


35-1988
 
11-2-88
 
Cameron/Feinthal House 7893 Cooper Road


39-1988
 
12-7-88
 
Johnson/Murdough Building 9429 Montgomery Road


25-1989
 
11-1-89
 
Hoffman House 7887 Cooper Road


26-1989
 
12-6-89
 
Mason House 9257 Montgomery Road


10-1990
 
9-5-90
 
Mills-Hellman House 7913 Cooper Road


13-1990
 
11-7-90
 
Crain-Eberhard House at 7737 Remington Road


4-1994
 
3-2-94
 
Stix-Durbrow House at 10451 Grand Oaks Lane


14-1997
 
8-6-97
 
Sage Tavern at 9410 Montgomery Road


15-1997
 
8-6-97
 
Arstingstall/May house at 9544 West Street


13-1999
 
8-4-99
 
Johnson Nature Preserve


23-1999
 
11-3-99
 
Parrot/Smith house at 7712 Cooper Road


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE II.  ACCEPTANCE OF DEDICATED STREETS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date
 
Description


3-2015
 
1-7-15
 
Modifying and reaffirming Ordinance No. 22-1984 and accepting the dedication
of certain streets within the city.


6-2016
 
7-6-16
 
Modifying and reaffirming Ordinance No. 3-2015 regarding the acceptance of
dedicated streets with the city.


 
 
 
 
 



 



PARALLEL REFERENCES




History References to Ohio Revised Code





References to 1967 Code of Ordinances





References to Ordinances




HISTORY REFERENCES TO OHIO REVISED CODE



Editor's note:



   This table lists those Ohio Revised Code sections which have been
substantially duplicated by corresponding Code of Ordinance sections.  All
legislative history references to "(R.C. § xx.xx)" which appear at the end
of sections (or divisions of sections) in the City's Code of Ordinances have
been listed here.  Example: to determine which section of the Code of
Ordinances is based on R.C. § 4511.19, scan down this table to the citation
for "4511.19" and examine the entry across from it: in this case, the
corresponding Code of Ordinances section is § 73.01, which means that §
73.01 (or a part thereof) is based directly on R.C. § 4511.19.



 

R.C. Section
 
Code Section




1.01
 
10.01


1.02
 
10.02


1.05
 
10.02


1.14
 
10.03


1.15
 
10.03


1.23
 
10.05


1.42
 
10.03


1.43
 
10.03


1.44
 
10.02


1.45
 
10.03


1.46
 
10.03


1.50
 
10.07


1.51
 
10.06


1.52
 
10.06


1.54
 
10.04


1.55
 
10.05


1.56
 
10.05


1.57
 
10.04


1.58
 
10.04


1.59
 
10.02


128.01(A)
 
136.21


128.32(E) - (G)
 
136.21


128.99(A), (B)
 
136.21


701.01
 
10.02


715.67
 
130.99


718.12
 
44.12


731.51
 
93.41


731.52
 
93.42


901.51
 
131.21


901.99(A)
 
131.21


1349.17
 
131.31


1349.99
 
131.31


1533.171(A)
 
131.24, 135.05


1533.99(C)
 
131.24, 135.05


2705.02
 
136.19


2901.01
 
130.02


2901.02
 
130.03


2901.03
 
130.04


2901.04
 
130.05


2901.05
 
130.13


2901.06
 
130.14


2901.08
 
130.15


2901.09
 
130.21


2901.11(A), (C)(1), (D), (E)
 
130.16


2901.13
 
130.06


2901.21
 
130.07


2901.22
 
130.08


2901.23
 
130.09


2901.24
 
130.10


2903.05
 
135.02


2903.06
 
135.03


2903.09
 
135.01


2903.10
 
135.19


2903.13
 
135.04


2903.14
 
135.04


2903.16
 
135.19


2903.21
 
135.06


2903.211
 
135.06


2903.22
 
135.06


2903.31
 
135.17


2903.33
 
135.20


2903.34
 
135.20


2903.341
 
135.20


2903.35
 
135.20


2903.36
 
135.20


2905.03
 
135.07


2905.05
 
135.08


2905.12
 
135.09


2907.01
 
133.01


2907.04
 
133.02


2907.06
 
133.03


2907.08
 
133.05


2907.09
 
133.04


2907.10
 
133.06


2907.23
 
133.07


2907.24(A), (C)(1), (D), (E)
 
133.08


2907.241
 
133.08


2907.25
 
133.09


2907.26
 
133.13


2907.31
 
133.10


2907.311
 
133.11


2907.33
 
133.12


2907.35
 
133.10


2907.36
 
133.14


2907.37
 
133.15


2909.01
 
131.01


2909.03
 
131.02


2909.06
 
131.03


2909.07
 
131.04


2909.08(A) - (E)
 
131.05


2909.09
 
131.03


2909.11(B) - (D)
 
131.02


2909.31
 
136.22


2911.21
 
131.06


2911.211
 
131.06


2911.23
 
131.06


2911.32
 
131.07


2913.01
 
131.01


2913.02
 
131.08


2913.03
 
131.09


2913.04
 
131.10


2913.07
 
131.33


2913.11
 
131.11


2913.21
 
131.12


2913.31(B), (C)(2)
 
131.26


2913.32
 
131.27


2913.33
 
131.13


2913.34
 
131.29


2913.40
 
131.23


2913.401
 
131.23


2913.41
 
131.14


2913.42
 
131.15


2913.43
 
131.16


2913.44
 
131.28


2913.441
 
132.11


2913.45
 
131.17


2913.47
 
131.23


2913.48
 
131.23


2913.51
 
131.18


2913.61(B) - (E)
 
131.19


2913.71
 
131.20


2913.72
 
131.25


2913.73
 
131.25


2915.01
 
134.01


2915.02(A) - (G), (K)
 
134.02


2915.03
 
134.03


2915.04
 
134.04


2915.05
 
134.05


2915.06
 
134.14


2915.09
 
134.06


2915.091
 
134.10


2915.092
 
134.11


2915.093
 
134.12


2915.094
 
134.13


2915.10
 
134.07


2915.11
 
134.08


2915.12
 
134.09


2915.13
 
134.12


2917.01
 
132.10


2917.03
 
132.01


2917.031
 
132.01


2917.04
 
132.02


2917.05
 
132.03


2917.11
 
132.04


2917.12
 
132.05


2917.13
 
132.06


2917.17
 
133.17


2917.21
 
132.07


2917.31
 
132.08


2917.32
 
132.09


2917.40
 
132.13


2917.41
 
132.16


2919.01
 
135.10


2919.11
 
135.11


2919.12
 
135.11


2919.121
 
135.11


2919.122
 
135.11


2919.14
 
135.12


2919.18
 
135.11


2919.21
 
135.13


2919.22(A) - (E), (H)
 
135.14


2919.23
 
135.15


2919.231
 
135.15


2919.24
 
135.18


2919.25
 
135.16


2919.27
 
135.23


2921.01
 
136.01


2921.04
 
136.17


2921.13
 
136.02


2921.14
 
136.14


2921.15
 
136.23


2921.21
 
136.03


2921.22
 
136.04


2921.23
 
136.05


2921.24
 
136.16


2921.25
 
136.16


2921.29
 
136.22


2921.31
 
136.06


2921.32
 
136.07


2921.321
 
136.15


2921.33
 
136.08


2921.331(A) - (C), (E), (F)
 
70.02


2921.36
 
136.13


2921.37
 
136.13


2921.42
 
136.09


2921.43
 
136.10


2921.44
 
136.11


2921.45
 
136.12


2921.51
 
132.12


2921.52(A) - (D)
 
136.18


2923.02
 
130.11


2923.03
 
130.12


2923.11
 
137.01


2923.12
 
137.02


2923.1211
 
137.17


2923.1212
 
137.17


2923.122(C) - (G)
 
137.15


2923.126
 
137.17


2923.131
 
137.16


2923.15
 
137.03


2923.162
 
137.09


2923.18
 
137.10


2923.19
 
137.06


2923.20
 
137.07


2923.201
 
137.14


2923.211
 
137.08


2923.24
 
137.05


2925.01
 
138.01


2925.03
 
138.02


2925.04
 
138.06


2925.11
 
138.03


2925.12
 
138.04


2925.13
 
138.05


2925.14
 
138.13


2925.141
 
138.13


2925.31
 
138.07


2925.32(B)(4), (D)(2), (F), (G)
 
138.10


2925.33
 
138.10


2925.36
 
138.08


2925.37(A), (G), (M)
 
138.12


2925.50
 
138.09


2925.51
 
138.11


2925.511
 
138.11


2925.55
 
138.18


2925.56
 
138.18


2925.57
 
138.18


2925.58
 
138.18


2927.01
 
135.28


2927.02
 
135.25


2927.021
 
135.25


2927.022
 
135.25


2927.023
 
135.25


2927.03
 
135.21


2927.12
 
135.22


2927.15
 
135.29


2927.27
 
130.20


2929.21
 
130.99


2929.22
 
130.18


2929.23
 
133.99


2929.24
 
130.99


2929.25
 
130.99


2929.26
 
130.99


2929.27
 
130.99


2929.28
 
130.99


2929.31
 
130.99


2929.41
 
130.19


2935.041
 
131.22


2935.11
 
136.20


2935.28
 
70.08


2935.36(E)
 
130.02


2981.07
 
131.30


2981.11
 
130.17


2981.12
 
130.17


2981.13(A)
 
130.17


3701.81
 
135.27


3701.99(C)
 
135.27


3715.05
 
138.18


3715.06
 
138.18


3716.11
 
135.24


3716.99(C)
 
135.24


3719.01
 
138.01


3719.011
 
138.01


3719.013
 
138.01


3719.08(A), (E)
 
138.14


3719.172(A), (B)
 
138.15


3719.99(C)
 
138.14


3719.99(E)
 
138.15


3767.13
 
93.03


3767.201
 
70.09


3767.99(C)
 
93.03


3767.99(D)
 
70.09


3773.06
 
137.09


3773.99(A)
 
137.09


3781.55
 
133.04


3791.031
 
135.26


4301.01
 
91.01


4301.20
 
91.02


4301.21
 
91.03


4301.22
 
91.04


4301.244
 
91.01


4301.58
 
91.05


4301.60
 
91.06


4301.61
 
91.30


4301.611
 
91.31


4301.62
 
91.07


4301.63
 
91.08


4301.631
 
91.09


4301.633
 
91.11


4301.634
 
91.12


4301.637
 
91.14


4301.638
 
91.04


4301.638
 
91.21


4301.639(A), (C)
 
91.15


4301.64
 
91.16


4301.65
 
91.10


4301.66
 
91.18


4301.67
 
91.19


4301.68
 
91.20


4301.69
 
91.21


4301.70
 
91.99


4301.73
 
91.28


4301.74
 
91.29


4301.99(A)
 
91.07, 91.10, 91.99


4301.99(B)
 
91.04, 91.09, 91.16, 91.19


4301.99(C)
 
91.03, 91.05, 91.06, 91.10, 91.11, 91.18, 91.20, 91.21, 91.29


4301.99(D)
 
91.04


4301.99(E)
 
91.08, 91.09


4301.99(F)
 
91.12


4301.99(H)
 
91.04


4301.99(I)
 
91.21


4301.99(J)
 
91.10


4303.202(D)(2)
 
91.17


4303.208(C)
 
91.17


4303.25
 
91.05


4303.40
 
91.27


4303.99(D)
 
91.17


4399.09
 
91.22


4399.10
 
91.23


4399.14
 
91.24


4399.15
 
91.25


4399.16
 
91.26


4399.99(B)
 
91.22


4399.99(C)
 
91.23


4399.99(D)
 
91.24


4501.01(LL)
 
70.01


4501.01(TT)
 
72.41


4503.05
 
71.02


4503.11(A), (D)
 
71.01


4503.111
 
71.01


4503.21
 
71.01


4503.236
 
71.03


4505.18
 
71.04


4506.01
 
71.25


4506.011
 
71.26


4506.03
 
71.28


4506.04
 
71.27


4506.05
 
71.28


4506.10
 
71.29


4506.12(I), (J)
 
71.27


4506.15
 
71.34


4506.17
 
71.31


4506.17(H)
 
71.34


4506.19
 
71.35


4506.20
 
71.36


4506.23
 
71.33, 71.34


4506.99
 
71.99


4507.02(A)
 
71.12


4507.03
 
71.12


4507.04
 
71.12


4507.05(F), (I)
 
71.11


4507.071(B) - (J)
 
71.11


4507.30
 
71.10


4507.31
 
71.11


4507.321
 
71.13


4507.33
 
71.14


4507.35
 
71.16


4507.36
 
71.17


4507.99
 
71.99


4509.102
 
136.02


4509.74
 
73.23


4510.037(J)
 
71.18


4510.04
 
71.18, 71.20, 71.21, 71.22


4510.05
 
71.15


4510.11
 
71.18


4510.111
 
71.18


4510.12
 
71.19


4510.14
 
71.20


4510.15
 
71.15


4510.16
 
71.21


4510.21
 
71.22


4510.44
 
73.03


4511.01
 
70.01


4511.03
 
70.03


4511.031
 
70.29


4511.04
 
70.04


4511.041
 
70.04


4511.042
 
70.04


4511.05
 
70.05


4511.051
 
70.06


4511.08
 
70.07


4511.12
 
70.20


4511.121
 
70.20


4511.13
 
70.21


4511.131
 
70.22


4511.132
 
70.23


4511.14
 
70.24


4511.16
 
70.26


4511.17
 
70.27


4511.18
 
70.28


4511.181
 
73.01


4511.19(A) - (M)
 
73.01


4511.191(A)
 
73.011


4511.191(D)
 
73.012


4511.192
 
73.012


4511.20
 
73.05


4511.201
 
73.06


4511.202
 
73.07


4511.203
 
71.14


4511.21(A) - (G), (O), (P)
 
73.10


4511.211
 
73.10


4511.213
 
72.60


4511.214
 
73.095


4511.215
 
73.095


4511.22
 
73.11


4511.23
 
73.14


4511.24
 
73.12


4511.25
 
72.01


4511.251
 
73.13


4511.26
 
72.03


4511.27
 
72.04


4511.28
 
72.05


4511.29
 
72.06


4511.30
 
72.07


4511.31
 
72.08


4511.32
 
72.09


4511.33
 
72.10


4511.34
 
72.11


4511.35
 
72.12


4511.36
 
72.13


4511.37
 
72.14


4511.38
 
72.15


4511.39
 
72.16


4511.40
 
72.17


4511.41
 
72.20


4511.43
 
72.22


4511.431(B)
 
72.23


4511.432
 
72.23


4511.44
 
72.24


4511.441
 
72.25


4511.45
 
72.26


4511.451
 
72.27


4511.452
 
72.28


4511.46
 
72.29


4511.47
 
72.30


4511.48
 
72.31


4511.481
 
72.40


4511.49
 
72.35


4511.491
 
72.39


4511.50
 
72.36


4511.51
 
72.37


4511.511
 
72.38


4511.512
 
72.41


4511.52
 
75.03


4511.521
 
75.07


4511.53
 
75.08


4511.54
 
75.09


4511.55
 
75.10


4511.56
 
75.11


4511.60
 
72.02


4511.61
 
72.45


4511.62
 
72.46


4511.63
 
72.47


4511.64
 
72.48


4511.65
 
70.10


4511.66
 
76.01


4511.661
 
76.02


4511.67
 
76.03


4511.68
 
76.04


4511.681
 
76.07


4511.69
 
76.05


4511.70
 
72.55


4511.701
 
72.56


4511.71
 
72.57


4511.711
 
72.58


4511.712
 
72.59


4511.713
 
72.58


4511.714
 
72.57


4511.72(B)
 
72.60


4511.73
 
72.61


4511.74(C)
 
72.62


4511.75
 
72.80


4511.751
 
72.81


4511.76(C), (E), (F)
 
72.82


4511.761
 
72.83


4511.762
 
72.84


4511.763
 
72.85


4511.764
 
72.86


4511.77
 
72.87


4511.771
 
72.88


4511.772
 
72.89


4511.79
 
73.02


4511.81(A) - (H), (K), (L)
 
72.63


4511.82
 
72.62


4511.84
 
72.66


4511.85
 
72.67


4511.99
 
70.99


4513.02(A)
 
74.01


4513.021
 
74.02


4513.03
 
74.03


4513.04
 
74.04


4513.05
 
74.05


4513.06
 
74.06


4513.07
 
74.07


4513.071
 
74.08


4513.08
 
74.09


4513.09
 
74.10


4513.10
 
74.11


4513.11
 
74.12


4513.111
 
74.12


4513.12
 
74.13


4513.13
 
74.14


4513.14
 
74.15


4513.15
 
74.16


4513.16
 
74.17


4513.17
 
74.18


4513.171
 
74.18


4513.18
 
74.19


4513.181
 
74.20


4513.182
 
74.21


4513.19
 
74.22


4513.20
 
74.23


4513.201
 
74.24


4513.202
 
74.25


4513.21
 
74.26


4513.22
 
74.27


4513.23
 
74.28


4513.24
 
74.29


4513.241(C) - (K)
 
74.31


4513.25
 
74.30


4513.26
 
74.31


4513.261
 
74.32


4513.262
 
74.33


4513.263(A) - (F)
 
72.64


4513.27
 
74.34


4513.28
 
74.35


4513.29
 
74.36


4513.30
 
74.41


4513.301
 
95.01


4513.31
 
74.42


4513.32
 
74.43


4513.33
 
74.44


4513.36
 
73.15


4513.361
 
73.16


4513.50
 
74.39


4513.51(A), (B), (D)
 
74.39


4513.60
 
95.01


4513.61
 
95.02


4513.62
 
95.03


4513.63
 
95.04


4513.64
 
95.05


4513.65
 
95.06


4513.66
 
70.13


4513.68
 
70.13


4513.99
 
74.11, 74.21, 74.23 - 74.25, 74.30, 74.31, 74.34, 74.36, 74.41 - 74.43


4519.01
 
75.25


4519.02
 
75.34


4519.20(A), (B)
 
75.26


4519.22(A)
 
75.26


4519.40
 
75.27


4519.401
 
73.095


4519.41
 
75.28


4519.44
 
75.29


4519.45
 
75.30


4519.46
 
75.31


4519.47
 
75.32


4519.48
 
75.33


4519.66
 
75.35


4549.02
 
73.20


4549.021
 
73.21


4549.03
 
73.22


4549.05
 
70.11


4549.08
 
71.06


4549.081
 
70.20


4549.10
 
71.07


4549.11
 
71.01


4549.12
 
71.01


4549.18
 
71.05


4549.20
 
74.38


4729.01
 
138.01


4731.481
 
138.17


4731.99(F)
 
138.17


4734.161
 
138.17


4734.99(B)
 
138.17


4921.32
 
74.60


4923.17
 
74.60


4933.18
 
131.32


4933.19
 
131.32


5577.02
 
74.45


5577.03
 
74.46


5577.04
 
74.46


5577.041
 
74.46


5577.042
 
74.51


5577.043
 
74.51


5577.044
 
74.51


5577.05
 
74.47


5577.06
 
74.47


5577.07
 
74.61


5577.08
 
74.62


5577.09
 
74.63


5577.10
 
74.48


5577.11
 
74.49


5577.12
 
74.50


5577.14
 
74.64


5577.15
 
74.43


5577.99(A)
 
74.45


5577.99(C)
 
74.46, 74.47


5577.99(D)
 
74.48


5577.99(E)
 
74.49


5589.08
 
72.68


5589.081
 
74.37


5589.12
 
131.10


5589.99(B)
 
72.68, 74.37, 131.10


5728.02
 
74.65


5728.04
 
74.66


5728.99(B)
 
74.66


 




 



REFERENCES TO 1967 CODE OF ORDINANCES



 

1967 Code Section
 
2000 Code Section




1.23
 
10.16


30.01
 
30.01


30.03
 
30.02


32.01
 
32.01


32.06
 
32.02


70.07
 
70.12


70.21
 
70.50


73.36
 
72.69


74.01
 
76.04


74.07
 
76.08


75.01
 
77.01


75.02
 
77.02


75.03
 
77.03


75.04
 
77.04


75.05
 
77.05


90.01
 
90.01


90.02
 
90.02


90.03
 
90.03


90.05
 
90.05


90.06
 
90.06


90.08
 
90.07


90.09
 
90.08


90.10
 
90.09


92.01
 
92.01


92.02
 
92.02


92.03
 
92.03


93.09
 
93.02


94.01
 
94.01


94.02
 
94.02


94.03
 
94.03


94.04
 
94.04


94.05
 
94.05


94.06
 
94.06


94.07
 
94.07


94.08
 
94.08


94.09
 
94.09


94.10
 
94.10


94.11
 
94.11


94.13
 
94.13


94.14
 
94.14


97.02
 
96.02


97.04
 
96.03


110.01
 
110.01


110.02
 
110.02


110.03
 
110.03


110.06
 
110.05


110.07
 
110.06


110.08
 
110.07


110.10
 
110.09


110.11
 
110.10


110.13
 
110.11


110.14
 
110.12


110.99
 
110.08


134.03
 
137.11


134.04
 
137.12


135.06
 
136.19


135.07
 
136.20


152.01
 
152.01


152.02
 
152.02


152.03
 
152.03


152.04
 
152.04


152.05
 
152.05


152.06
 
152.06


152.07
 
152.07


 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




381
 
-  -55
 
94.12


9-1968
 
7-3-68
 
72.69


5-1971
 
1-6-71
 
30.02


1-1972
 
1-5-72
 
44.01 - 44.15


1972
 
1-5-72
 
44.08


5-1972
 
4-5-72
 
94.14


12-1972
 
7-20-72
 
33.15 - 33.28


18-1972
 
10-4-72
 
97.01 - 97.05


3-1973
 
2-7-73
 
152.08, 152.99


25-1973
 
10-3-73
 
94.11


27
 
12-5-73
 
96.02,  96.03


30-1973
 
12-27-73
 
34.01 - 34.03, 34.15


3-1974
 
5-1-74
 
33.01


15-1974
 
9-4-74
 
94.15


22-1974
 
12-4-74
 
75.12


7-1975
 
5-7-75
 
75.01, 75.02, 75.04 - 75.06


27-1975
 
12-3-75
 
30.01


28-1975
 
12-3-75
 
30.03


12-1976
 
5-5-76
 
34.04


27-1976
 
11-3-76
 
90.04


4-1977
 
2-2-77
 
70.40


11-1977
 
5-4-77
 
98.01


14-1977
 
7-6-77
 
T.S.O. I


15-1977
 
7-6-77
 
T.S.O. I


19-1977
 
8-3-77
 
T.S.O. I


20-1977
 
8-3-77
 
T.S.O. I


21-1977
 
8-3-77
 
T.S.O. I


22-1977
 
8-3-77
 
T.S.O. I


18-1977
 
8-5-77
 
T.S.O. I


25-1977
 
9-7-77
 
T.S.O. I


26-1977
 
9-7-77
 
T.S.O. I


27-1977
 
9-7-77
 
T.S.O. I


28-1977
 
9-7-77
 
T.S.O. I


29-1977
 
9-7-77
 
T.S.O. I


30-1977
 
9-7-77
 
T.S.O. I


31-1977
 
9-7-77
 
T.S.O. I


35-1977
 
11-2-77
 
T.S.O. I


36-1977
 
11-2-77
 
T.S.O. I


3-1978
 
3-1-78
 
T.S.O. I


6-1978
 
5-3-78
 
30.01


11-1978
 
8-2-78
 
T.S.O. I


12-1978
 
8-2-78
 
T.S.O. I


4-1979
 
2-7-79
 
T.S.O. I


6-1979
 
4-4-79
 
152.08


8-1979
 
5-2-79
 
99.01, 99.02


10-1979
 
6-6-79
 
153.02


24-1979
 
7-11-79
 
153.05


27-1979
 
9-5-79
 
152.01, 152.03, 152.04


29-1979
 
11-7-79
 
33.19


6-1980
 
5-7-80
 
33.22


8-1980
 
6-4-80
 
T.S.O. I


20-1980
 
10-1-80
 
T.S.O. I


22-1980
 
10-1-80
 
94.09, 94.10


—
 
11-5-80
 
44.10


23-1980
 
- -80
 
44.10


23-1980
 
11-5-80
 
44.06


25-1980
 
12-3-80
 
94.14


5-1981
 
3-4-81
 
137.13


10-1981
 
5-6-81
 
99.01, 99.02


26-1981
 
10-7-81
 
152.02, 152.03


27-1981
 
10-7-81
 
30.02, 33.01, 33.05, 33.15, 33.16, 34.01, 34.03, 34.04, 34.15, 44.08, 44.13


28-1981
 
10-7-81
 
77.01, 77.02, 90.06, 110.04, 110.08, 110.11, 110.12


29-1981
 
11-4-81
 
75.05, 97.01 - 97.06


31-1981
 
12-2-81
 
33.24


Res. 39-1981
 
11-18-81
 
153.05


6-1982
 
3-4-82
 
33.05


10-1982
 
4-7-82
 
33.19, 33.24


11-1982
 
6-2-82
 
30.04


23-1982
 
10-6-82
 
153.05


2-1983
 
1-5-83
 
44.15


1983-21
 
8-3-83
 
50.01


30-1983
 
11-2-83
 
99.02


31-1983
 
11-2-83
 
30.01


9-1984
 
4-4-84
 
94.17


11-1984
 
5-2-84
 
T.S.O. I


12-1984
 
5-2-84
 
76.04, 76.09, 76.99


19-1984
 
8-1-84
 
94.07, 94.08, 94.11


21-1984
 
9-5-84
 
33.40, 33.41


25-1984
 
10-3-84
 
44.05


13-1985
 
6-19-85
 
44.09


26-1985
 
10-2-85
 
76.04


8-1986
 
7-2-86
 
94.14


—
 
1-7-87
 
136.19


2-1987
 
- -87
 
136.19


20-1987
 
9-2-87
 
34.01 - 34.04


22-1987
 
11-4-87
 
152.01


24-1987
 
11-4-87
 
44.15


8-1988
 
2-3-88
 
30.05


12-1988
 
3-2-88
 
94.18; Ch. 94, Appendix


13-1988
 
3-2-88
 
154.01 - 154.04, 154.06, 154.99


31-1988
 
11-2-88
 
155.01 - 155.12, 155.20 - 155.30


34-1988
 
11-2-88
 
33.50


35-1988
 
11-2-88
 
T.S.O. I


39-1988
 
12-7-88
 
T.S.O. I


12-1989
 
5-3-89
 
34.01


14-1989
 
5-3-89
 
33.29


15-1989
 
5-3-89
 
34.08


20-1989
 
6-7-89
 
137.13


25-1989
 
11-1-89
 
T.S.O. I


26-1989
 
12-6-89
 
T.S.O. I


10-1990
 
9-5-90
 
T.S.O. I


13-1990
 
11-7-90
 
T.S.O. I


9-1991
 
4-3-91
 
44.16, 44.99


10-1991
 
4-3-91
 
94.19


5-1992
 
4-1-92
 
76.06, 76.99


8-1992
 
5-6-92
 
33.01


23-1992
 
10-8-92
 
90.10


25-1992
 
11-4-92
 
153.05


27-1992
 
11-4-92
 
31.01


4-1993
 
1-20-93
 
94.20


5-1993
 
2-3-93
 
154.01 - 154.04, 154.06, 154.99


7-1993
 
4-3-93
 
50.02


16-1993
 
4-7-93
 
132.06


17-1993
 
4-7-93
 
137.04


18-1993
 
4-7-93
 
70.99


35-1993
 
11-3-93
 
152.01


36-1993
 
12-1-93
 
33.60


37-1993
 
12-1-93
 
33.05


38-1993
 
12-1-93
 
33.70


4-1994
 
3-2-94
 
T.S.O. I


5-1994
 
3-2-94
 
96.01


3-1995
 
1-4-95
 
44.05, 44.10


7-1995
 
3-1-95
 
132.14


12-1995
 
5-3-95
 
33.50


13-1995
 
5-3-95
 
34.04


19-1995
 
6-7-95
 
34.05, 34.07


26-1995
 
12-6-95
 
33.01


14-1996
 
11-6-96
 
94.19


1-1997
 
1-8-97
 
97.01


14-1997
 
8-6-97
 
T.S.O. I


15-1997
 
8-6-97
 
T.S.O. I


1-1998
 
2-4-98
 
30.02


2-1998
 
2-4-98
 
71.02, 71.29 - 71.33, 74.40, 74.48, 74.50, 74.60 - 74.62 - 74.68, 94.19


6-1998
 
5-6-98
 
90.11


7-1998
 
7-1-98
 
34.06


8-1998
 
7-1-98
 
34.06


9-1998
 
7-1-98
 
34.05, 34.07


11-1999
 
7-7-99
 
34.01 - 34.08, 34.15


12-1999
 
7-21-99
 
34.05, 34.07


13-1999
 
8-4-99
 
T.S.O. I


14-1999
 
8-4-99
 
76.04, 76.99


19-1999
 
9-1-99
 
132.14


20-1999
 
9-1-99
 
132.15


22-1999
 
9-19-99
 
33.19


22-1999
 
9-29-99
 
33.15 - 33.18, 33.20 - 33.29


23-1999
 
11-3-99
 
T.S.O. I


–
 
3-7-00
 
Charter § 3.04


2-2000
 
7-5-00
 
75.50 - 75.60, 75.99


10-2000
 
10-4-00
 
94.16


12-2000
 
12-6-00
 
44.14


1-2001
 
1-24-01
 
44.01 - 44.17, 44.99


2-2001
 
2-7-01
 
133.16


7-2001
 
8-1-01
 
34.06


8-2001
 
8-1-01
 
34.06


9-2001
 
8-1-01
 
34.05


10-2001
 
9-5-01
 
51.01 - 51.23, 51.99


11-2001
 
9-5-01
 
34.06


13-2001
 
10-3-01
 
76.04


14-2001
 
11-7-01
 
34.01


15-2001
 
12-5-01
 
Title XV


1-2002
 
1-2-02
 
100.01 - 100.11, 100.99


2-2002
 
1-2-02
 
34.05


3-2002
 
3-6-02
 
Ch. 156.01, Ch. 156.02


4-2002
 
3-6-02
 
33.60


6-2002
 
4-3-02
 
151.1405


10-2002
 
8-7-02
 
Charter


12-2002
 
10-2-02
 
33.15 - 33.29, 33.40, 33.41


1-2003
 
2-5-03
 
30.06


2-2003
 
2-5-03
 
101.01, 101.02, 101.99


15-2003
 
8-6-03
 
111.01 - 111.10, 111.99


17-2003
 
10-1-03
 
101.01 - 101.03, 101.99


2-2004
 
4-7-04
 
44.15, 75.99, 76.99, 90.11


3-2004
 
4-7-04
 
111.11


5-2004
 
5-5-04
 
157.01 - 157.09, 157.20 - 157.28, 157.40 - 157.49, 157.65 - 157.67, 157.80 -
157.82


7-2004
 
6-2-04
 
157.01 - 157.09, 157.20 - 157.28, 157.40 - 157.49, 157.65 - 157.67, 157.80 -
157.82


9-2004
 
6-2-04
 
34.05


1-2005
 
1-5-05
 
44.01 - 44.17, 44.99


2-2005
 
3-23-05
 
151.1313 - 151.1322


4-2005
 
3-23-05
 
151.1301 - 151.1312


5-2005
 
3-23-05
 
150.0101 - 150.0106, 150.0201 - 150.0204, 150.0301, 150.0302, 150.1001 -
150.1007, 150.1201 - 150.1208, 150.1401 - 150.1417, 150.1601 - 150.1611,
150.1801 - 150.1805, 150.2001 - 150.2011, 150.2201 - 150.2208, 150.3001 -
150.3010, 151.0101 - 151.0105, 151.1201 - 151.1208, 151.1211 - 151.1216,
151.2001 - 151.2008, 151.3001 - 151.3022, 151.3201 - 151.3209, 151.3213,
151.3214, 151.3401 - 151.3408, 151.3411, 151.3601 - 151.3607, 151.5001 -
151.5011


1-2006
 
2-1-06
 
151.3001, 151.3017


2-2006
 
2-1-06
 
94.21


5-2006
 
4-5-06
 
154.01 - 154.07, 154.99


6-2006
 
4-5-06
 
150.0302, 150.2202, 151.1203


7-2006
 
4-19-06
 
151.1203, 151.1207, 151.1501 - 151.1507, 151.1509 - 151.1523, 151.3212


9-2006
 
5-3-06
 
33.80


12-2006
 
8-2-06
 
91.21


15-2006
 
10-4-06
 
152.09


18-2006
 
10-4-06
 
71.18


19-2006
 
10-4-06
 
73.013, 73.014


20-2006
 
11-1-06
 
50.02


21-2006
 
12-6-06
 
44.14


4-2007
 
5-2-07
 
50.02


5-2007
 
6-6-07
 
50.02


10-2007
 
8-1-07
 
151.1407


11-2007
 
8-1-07
 
34.05


3-2008
 
5-7-08
 
33.24


4-2008
 
5-7-08
 
112.01 - 112.10, 112.99


9-2008
 
5-7-08
 
34.05


11-2008
 
9-3-08
 
151.1217


12-2008
 
9-3-08
 
151.1201, 151.1203 - 151.1206, 151.1214, 151.3213, 151.3407


15-2008
 
10-1-08
 
93.01, 93.10 - 93.24


16-2008
 
11-5-08
 
151.1208, 151.1209, 151.3002, 151.3004, 151.3011, 151.3014, 151.3015


20-2008
 
12-3-08
 
76.10


2-2009
 
3-4-09
 
150.0302, 151.3201, 151.3204, 151.3206, 151.3210, 151.3213, 151.3405,
151.3406, 151.3408


4-2009
 
7-1-09
 
90.04, 90.12


9-2009
 
10-7-09
 
44.14


13-2009
 
12-2-09
 
93.23, 150.0302, 151.1003, 151.1009


14-2009
 
12-2-09
 
90.13


1-2010
 
1-6-10
 
90.12


3-2010
 
4-7-10
 
151.1601 - 151.1609


5-2010
 
7-7-10
 
151.1401 - 151.1406


6-2010
 
7-7-10
 
150.0302, 150.1414, 151.1001 - 151.1011, 151.1209, 151.1210, 151.1508,
151.3211, 151.3212, 151.3409, 151.3410


9-2010
 
7-21-10
 
151.3002 - 151.3004, 151.3008, 151.3010 - 151.3013, 151.3015, 151.3018,
151.3019


13-2010
 
12-1-10
 
72.04, 72.171, 72.21


3-2011
 
4-6-11
 
73.10


4-2011
 
4-6-11
 
76.04, 76.99


5-2011
 
4-6-11
 
151.1209, 151.3015


6-2011
 
4-6-11
 
150.0302, 151.1009, 151.1211


4-2012
 
3-7-12
 
34.01 - 34.07, 34.15


5-2012
 
5-2-12
 
44.14


8-2012
 
11-7-12
 
44.99


9-2012
 
11-7-12
 
138.19


10-2012
 
11-7-12
 
90.03, 90.99


11-2012
 
12-5-12
 
152.02


1-2013
 
1-2-13
 
73.08, 73.09


3-2013
 
2-16-13
 
34.04, 34.05


4-2013
 
2-6-13
 
151.1217


7-2013
 
3-6-13
 
98.02


15-2013
 
11-6-13
 
154.20


16-2013
 
11-6-13
 
150.0302, 150.1405, 151.1006, 151.1009, 151.1203 - 151.1205, 151.1208,
151.1405, 151.1508 - 151.1511, 151.1514, 151.1515, 151.1517, 151.1518,
151.2004, 151.2007, 151.3002, 151.3004, 151.3010 - 151.3012, 151.3015,
151.3016, 151.3203, 151.3204, 151.3210, 151.3211, 151.3213, 151.3406 -
151.3408


2-2014
 
3-5-14
 
150.0302, 151.0101, 151.1201, 151.1202, 151.1203, 151.1204, 151.1205,
151.1206, 151.1207, 151.1211, 151.1213, 151.1214, 151.1215, 151.2001,
151.2002, 151.2006, 151.3008, 151.3011, 151.3012, 151.3013, 151.3016,
151.3018, 151.3213, 151.3409, 151.3410, 151.3602, 151.3603, 151.3604, 151.3605


19-2014
 
12-3-14
 
150.0302, 151.1003, 151.1004, 151.1010, 151.1011, 151.1012, 151.1013,
151.1203, 151.2001, 151.2002, 151.2003, 151.2004, 151.2005, 151.2006,
151.2007, 151.2008, 151.3204


20-2014
 
12-17-14
 
34.09


1-2015
 
1-7-15
 
Repeals 153.01


2-2015
 
1-7-15
 
153.05


3-2015
 
1-7-15
 
T.S.O. II


5-2015
 
3-4-15
 
33.41


7-2015
 
10-7-15
 
73.101


8-2015
 
11-4-15
 
44.1.01 - 44.1.30, 44.1.97 - 44.1.99


3-2016
 
3-2-16
 
44.13


4-2016
 
6-1-16
 
30.03


6-2016
 
7-6-16
 
T.S.O. II


1-2017
 
1-4-17
 
44.14


2-2017
 
1-4-17
 
151.1203, 151.181 - 151.1813


 
 
 
 
 




 


