
Minster, OH Code of Ordinances


VILLAGE OF MINSTER, OHIO
CODE OF ORDINANCES




Supplement 2019 S-16 contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 18-10-02, passed 2-19-2019
State legislation current through 12-31-18










Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com




ADOPTING ORDINANCE



ORDINANCE 03-04-01



   AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE VILLAGE OF MINSTER,
OHIO, REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING, AND COMPILING CERTAIN
EXISTING GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE POLITICAL SUBDIVISION DEALING WITH
SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN SUCH CODE OF ORDINANCES, AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY



WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the political
subdivision are inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in
form and substance for the complete preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality and for the proper conduct of
its affairs; and



WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of Ohio empower and
authorize the political subdivision to revise, amend, restate, codify and
compile any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted
or published and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book
form; and



WHEREAS, the Legislative Authority of the Village of Minster has authorized a
general compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances of the
Village of Minster of a general and permanent nature and publication of such
ordinance in book form; and



WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety, and general welfare of the municipality that this Ordinance take
effect at an early date.



NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL of the Village of Minster,
Auglaize County, Ohio to wit:




SECTION 1:  The general ordinances of the Village of Minster as revised,
restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as and shall
constitute the “Code of Ordinances of the Village of Minster, Ohio.”




SECTION 2:  Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of
the following Titles:



   Title I:      General Provisions



   Title III:   Administration



   Title V:   Public Works



   Title VII:   Traffic Code



   Title IX:   General Regulations



   Title XI:   Business Regulations



   Title XIII:   General Offenses



   Title XV:   Land Usage



SECTION 3:  All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such
Code of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date
of this Ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or in
part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense
committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective
date of this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of
ordinances levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching
territory, establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain
persons, authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds
or borrowing of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal
property, granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to
public use, vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public
places; not shall such repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or
special nature or pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the
Code.



SECTION 4:  Such code shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Legislative Authority and Clerk of the Village
of Minster is hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of such Code of
Ordinances in the office of the Clerk.



SECTION 5:  Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in
Section 6, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and
places of the ordinances and all provisions, sections, penalties and
regulations therein contained and of the date of passage, and that the same
is properly signed, attested, recorded, and approved and that any public
hearings and notices thereof as required by law have been given.



SECTION 6:  This Ordinance shall be and it hereby is deemed to be an
emergency measure for the immediate preservation of the peace, health,
safety, and general welfare of the people of this municipality and this
Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage.



Adopted: April 15, 2003



                        ______________________________



                        Dennis Kitzmiller, Mayor



ATTEST:



__________________________________



John W. Stechschulte, Clerk



ORDINANCE NUMBER 04-05-03



   AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES FOR THE VILLAGE OF MINSTER, OHIO AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.



WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2004 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Village of
Minster, Ohio, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and
permanent nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances
of the Village of Minster, Ohio; and



WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision
or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on
or make reference to sections of the Ohio Revised Code; and



WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Legislative Authority to accept these
updated sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the State of
Ohio; and



WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take
effect at an early date;



NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY OF THE VILLAGE OF
MINSTER, OHIO:



Section 1.  That the 2004 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
Village of Minster, Ohio as submitted by American Legal Publishing
Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is
hereby adopted by reference as if set out in its entirety.



Section 2.  Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Legislative Authority and the Clerk of the
Village of Minster, Ohio is hereby authorized and ordered to insert such
supplement into the copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office
of the Clerk.



Section 3.  This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general
welfare of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at the
earliest date provided by law.



PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Legislative Authority of the Village of Minster,
Ohio on this 4th day of May, 2004



ADOPTED:  May 4, 2004



                          Dennis Kitzmiller     
  /s/



                        Dennis Kitzmiller, Mayor



ATTEST:



  John Stechschulte    /s/



John W. Stechschulte, Clerk



ORDINANCE 05-04-01



   AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES FOR THE VILLAGE OF MINSTER, OHIO AND TO DECLARE AN EMERGENCY:



WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2005 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Village of
Minster, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and permanent
nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
Village of Minster, and



WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision
or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on
or make reference to sections of the Ohio Code;



WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety, and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take
effect at an early date;



NOW, THEREFORE BE IT ORDAINED BY THE LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY OF THE POLITICAL
SUBDIVISION OF THE VILLAGE OF MINSTER, OHIO:



Section 1:  That the 2005 supplement to the Code of Ordinance of the Village
of Minster as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted
by reference as if set out in its entirety.



Section 2:  Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Legislative Authority and the Clerk of the
Village of Minster is hereby authorized and ordered to insert such supplement
into the copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the
Clerk.



Section 3:  This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general
welfare of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at the
earliest date provided by law.



PASSED AND ADOPTED by the legislative Authority of the Village of Minster on
this 5th day of April, 2005.



                        Dennis Kitzmiller     
/s/   



                        Dennis Kitzmiller, Mayor



ATTEST:



John Stechschulte        /s/ 



John Stechschulte, Clerk



ORDINANCE 06-04-01



   AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES FOR THE VILLAGE OF MINSTER, OHIO AND TO DECLARE AN EMERGENCY:



WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2006 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Village of
Minster, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and permanent
nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
Village of Minster, and



WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision
or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on
or make reference to sections of the Ohio Code;



WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety, and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take
effect at an early date;



NOW, THEREFORE BE IT ORDAINED BY THE LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY OF THE POLITICAL
SUBDIVISION OF THE VILLAGE OF MINSTER, OHIO:



Section 1:  That the 2006 supplement to the Code of Ordinance of the Village
of Minster as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted
by reference as if set out in its entirety.



Section 2:  Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Legislative Authority and the Clerk of the
Village of Minster is hereby authorized and ordered to insert such supplement
into the copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the
Clerk.



Section 3:  This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general
welfare of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at the
earliest date provided by law.



PASSED AND ADOPTED by the legislative Authority of the Village of Minster on
this 4th day of April, 2006.



                        Dennis Kitzmiller     
/s/   



                        Dennis Kitzmiller, Mayor



ATTEST:



John Stechschulte        /s/ 



John Stechschulte, Clerk



ORDINANCE 07-05-03



   AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES FOR THE VILLAGE OF MINSTER, OHIO AND TO DECLARE AN EMERGENCY:



WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2007 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Village of
Minster, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and permanent
nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
Village of Minster, and



WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision
or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on
or make reference to sections of the Ohio Code;



WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety, and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take
effect at an early date;



NOW, THEREFORE BE IT ORDAINED BY THE LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY OF THE POLITICAL
SUBDIVISION OF THE VILLAGE OF MINSTER, OHIO:



Section 1:  That the 2007 supplement to the Code of Ordinance of the Village
of Minster as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted
by reference as if set out in its entirety.



Section 2:  Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Legislative Authority and the Clerk of the
Village of Minster is hereby authorized and ordered to insert such supplement
into the copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the
Clerk.



Section 3:  This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general
welfare of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at the
earliest date provided by law.



PASSED AND ADOPTED by the legislative Authority of the Village of Minster on
this 1st day of May, 2007.



                        Dennis Kitzmiller     
/s/   



                        Dennis Kitzmiller, Mayor



ATTEST:



John W. Stechschulte        /s/ 



John W. Stechschulte, Clerk



ORDINANCE 11-04-03



AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR
THE VILLAGE OF MINSTER AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY



WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2010 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Village of
Minster, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and permanent
nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
Village of Minster; and



WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision
or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on
or make reference to sections of the Ohio code; and



WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Legislative authority to accept these
updated sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the State of
Ohio; and



WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take
effect at and early date;



NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Council of the Village of Minster,
Auglaize County, Ohio to-wit:



Section 1:   That the 2010 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
Village of Minster, Ohio as submitted by American Legal Publishing
Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is
hereby adopted by reference as if set out in its entirety.



Section 2:   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of
its adoption and approval by the Legislative Authority and the Clerk of the
Village of Minster is hereby authorized and ordered to insert such supplement
into the copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the
Clerk.



Section 3:   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure
necessary for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and
general welfare of the people of the Village of Minster, and shall take
effect at the earliest date provided by law.



ADOPTED: April 19, 2011



                                       �
�  Dennis Kitzmiller  /s/     



                                       �
�  Dennis Kitzmiller, Mayor



ATTEST:



John Stechshulte    /s/             



John W. Stechshulte, Clerk/Fiscal Officer



ORDINANCE 12-04-01



AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR
THE VILLAGE OF MINSTER AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY



WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2011 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Village of
Minster, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and permanent
nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
Village of Minster; and



WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision
or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on
or make reference to sections of the Ohio code; and



WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Legislative authority to accept these
updated sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the State of
Ohio; and



WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take
effect at and early date;



NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Council of the Village of Minster,
Auglaize County, Ohio to-wit:



Section 1:   That the 2011 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
Village of Minster, Ohio as submitted by American Legal Publishing
Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is
hereby adopted by reference as if set out in its entirety.



Section 2:   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of
its adoption and approval by the Legislative Authority and the Clerk of the
Village of Minster is hereby authorized and ordered to insert such supplement
into the copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the
Clerk.



Section 3:   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure
necessary for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and
general welfare of the people of the Village of Minster, and shall take
effect at the earliest date provided by law.



ADOPTED: April 3, 2012



                                       �
�  Dennis Kitzmiller  /s/     



                                       �
�  Dennis Kitzmiller, Mayor



ATTEST:



John Stechschulte    /s/             



John W. Stechschulte, Clerk/Fiscal Officer



TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



      Chapter




         10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS




CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   10.01   Short titles



   10.02   Definitions



   10.03   Rules of construction



   10.04   Revivor; effect of amendment or repeal



   10.05   Construction of section references



   10.06   Conflicting provisions



   10.07   Severability



   10.08   Reference to offices



   10.09   Errors and omissions



   10.10   Ordinances repealed



   10.11   Ordinances unaffected



   10.12   Ordinances saved



   10.13   Application to future ordinances



   10.14   Interpretation



   10.15   Amendments to code; amendatory language



   10.16   Statutory references



   10.17   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities



   10.18   Determination of legislative intent



 



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  SHORT TITLES.



   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the
municipality, as revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated
into component codes, titles, chapters, and sections, shall be known and
designated as the “Municipal Code of Minster,” for which designation
“code of ordinances,” “codified ordinances” or “code” may be
substituted.  Code title, chapter, and section headings do not constitute
any part of the law as contained in the code.



(R.C. § 1.01)



   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters, and sections are to
such components of the code unless otherwise specified.  Any component code
may be referred to and cited by its name, such as the “Traffic Code.” 
Sections may be referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by
the number, such as “§ 10.01.”  Headings and captions used in this code
other than the title, chapter, and section numbers are employed for reference
purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AND may be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the sense requires it.



   ANOTHER.  When used to designate the owner of property which is the
subject of an offense, includes not only natural persons but also every other
owner of property.



   CHILD.  Includes child by adoption.



   COUNCIL.  The Legislative Authority of the municipality.



   COUNTY.  Auglaize County.



   FIRE CHIEF.  Shall include the Chief of a fire department if such fire
department has been established in the municipality, and shall include the
Fire Prevention Officer if no fire department has been established in the
municipality.



   IMPRISONED.  Shall have the same meaning as in R.C. § 1.05.



   INTERNET.  The international computer network of both federal and
non-federal interoperable packet switched data networks, including the
graphical subnetwork known as the world wide web.



   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR.  Includes all persons, whether acting by
themselves or as a servant, agent, or employee.



   LAND or REAL ESTATE.  Includes rights and easements of incorporeal
nature.



   LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY.  The Legislative Authority of the municipality.



   MAY.  Is permissive.



   MUNICIPALITY, CITY, TOWN, VILLAGE, or MUNICIPAL CORPORATION.  When
used in this code, shall denote the Village of Minster, irrespective of its
population or legal classification.



   O.A.C.  Refers to the Ohio Administrative Code.



   OATH.  Includes affirmation; and SWEAR includes affirm.



   OWNER.  When applied to property, includes any part owner, joint
owner, or tenant in common of the whole or part of such property.



   PERSON.  Includes an individual, corporation, business trust, estate,
trust, partnership, and association.



   PERSONAL PROPERTY.  Includes all property except real property.



   PLAN OF SEWERAGE, SYSTEM OF SEWERAGE, SEWER, and SEWERS.  Includes
sewers, sewage disposal works and treatment plants, and sewage pumping
stations, together with facilities and appurtenances necessary and proper
therefor.



   PREMISES.  As applied to property, includes land and buildings.



   PROPERTY.  Includes real, personal, mixed estates, and interests.



   PUBLIC AUTHORITY.  Includes boards of education; the municipal,
county, state, or federal government, its officers, or an agency thereof; or
any duly authorized public official.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school
yard, body of water or watercourse, public conveyance, or any other place for
the sale of merchandise, public accommodation, or amusement.



   R.C. or REVISED CODE.  Refers to the Ohio Revised Code.



   REAL PROPERTY.  Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.



   REGISTERED MAIL.  Includes certified mail; and CERTIFIED MAIL includes
registered mail.



   SHALL.  Is mandatory.



   SIDEWALK.  That portion of the street between the curb line and the
adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.



   STATE.  The State of Ohio.



   STREET.  Includes alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads, highways,
viaducts, and all other public thoroughfares within the municipality.



   TENANT or OCCUPANT.  As applied to premises, includes any person
holding a written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any
part of such premises, alone or with others.



   WEEK.  Seven consecutive days.



   WHOEVER.  Includes all persons, natural and artificial; partners;
principals, agents, and employees; and all officials, public or private.



   WRITING.  Includes printing.



   WRITTEN or IN WRITING.  The terms include any representation of words,
letters, symbols, or figures; this provision does not affect any law relating
to signatures.



   YEAR.  Twelve consecutive months.



(R.C. §§ 1.02, 1.05, 1.44, 1.59, 701.01)



§ 10.03  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   Common and technical usage.  Words and phrases shall be read
in context and construed according to the rules of grammar and common
usage.  Words and phrases that have acquired a technical or particular
meaning, whether by legislative definition or otherwise, shall be construed
accordingly.



(R.C. § 1.42)



   (B)   Singular and plural; gender; tenses.  As used in this code,
unless the context otherwise requires:



      (1)   The singular includes the plural, and the plural
includes the singular.



      (2)   Words of one gender include the other genders.



      (3)   Words in the present tense include the future tense.



(R.C. § 1.43)



   (C)   Calendar; computation of time.



      (1)   The time within which an act is required by law to be
done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day;
except that when the last day falls on Sunday or a legal holiday, then the
act may be done on the next succeeding day that is not a Sunday or a legal
holiday.



      (2)   When a public office, in which an act required by law is
to be performed, is closed to the public for the entire day that constitutes
the last day for doing the act or before its usual closing time on that day,
the act may be performed on the next succeeding day that is not a Sunday or a
legal holiday.



      (3)   LEGAL HOLIDAY, as used in divisions (C)(1) and (C)(2) of
this section, means the following days:



         (a)   The first day of January, known as New Year’s
day;



         (b)   Good Friday;



         (c)   The day designated in the “Act of June 28,
1968,” 82 Stat. 250, 5 U.S.C. 6103, as amended, for the commemoration of
Memorial day;



         (d)   The fourth day of July, known as Independence day;



         (e)   The first Monday in September, known as Labor day;



         (f)   The fourth Thursday in November, known as
Thanksgiving day;



         (g)   The Friday following Thanksgiving;



         (h)   December 24;



         (i)   The twenty-fifth day of December, known as
Christmas day;



         (j)   Any day appointed and recommended by the Governor
of this state or the President of the United States as a holiday.



      (4)   (a)   If any day designated in this section as a
legal holiday falls on a Sunday, the next succeeding day is a legal holiday.



(R.C. § 1.14)



         (b)   If any day designated in this section as a legal
holiday falls on a Saturday, the last preceding Friday is a legal holiday.



      (5)   When an act is to take effect or become operative from
and after a day named, no part of that day shall be included.  If priority
of legal rights depends upon the order of events on the same day, such
priority shall be determined by the times in the day at which they
respectively occurred.



(R.C. § 1.15)



      (6)   If a number of months is to be computed by counting the
months from a particular day, the period ends on the same numerical day in
the concluding month as the day of the month from which the computation is
begun, unless there are not that many days in the concluding month, in which
case the period ends on the last day of that month.



(R.C. § 1.45)



      (7)   In all cases where the law shall require any act to be
done in a reasonable time or reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time
or notice shall mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt
performance of such duty or compliance with such notice.



   (D)   Numbers.  If there is a conflict between figures and words in
expressing a number, the words govern.



(R.C. § 1.46)



   (E)   Authority.  When the law requires an act to be done which may
by law as well be done by an agent as by the principal, such requirement
shall be construed to include all such acts when done by an authorized agent.



   (F)   Joint authority.  All words purporting to give joint
authority to three or more municipal officers or other persons shall be
construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other
persons, unless it shall be otherwise expressly declared in the law giving
the authority, or it is inconsistent with state law or municipal charter
provisions.



   (G)   Exceptions.  The rules of construction shall not apply to any
law which contains any express provision excluding such construction, or when
the subject matter or context of such law is repugnant thereto.



§ 10.04  REVIVOR; EFFECT OF AMENDMENT OR REPEAL.



   (A)   The repeal of a repealing statute does not revive the
ordinance originally repealed nor impair the effect of any saving clause
therein.



(R.C. § 1.57)



   (B)   The re-enactment, amendment, or repeal of an ordinance does
not, except as provided in division (C) of this section:



      (1)   Affect the prior operation of the ordinance or any prior
action taken thereunder.



      (2)   Affect any validation, cure, right, privilege,
obligation, or liability previously acquired, accrued, accorded, or incurred
thereunder.



      (3)   Affect any violation thereof or penalty, forfeiture, or
punishment incurred in respect thereto, prior to the amendment or repeal.



      (4)   Affect any investigation, proceeding, or remedy in
respect of any privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture, or
punishment; and the investigation, proceeding, or remedy may be instituted,
continued, or enforced, and the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment imposed,
as if the ordinance had not been repealed or amended.



   (C)   If the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment for any offense is
reduced by a re-enactment or amendment of an ordinance, the penalty,
forfeiture, or punishment, if not already imposed, shall be imposed according
to the ordinance as amended.



(R.C. § 1.58)



   (D)   An ordinance which is re-enacted or amended is intended to be
a continuation of the prior ordinance and not a new enactment, so far as it
is the same as the prior ordinance.



(R.C. § 1.54)



§ 10.05  CONSTRUCTION OF SECTION REFERENCES.



   (A)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation
of a section or an inclusive group of sections, or of divisions or
subdivisions of a section, such reference shall be construed to mean a
violation of any provision of the section, sections, divisions or
subdivisions included in the reference.



   (B)   References in the code to action taken or authorized under
designated sections of the code include, in every case, action taken or
authorized under the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by
this code.



(R.C. § 1.23)



   (C)   A reference to any portion of a provision of this code applies
to all re-enactments or amendments thereof.



(R.C. § 1.55)



   (D)   If a section refers to a series of numbers or letters, the
first and the last numbers or letters are included.



(R.C. § 1.56)



   (E)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section
hereof, the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered, unless the subject
matter has been changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.06  CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.



   (A)   If a general provision conflicts with a special or local
provision, they shall be construed, if possible, so that effect is given to
both. If the conflict between the provisions is irreconcilable, the special
or local provision prevails as an exception to the general provision, unless
the general provision is the later adoption and the manifest intent is that
the general provision prevail.



(R.C. § 1.51)



   (B)   (1)   If ordinances enacted at different meetings of the
Legislative Authority are irreconcilable, the ordinance latest in date of
enactment prevails.



      (2)   If amendments to the same ordinance are enacted at
different meetings of the Legislative Authority, one amendment without
reference to another, the amendments are to be harmonized, if possible, so
that effect may be given to each. If the amendments are substantively
irreconcilable, the latest in date of enactment prevails. The fact that a
later amendment restates language deleted by an earlier amendment, or fails
to include language inserted by an earlier amendment, does not of itself make
the amendments irreconcilable. Amendments are irreconcilable only when
changes made by each cannot reasonably be put into simultaneous operation.



(R.C. § 1.52)



   (C)   In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of
this code, or between any of the provisions of this code and any standard
code adopted by the municipality pursuant to R.C. § 731.231, the provision
that establishes the higher or stricter standard shall control.



§ 10.07  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provisions of a section of this code or the application thereof
to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions or applications of the section or related sections which can
be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end
the provisions are severable.



(R.C. § 1.50)



§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of the municipality exercising the powers,
duties, or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.09  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered consisting of the misspelling of any
words, the omission of any words necessary to express the intention of the
provisions affected, the use of words to which no meaning can be attached, or
the use of a word when another word was clearly intended to express the
intention, the spelling shall be corrected, and the words supplied, omitted,
or substituted shall conform with the manifest intention, and the provision
shall have the same effect as though the correct words were contained in the
text as originally published.  No alteration shall be made or permitted if
any question exists regarding the nature or extent of such error.



§ 10.10  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   With the exception of any ordinances specifically saved by the
municipality, this code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all
of the provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein
enumerated and embraced.  All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects
treated by this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective
date of this code of ordinances.



§ 10.11  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature, all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not enumerated and embraced in this code of
ordinances, and all ordinances specifically saved by the municipality shall
remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by
necessary implication.



§ 10.12  ORDINANCES SAVED.



   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the
legislative body, or a certain municipal officer or employee, to make
additional ordinances or regulations for the purpose of carrying out the
intention of the ordinance, all ordinances and regulations of a similar
nature serving the purpose, effected prior to the codification and not
inconsistent thereto, shall remain in effect and are saved.



§ 10.13  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.14  INTERPRETATION.



   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required,
the same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state
law.



§ 10.15  AMENDMENTS TO CODE; AMENDATORY LANGUAGE.



   (A)   Any chapter, section, or division amended or added to this
code by ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this code may be
numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this code and need not be
inserted in this code, but shall be treated as if printed for inclusion
herein.



   (B)   The following language should be used by the municipality to
amend, add, or repeal a chapter, section, or division:



      (1)   To amend a section: “Section               of
the Municipal Code of Ordinances is amended to read as follows: . . . .”



      (2)   To add a section: “Section               of the
Municipal Code of Ordinances, which is to be added to and amends the
Municipal Code of Ordinances, reads as follows: . . . .”



      (3)   To repeal a section: “Section               of
the Municipal Code of Ordinances, which reads as follows, is repealed: . . .
.”



§ 10.16  STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, located in
parenthesis immediately following a division or section of this code, this
indicates that the text of the division or section reads substantially the
same as the statutory provision.  Example:  (R.C. § 4511.02)



   (B)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory
reference” following the text of a section, this indicates that the reader
should refer to that statute for further information.  Example:



      § 30.08 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.



         Unless otherwise exempted by state law, all public records
shall be promptly prepared and made available for inspection to any person.



      (R.C. § 149.43(B))



      Statutory reference:



         Public records, see R.C. § 149.43



§ 10.17  PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.



   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date
of this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those
laws.  This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued,
penalties incurred, or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this
code.  The liabilities, proceedings and rights are continued; punishments,
penalties, or forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had
not been enacted.  In particular, any agreement granting permission to
utilize highway rights-of-way, contracts entered into or franchises granted,
the acceptance, establishment or vacation of any highway, and the election of
corporate officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had
not been enacted.



§ 10.18  DETERMINATION OF LEGISLATIVE INTENT.



   (A)   In enacting an ordinance, it is presumed that:



      (1)   Compliance with the constitutions of the State and of
the United States is intended;



      (2)   The entire ordinance is intended to be effective;



      (3)   A just and reasonable result is intended;



      (4)   A result feasible of execution is intended.



(R.C. § 1.47)



   (B)   An ordinance is presumed to be prospective in its operation
unless expressly made retrospective.



(R.C. § 1.48)



   (C)   If an ordinance is ambiguous, the court, in determining the
intention of the Legislative Authority, may consider among other matters:



      (1)   The object sought to be attained;



      (2)   The circumstances under which the ordinance was enacted;



      (3)   The legislative history;



      (4)   The common law or former legislative provisions,
including laws upon the same or similar subjects;



      (5)   The consequences of a particular construction;



      (6)   The administrative construction of the ordinance.



(R.C. § 1.49)



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   (A)   Whenever, in this municipal code or in any ordinance of the
municipality, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or
an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever the doing of any act is required or
the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific
penalty is otherwise provided, whoever violates any such provision shall be
punished by a fine not exceeding $500, a term of imprisonment not exceeding
six months, or both.  A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day
during or on which a violation continues or occurs.



   (B)   The failure of any officer or employee of the municipality to
perform any official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer
or employee to the penalty imposed for a violation unless a penalty is
specifically provided for such failure.



Cross-reference:



   Misdemeanor classifications, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Ordinance violations and penalties, see R.C. § 715.67



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



      Chapter




         30.   GENERAL PROVISIONS





         31.   EXECUTIVE AUTHORITY





         32.   LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY





         33.   JUDICIAL AUTHORITY





         34.   POLICE DEPARTMENT





         35.   VILLAGE INVESTMENT POLICY





         36.   PERSONNEL POLICIES





         37.   INCOME TAX EFFECTIVE THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 2015





         38.   FIRE DEPARTMENT





         39.   INCOME TAX EFFECTIVE BEGINNING JANUARY 1, 2016




CHAPTER 30:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   30.01   Application of Title III



   30.02   Qualifications; oaths



   30.03   Bonds of officers and employees; amount



   30.04   Additional bond; where bonds recorded and kept



   30.05   Approval of bonds



   30.06   Sufficiency of form of bond



   30.07   Filling vacancies in offices



   30.08   Public records available



   30.09   Records Commission



   30.10   Meetings of public bodies to be open



   30.11   Municipal officers may attend conference or convention;
expenses



   30.12   Use of village equipment and facilities



   30.13   Industrial, commercial, distribution and research development



   30.14   Residency requirements prohibited; exceptions



   30.15   Identity Theft Prevention Program



Statutory reference:



   Village accounting and financial reporting, State Auditor
administrative regulations, see O.A.C. Chapter 117-9



§ 30.01  APPLICATION OF TITLE III.



   (A)   Title III of this code of ordinances is designed to include
and incorporate, insofar as is practical, all legislation concerning the
organization, qualifications, appointment or election, terms of office,
compensation, and the powers and duties of the officials, boards, and bodies
of the village.  Pertinent sections of the Ohio Revised Code relative to
these village offices and boards have been assembled and adopted as a part of
this Title.  No material changes of the Revised Code sections referred to in
the legislative histories have been made.  The purpose of including these
sections is to afford easy reference to the statutory provisions.



   (B)   In the interest of uniformity and consistency, all references
to “village,” as the term appears in the Revised Code, have been changed
to read “municipality” throughout this Title.  However, the provisions
of this Chapter shall only apply to the administration of village local
government.



§ 30.02  QUALIFICATIONS; OATHS.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B) of this section
or in another section of the Revised Code, each officer of the municipality
or of any department or board of the municipality, whether elected or
appointed as a substitute for a regular officer, shall be an elector of the
municipality and, before entering upon official duties, shall take an oath to
support the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the
State and an oath that the officer will faithfully, honestly, and impartially
discharge the duties of the office to which elected or appointed.  These
provisions as to official oaths shall extend to deputies, but they need not
be electors.



   (B)   Neither this section nor any section of the Revised Code
requires, or shall be construed to require, that a Fire Chief be an elector
of the municipality.



(R.C. § 733.68)



§ 30.03  BONDS OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES; AMOUNT.



   (A)   Before entering upon the discharge of his or her duties, each
officer and employee, where such is required by the legislative authority,
shall execute a bond approved according to law in the amount set forth for
his or her respective office or position.



   (B)   Bonds for officials are established as follows.



      (1)   The bond of the Mayor shall be in the amount of $1,000.



      (2)   The bond of the Clerk-Treasurer shall be in the amount
of $50,000.



      (3)   The bond of the Chief of Police, Village Administrator,
Street Superintendent of Utilities, Utility Clerks and members of the Police
Department (regular) shall be $10,000.



(Ord. 87-5-1, passed 6-2-87)



§ 30.04  ADDITIONAL BOND; WHERE BONDS RECORDED AND KEPT.



    Except as otherwise provided in the municipal charter or in R.C. §
3.061, each officer required by law or ordinance to give bond shall do so
before entering upon the duties of the office. Except as otherwise provided
in the municipal charter or in R.C. § 3.061, the Legislative Authority may
at any time require each officer to give a new or additional bond. Each bond,
except that of the Auditor or Clerk, upon its approval, shall be delivered to
the Auditor or Clerk, who shall immediately record it in a record provided
for that purpose and file and carefully preserve it in the Auditor's or
Clerk's office. The bond of the Auditor or Clerk shall be delivered to the
Treasurer, who shall in like manner record and preserve it.



(R.C. § 733.69)



§ 30.05  APPROVAL OF BONDS.



   The official bonds of all municipal officers shall be prepared by the
Solicitor or Director of Law.  Except as otherwise provided in state law,
the bonds shall be in a sum as the Legislative Authority prescribes by
general or special ordinance, and be subject to the approval of the Mayor,
except that the Mayor's bond shall be approved by the Legislative Authority,
or, if it is not legally organized, by the Clerk of the Court of Common Pleas
of the county in which the municipality or the larger part thereof is
situated.



(R.C. § 733.70)



§ 30.06  SUFFICIENCY OF FORM OF BOND.



   In each bond mentioned in § 30.05, the condition that the person
elected or appointed shall faithfully perform the duties of the office shall
be sufficient.  The fact that the instrument is without a seal, that blanks
for the date or amount have been filled subsequent to its execution but
before its acceptance, without the consent of the sureties, that all the
obligees named in the instrument have not signed it, that new duties have
been imposed on the officers or that any merely formal objection exists shall
not be available in any suit on the instrument.



(R.C. § 733.71)



§ 30.07  FILLING VACANCIES IN OFFICES.



   Unless otherwise provided by law, vacancies arising in appointive and
elective offices of the  municipality shall be filled by appointment by the
Mayor for the remainder of the unexpired term, provided that:



   (A)   Vacancies in the office of the Mayor shall be filled in the
manner provided by R.C. § 733.25, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance;



   (B)   Vacancies in the membership of the Legislative Authority shall
be filled in the manner provided by R.C. § 731.43, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance;



   (C)   Vacancies in the office of President Pro Tempore of the
Legislative Authority shall be filled in the manner provided by R.C. §
731.11, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;



   (D)   Vacancies in the office of Clerk-Treasurer may be filled in
the following manner:  The Mayor may appoint a person to serve as acting
officer to perform the duties of the office until a permanent officer is
appointed to fill the vacancy.



(R.C. § 733.31(A))



§ 30.08  PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.



   (A)    Upon request and subject to division (H) of this section, all
public records responsive to the request shall be promptly prepared and made
available for inspection to any person at all reasonable times during regular
business hours. Subject to division (H) of this section, upon request by any
person, a public office or person responsible for public records shall make
copies of the requested public record available to the requestor at cost and
within a reasonable period of time. If a public record contains information
that is exempt from the duty to permit public inspection or to copy the
public record, the public office or the person responsible for the public
record shall make available all of the information within the public record
that is not exempt. When making that public record available for public
inspection or copying that public record, the public office or the person
responsible for the public record shall notify the requester of any redaction
or make the redaction plainly visible. A redaction shall be deemed a denial
of a request to inspect or copy the redacted information, except if federal
or state law authorizes or requires a public office to make the redaction.



   (B)   To facilitate broader access to public records, a public
office or the person responsible for public records shall organize and
maintain public records in a manner that they can be made available for
inspection or copying in accordance with this section. A public office also
shall have available a copy of its current records retention schedule at a
location readily available to the public. If a requester makes an ambiguous
or overly broad request or has difficulty in making a request for copies or
inspection of public records under this section such that the public office
or the person responsible for the requested public record cannot reasonably
identify what public records are being requested, the public office or the
person responsible for the requested public record may deny the request but
shall provide the requester with an opportunity to revise the request by
informing the requester of the manner in which records are maintained by the
public office and accessed in the ordinary course of the public office’s or
person’s duties.



   (C)   If a request is ultimately denied, in part or in whole, the
public office or the person responsible for the requested public record shall
provide the requester with an explanation, including legal authority, setting
forth why the request was denied. If the initial request was provided in
writing, the explanation also shall be provided to the requester in writing.
The explanation shall not preclude the public office or the person
responsible for the requested public record from relying upon additional
reasons or legal authority in defending an action commenced under R.C. §
149.43(C).



   (D)   Unless specifically required or authorized by state or federal
law or in accordance this section, no public office or person responsible for
public records may limit or condition the availability of public records by
requiring disclosure of the requester’s identity or the intended use of the
requested public record. Any requirement that the requester disclose the
requester’s identity or the intended use of the requested public record
constitutes a denial of the request.



   (E)   A public office or person responsible for public records may
ask a requester to make the request in writing, may ask for the requester’s
identity, and may inquire about the intended use of the information
requested, but may do so only after disclosing to the requester that a
written request is not mandatory and that the requester may decline to reveal
the requester’s identity or the intended use and when a written request or
disclosure of the identity or intended use would benefit the requester by
enhancing the ability of the public office or person responsible for public
records to identify, locate, or deliver the public records sought by the
requester.



   (F)   If any person requests a copy of a public record in accordance
with this section, the public office or person responsible for the public
record may require that person to pay in advance the cost involved in
providing the copy of the public record in accordance with the choice made by
the person requesting the copy under this division. The public office or the
person responsible for the public record shall permit that person to choose
to have the public record duplicated upon paper, upon the same medium upon
which the public office or person responsible for the public record keeps it,
or upon any other medium upon which the public office or person responsible
for the public record determines that it reasonably can be duplicated as an
integral part of the normal operations of the public office or person
responsible for the public record. When the person requesting the copy makes
a choice under this division, the public office or person responsible for the
public record shall provide a copy of it in accordance with the choice made
by that person. Nothing in this section requires a public office or person
responsible for the public record to allow the person requesting a copy of
the public record to make the copies of the public record.



   (G)   (1)   Upon a request made in accordance with this section
and subject to division (F) of this section, a public office or person
responsible for public records shall transmit a copy of a public record to
any person by United States mail or by any other means of delivery or
transmission within a reasonable period of time after receiving the request
for the copy. The public office or person responsible for the public record
may require the person making the request to pay in advance the cost of
postage if the copy is transmitted by United States mail or the cost of
delivery if the copy is transmitted other than by United States mail, and to
pay in advance the costs incurred for other supplies used in the mailing,
delivery, or transmission.



      (2)   Any public office may adopt a policy and procedures that
it will follow in transmitting, within a reasonable period of time after
receiving a request, copies of public records by United States mail or by any
other means of delivery or transmission pursuant to division (G) of this
section.  A public office that adopts a policy and procedures under division
(G) of this section shall comply with them in performing its duties under
that division.



      (3)   In any policy and procedures adopted under division (G)
of this section:



         (a)   A public office may limit the number of records
requested by a person that the office will physically deliver by United
States mail or by another delivery service to ten per month, unless the
person certifies to the office in writing that the person does not intend to
use or forward the requested records, or the information contained in them,
for commercial purposes.



         (b)   A public office that chooses to provide some or
all of its public records on a web site that is fully accessible to and
searchable by members of the public at all times, other than during acts of
God outside the public office’s control or maintenance, and that charges no
fee to search, access, download, or otherwise receive records provided on the
web site, may limit to ten per month the number of records requested by a
person that the office will deliver in a digital format, unless the requested
records are not provided on the web site and unless the person certifies to
the office in writing that the person does not intend to use or forward the
requested records, or the information contained in them, for commercial
purposes.



         (c)   For purposes of division (G) of this section,
COMMERCIAL shall be narrowly construed and does not include reporting or
gathering news, reporting or gathering information to assist citizen
oversight or understanding the operation or activities of government, or
nonprofit educational research.



   (H)   A public office or person responsible for public records is
not required to permit a person who is incarcerated pursuant to a criminal
conviction or a juvenile adjudication to inspect or to obtain a copy of any
public record concerning a criminal investigation or prosecution or
concerning what would be a criminal investigation or prosecution if the
subject of the investigation or prosecution were an adult, unless the request
to inspect or to obtain a copy of the record is for the purpose of acquiring
information that is subject to release as a public record under this section
and the judge who imposed the sentence or made the adjudication with respect
to the person, or the judge's successor in office, finds that the information
sought in the public record is necessary to support what appears to be a
justiciable claim of the person.



   (I)   (1)   Upon written request made and signed by a journalist,
a public office, or person responsible for public records, having custody of
the records of the agency employing a specified designated public service
worker, as defined in R.C. § 149.43, shall disclose to the journalist the
address of the actual personal residence of the designated public service
worker and, if the designated public service worker's spouse, former spouse
or child is employed by a public office, the name and address of the employer
of the designated public service worker's spouse, former spouse or child. The
request shall include the journalist's name and title and the name and
address of the journalist's employer and shall state that disclosure of the
information sought would be in the public interest.



      (2)   Division (I)(1) of this section also applies to
journalist requests for:



         (a)   Customer information maintained by a municipally
owned or operated public utility, other than social security numbers and any
private financial information such as credit reports, payment methods, credit
card numbers, and bank account information.



         (b)    Information about minors involved in a school
vehicle accident as provided in division R.C. § 149.43(A)(1)(gg), other than
personal information as defined in R.C. § 149.45.



      (3)   As used in this division (I), JOURNALIST means a person
engaged in, connected with, or employed by any news medium, including a
newspaper, magazine, press association, news agency, or wire service, a radio
or television station, or a similar medium, for the purpose of gathering,
processing, transmitting, compiling, editing, or disseminating information
for the general public.



   (J)   Upon a request made by a victim, victim's attorney, or
victim's representative, as that term is used in R.C. § 2930.02, a public
office or person responsible for public records shall transmit a copy of a
depiction of the victim as described in R.C. § 149.43(A)(1)(gg) to the
victim, victim's attorney, or victim's representative.



   (K)   (1)   To ensure that all employees of public offices are
appropriately educated about a public office's obligations under this
section, all elected officials or their appropriate designees shall attend
training approved by the Attorney General as provided in R.C. § 109.43. A
future official may satisfy the requirements of this division by attending
the training before taking office, provided that the future official may not
send a designee in the future official's place.



      (2)   All public offices shall adopt a public records policy
in compliance with this section for responding to public records requests. In
adopting a public records policy under this division, a public office may
obtain guidance from the model public records policy developed and provided
to the public office by the Attorney General under R.C. § 109.43. Except as
otherwise provided in this section or R.C. § 149.43, the policy may not
limit the number of public records that the public office will make available
to a single person, may not limit the number of public records that it will
make available during a fixed period of time, and may not establish a fixed
period of time before it will respond to a request for inspection or copying
of public records, unless that period is less than eight hours.



      (3)   The public office shall distribute the public records
policy adopted by the public office under this division (K) to the employee
of the public office who is the records custodian or records manager or
otherwise has custody of the records of that office. The public office shall
require that employee to acknowledge receipt of the copy of the public
records policy. The public office shall create a poster that describes its
public records policy and shall post the poster in a conspicuous place in the
public office and in all locations where the public office has branch
offices. The public office may post its public records policy on the internet
web site of the public office if the public office maintains an internet web
site. A public office that has established a manual or handbook of its
general policies and procedures for all employees of the public office shall
include the public records policy of the public office in the manual or
handbook.



(R.C. § 149.43(B), (E))



Statutory reference:



   Availability and scope of public records; mandamus action to compel
disclosure, see R.C. § 149.43



   Competitive bidding, public inspection and copying prohibited, see R.C.
§ 125.071



§ 30.09  RECORDS COMMISSION.



   (A)   There is hereby established in and for the municipality a
Records Commission, composed of the Chief Executive of the municipality, or
the Chief Executive’s appointed representative, as Chairperson, and the
Chief Fiscal Officer, the Chief Legal Officer and a citizen appointed by the
Chief Executive. The Commission shall appoint a Secretary, who may or may not
be a member of the Commission and who shall serve at the pleasure of the
Commission. The Commission may employ an archivist or records manager to
serve under its direction. The Commission shall meet at least once every six
months and upon the call of the Chairperson.



   (B)   The functions of the Commission shall be to provide rules for
retention and disposal of records of the municipality and to review
applications for one-time disposal of obsolete records and schedules of
records retention and disposition submitted by municipal offices. The
Commission may dispose of records pursuant to the procedure outlined in R.C.
§ 149.381. The Commission, at any time, may review any schedule it has
previously approved and, for good cause shown, may revise that schedule under
the procedure outlined in that section.



(R.C. § 149.39)



§ 30.10  MEETINGS OF PUBLIC BODIES TO BE OPEN.



   (A)   Purpose; application of the rules. Council has adopted rules
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 121.22 for the purposes of establishing a reasonable
method for every person to determine the time and place of regularly
scheduled meetings and the time and place of special meetings; the making of
provisions for giving advance notices of special meetings to the news media
that have requested notification; and making provisions for persons to
request and obtain reasonable advance notification of all meetings at which
any specific type of public business is to be discussed. These rules apply to
each municipal body, or committee thereof, of the village and are in addition
to any applicable legal requirements as to notices to members of the
municipal body or others in connection with specific meetings or specific
matters.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      (1)   CLERK-TREASURER.  Clerk of Council of the Village of
Minster, or secretary of other municipal body, or committee thereof, required
to have open meetings.



      (2)   DAY.  A calendar day.



      (3)   MEETING.  Any prearranged discussion of public business
of a municipal body, or committee thereof, by a majority of members of such
municipal body, or committee thereof.



      (4)   MUNICIPAL BODY.  Each of the following: Council, Board
of Zoning Appeals, and such other boards and commissions that the village may
have for the purposes of operating its governmental business, and committees
of such municipal bodies.



      (5)   ORAL NOTIFICATION.  A notification given orally, either
in person or by telephone directly to the person to whom such notification is
intended or by leaving the oral message at the address or at the telephone
number of such person as shown in the records of the initial request for
notification.



      (6)   POSTING.  To post in an area accessible to the public,
during usual business hours in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer, which means
the Administrative Building.



      (7)   PUBLISH.  Published once in a newspaper having a
general circulation in the village.



      (8)   SPECIAL MEETING.  A meeting which is neither a regular
meeting nor an adjournment of a regular meeting to another time or day, to
consider items specifically stated in the original agenda of the regular
meeting.



      (9)   WRITTEN NOTIFICATION  Notification in writing, mailed
or hand delivered to the address of the person for whom such notification is
intended as shown on the records kept by the Clerk- Treasurer or the person
responsible for delivering such notification.



   (C)   Notice of regular and organizational meetings.



      (1)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall post a statement of the times
and places of the regular meetings of Council and the Clerk of each body
shall have the responsibility of posting times and places of the meetings of
their bodies. Notification posted shall be as nearly as practical for a full
calendar year of regular meetings, indicating the times and places. The
Clerk-Treasurer shall check at reasonable intervals to insure that the
statement remains so posted during the calendar year. In the event that the
time and place of regular meetings is changed on a permanent or temporary
basis, a statement of the time and places where the meetings have been
changed to, shall be posted at least 24 hours before the time of the first
changed regular meeting.



      (2)   The Clerk of each municipal body, including Council, or
committee thereof, shall have posted the time and place of any organizational
meeting of such municipal body at least 24 hours before the organizational
meeting is held.



      (3)   Upon the adjournment of any regular special meeting to
another day, the Clerk-Treasurer shall promptly post notice of the time and
place of such adjournment.



   (D)   Notice of special meetings.



      (1)   Except in the case of an emergency meeting, the
Clerk-Treasurer shall, no later than 24 hours before the time of the special
meeting of a municipal body, post a statement of the time, place and purposes
of such special meeting.



      (2)   A statement under this section in the notifications,
shall state such specific or general purpose or purposes then known to the
Clerk-Treasurer to be intended to be considered at the special meeting, may
state such other items of business that may be properly brought before the
body at that time.



   (E)   Notice to news media of special meetings.



      (1)   Any news media organization that desires to be given
advance notification of special meetings of a municipal body, shall file with
the Clerk-Treasurer written request thereof. Further, except in the event of
an emergency requiring immediate official action, a special meeting shall not
be held unless 24 hours advance notice of the time, place and purposes of the
special meeting is given to the news media that have requested such
notification.



      (2)   A news media request for such advance notification of a
special meeting shall specify the municipal body that is subject to the
request, the name of the media, the name and address of the person to whom
written notification to the media may be mailed or delivered, and the names,
addresses and telephone numbers of at least two persons to either one of whom
oral notifications of the meeting may be given. Any such request shall be
effective for a period of one year from the date of filing with the
Clerk-Treasurer or until the Clerk-Treasurer receives a written notification
of such media in canceling or modifying the request.



      (3)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall give such oral notification or
written notification or both as the Clerk-Treasurer determines to the news
media that have requested such advance notification of time, place and
purposes of a special meeting at least 24 hours prior to the time of such
special meeting.



      (4)   In the event of an emergency requiring immediate
official action, a special meeting may be called without giving 24 hours
advance notification thereof to the requesting news media. The persons
calling such meeting or any one of such persons or the Clerk-Treasurer, on
their behalf, shall immediately give oral notification or written
notification or both, to the person or persons giving such notification,
determining the time, place and purpose of such special meeting to the news
media that have requested the advance notification in accordance with these
rules.



   (F)   Minutes.  The Clerk-Treasurer shall promptly prepare, file,
and maintain the minutes of a municipal body, and said minutes shall be open
for public inspection.



(Ord. 94-4-2, passed  - -94)



§ 30.11  MUNICIPAL OFFICERS MAY ATTEND CONFERENCE OR CONVENTION; EXPENSES.



   (A)   Any elected or appointed officer, deputy, assistant or
employee of the municipality may attend, at the expense of the municipality,
any conference or convention relating to municipal affairs, if authorized by
the Mayor, the President of the Legislative Authority or the Administrator.
If the fiscal officer of the municipality certifies that funds are
appropriated and available for such purpose, such person shall be reimbursed
for his or her expense so incurred.



   (B)   A request for such allowance shall be made in writing to the
Mayor, the President of the Legislative Authority or the Administrator,
showing the necessity for such attendance and an estimate of the costs
thereof to the municipality.



(R.C. § 733.79)



§ 30.12  USE OF VILLAGE EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES.



   (A)   All village equipment and facilities shall be for use by the
village only unless some specific approval is obtained for each exception to
this rule. This approval shall be from the Mayor, the President of the
Council, or in the absence of both of the above, one or more of the Council
members.



   (B)   When cooperation with any other organization is desired in the
use of village equipment or facilities it shall be approved by the Mayor, the
President of the Council, or in their absence one or more members of the
Council.



   (C)   At no time shall any village equipment or facilities be used
for the personal use of any of the village employees, officers, or of any
individual.



   (D)   All village equipment shall be marked with the name of the
village in a conspicuous spot with large enough letters to be identifiable at
a reasonable distance.



(Ord. 1979- , passed  - -79)



§ 30.13  INDUSTRIAL, COMMERCIAL, DISTRIBUTION AND RESEARCH DEVELOPMENT.



   The Village of Minster Community Improvement Corporation (CIC) is
hereby designated as agent and instrumentality of the village for the
industrial, commercial, distribution and research development in the village.



(Ord. 80-7-3, passed 7-15-80)



§ 30.14  RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   As used in this section:



      POLITICAL SUBDIVISION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2743.01.



      VOLUNTEER. A person who is not paid for service or who is
employed on less than a permanent full-time basis.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C) of this section,
no political subdivision shall require any of its employees, as a condition
of employment, to reside in any specific area of the state.



   (C)   (1)   Division (B) of this section does not apply to a
volunteer.



      (2)   To ensure adequate response times by certain employees
of political subdivisions to emergencies or disasters while ensuring that
those employees generally are free to reside throughout the  state, the
electors of any political subdivision may file an initiative petition to
submit a local law to the electorate, or the Legislative Authority may adopt
an ordinance or resolution, that requires any individual employed by that
political subdivision, as a condition of employment, to reside either in the
county where the political subdivision is located or in any adjacent county
in this state. For purposes of  this section, an initiative petition shall
be filed and considered as provided in R.C. §§ 731.28 and 731.31, except
that the Fiscal Officer of the political subdivision shall take the actions
prescribed for the Auditor or Clerk if the political subdivision has no
Auditor or Clerk, and except that references to a municipal corporation shall
be considered to be references to the applicable political subdivision.



   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C), employees of
political subdivisions of this state have the right to reside any place they
desire.



(R.C. § 9.481)



§ 30.15  IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM.



   (A)   The village hereby adopts by reference and makes a part of
this code, the same as if set forth in full herein, an Identity Theft
Prevention Program, in accordance with the requirements of the Fair and
Accurate Credit Transaction Act, and as set forth in Resolution No. 09-04-01.



   (B)   The village appoints the Village Administrator and Fiscal
Officer as the oversight committee to oversee the operation and compliance of
the village’s Identity Theft Prevention Program.



   (C)   The village authorizes the Village Administrator to approve
modifications to the Identity Theft Prevention Program as needed to meet the
needs of the utility department and to maintain compliance with the Fair and
Accurate Credit Transaction Act.



(Res. 09-04-01, passed 4-21-09)



CHAPTER 31:  EXECUTIVE AUTHORITY



Section




General Provisions




   31.01   Executive power; where vested




Mayor




   31.05   Term of Mayor; power and duties



   31.06   General duties of the Mayor



   31.07   Communications to the Legislative Authority



   31.08   Protest against excess of expenditures



   31.09   Supervision of conduct of officers



   31.10   Annual report to the Legislative Authority



   31.11   Mayor to file charges against delinquent officers



   31.12   Vacancies in office of Mayor



   31.13   Disposition of fines and other moneys




Village Fiscal Officer




   31.20   Election, term, qualifications of the Village Fiscal Officer



   31.21   Powers and duties



   31.22   Books and accounts



   31.23   Seal of Village Fiscal Officer



   31.24   Quarterly account; annual report



   31.25   Receipt and disbursement of funds



   31.26   Duty of delivering money and property




Other Officials




   31.40   Legal counsel



   31.41   Administrator



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 31.01  EXECUTIVE POWER; WHERE VESTED.



   The executive power and authority of the municipality shall be vested
in the Mayor, Clerk-Treasurer, Marshal, Village Administrator, and such other
officers and departments as are created by law.



(R.C. § 733.23)



MAYOR



§ 31.05  TERM OF MAYOR; POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Mayor shall be elected for a term of four years commencing on the
first day of January next after his or her election.  He or she shall be an
elector of the municipality, and shall have resided in the municipality for
at least one year immediately preceding his or her election.  He or she
shall be the chief conservator of the peace within the municipality, and
shall have the powers and duties provided by law.  He or she shall be the
President of the Legislative Authority, and shall preside at all regular and
special meetings thereof, but shall have no vote except in case of a tie.



(R.C. § 733.24)



§ 31.06  GENERAL DUTIES OF THE MAYOR.



   The Mayor shall perform all the duties prescribed by the bylaws and
ordinances of the municipality.  He or she shall see that all ordinances,
bylaws, and resolutions of the Legislative Authority are faithfully obeyed
and enforced.  He or she shall sign all commissions, licenses, and permits
granted by the Legislative Authority, or authorized by Title VII of the
Revised Code, and such other instruments as by law or ordinance require his
or her certificate.



(R.C. § 733.30)



§ 31.07  COMMUNICATIONS TO THE LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY.



   The Mayor shall communicate to the Legislative Authority from time to
time a statement of the finances of the municipality, and other information
relating thereto, and the general condition of the affairs of the
municipality as he or she deems proper, or as is required by the Legislative
Authority.



(R.C. § 733.32)



§ 31.08  PROTEST AGAINST EXCESS OF EXPENDITURES.



   If, in the opinion of the Mayor, an expenditure authorized by the
Legislative Authority exceeds the revenues of the municipality for the
current year, he or she shall protest against the expenditure and enter the
protest, and the reason therefor, on the journal of the Legislative Authority.



(R.C. § 733.33)



§ 31.09  SUPERVISION OF CONDUCT OF OFFICERS.



   The Mayor shall supervise the conduct of all the officers of the
municipality, inquire into and examine the grounds of all reasonable
complaints against any officers, and cause their violations or neglect of
duty to be punished promptly or reported to the proper authority for
correction.



(R.C. § 733.34)



§ 31.10  ANNUAL REPORT TO THE LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY.



   At the first regular meeting in January of each year, and at other
times as the Mayor deems expedient, he or she shall report to the Legislative
Authority concerning the affairs of the municipality, and recommend such
measures as seem proper to him or her.



(R.C. § 733.41)



§ 31.11  MAYOR TO FILE CHARGES AGAINST DELINQUENT OFFICERS.



   (A)   Generally. The Mayor shall have general supervision over each
department and the officers provided for in Title VII of the Revised Code. 
When the Mayor has reason to believe that the head of a department or an
officer has been guilty, in the performance of his or her official duty, of
bribery, misfeasance, malfeasance, nonfeasance, misconduct in office, gross
neglect of duty, gross immorality, or habitual drunkenness, he or she shall
immediately file with the Legislative Authority, except when the removal of
the head of the department or officer is otherwise provided for, written
charges against the person, setting forth in detail a statement of alleged
guilt, and, at the same time, or as soon thereafter as possible, serve a true
copy of the charges upon the person against whom they are made.  Service may
be made on the person or by leaving a copy of the charges at the office of
the person.  Return thereof shall be made to the Legislative Authority, as
is provided for the return of the service of summons in a civil action.



(R.C. § 733.35)



   (B)   Hearing of charges; action of the Legislative Authority.
Charges filed with the Legislative Authority under division (A) of this
section shall be heard at the next regular meeting thereof, unless the
Legislative Authority extends the time for the hearing, which shall be done
only on the application of the accused. The accused may appear in person and
by counsel, examine all witnesses, and answer all charges against him or her.
The judgment or action of the Legislative Authority shall be final, but to
remove such officer the votes of two-thirds of all members elected thereto
shall be required.



(R.C. § 733.36)



   (C)   Suspension of accused pending hearing.  Pending any
proceedings under division (A) and (B) of this section, an accused person may
be suspended by a majority vote of all members elected to the Legislative
Authority, but such suspension shall not be for a longer period than 15 days,
unless the hearing of such charges is extended upon the application of the
accused, in which event the suspension shall not exceed 30 days.



(R.C. § 733.37)



   (D)   Power of the Legislative Authority as to process. For the
purpose of investigating charges filed pursuant to division (A) of this
section against the head of any department or officer, the Legislative
Authority may issue subpoenas or compulsory process to compel the attendance
of persons and the production of books and papers before it, and the
Legislative Authority may provide by ordinance for exercising and enforcing
this section.



(R.C. § 733.38)



   (E)   Oaths; compulsory testimony; costs. In all cases in which the
attendance of witnesses may be compelled for an investigation under division
(D) of this section, any member of the Legislative Authority may administer
the requisite oaths, and the Legislative Authority has the same power to
compel the giving of testimony by attending witnesses as is conferred upon
courts. In all such cases, witnesses shall be entitled to the same privileges
and immunities as are allowed witnesses in civil cases. Witnesses shall be
paid the same fees and mileage provided for under R.C. § 1901.26, and the
costs of all such proceedings shall be payable from the General Fund of the
municipality.



(R.C. § 733.39)



§ 31.12  VACANCIES IN OFFICE OF MAYOR.



   When the Mayor is absent from the municipality, or is unable for any
cause to perform his or her duties, the President Pro Tempore of the
Legislative Authority shall be acting Mayor.  In case of the death,
resignation, or removal of the Mayor, such President Pro Tempore shall become
the Mayor and shall hold office until his or her successor is elected and
qualified.  Such successor shall be elected to the office for the unexpired
term at the first regular municipal election that occurs more than 40 days
after the vacancy has occurred, except that when the unexpired term ends
within one year immediately following the date of such election, an election
to fill such unexpired term shall not be held and the President of the
Legislative Authority shall hold the office for such unexpired term.



(R.C. § 733.25)



§ 31.13  DISPOSITION OF FINES AND OTHER MONEYS.



   (A)    Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 4511.193, all fines,
forfeitures and costs in ordinance cases and all fees collected by the Mayor,
or which in any manner come into his or her hands, or which are due the Mayor
or the Chief of Police or other officer of the municipality, any other fees
and expenses which have been advanced out of the treasury of the
municipality, and all money received by the Mayor for the use of the
municipality, shall be paid by him or her into such treasury on the first
Monday of each month. At the first regular meeting of the Legislative
Authority each month, the Mayor shall submit a full statement of all money
received, from whom and for what purposes received, and when paid into the
treasury. Except as otherwise provided by R.C. § 307.515 or R.C. § 4511.99,
all fines and forfeitures collected by the Mayor in state cases, together
with all fees and expenses collected which have been advanced out of the
county treasury, shall be paid by him or her to the county treasury on the
first business day of each month. Except as otherwise provided by R.C. §
307.515 or R.C. § 4511.99, all court costs and fees collected by the Mayor
in state cases shall be paid by him or her into the municipal treasury on the
first business day of each month.



   (B)   This section does not apply to fines collected by the
Mayor’s Court for violations of R.C. § 4513.263(B), or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, all of which shall be forwarded to the
Treasurer of State as provided in R.C. § 4513.263(E).



(R.C. § 733.40)



VILLAGE FISCAL OFFICER



§ 31.20  ELECTION, TERM, QUALIFICATIONS OF THE VILLAGE FISCAL OFFICER.



   The Village Fiscal Officer shall be elected for a term of four years,
commencing on April 1 next after his or her election.  He or she shall be an
elector of the municipality.



(R.C. §§ 733.26, 733.42)



Cross-reference:



   Vacancies, filling of, see § 30.07(D)



§ 31.21  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The Village Fiscal Officer  shall attend all meetings of the
Legislative Authority and keep a record of its proceedings and of all rules,
bylaws, resolutions, and ordinances passed or adopted, which shall be subject
to the inspection of all persons interested.  In case of the absence of the
Village Fiscal Officer, the Legislative Authority shall appoint one of its
members to perform his or her duties.



   (B)   The Village Fiscal Officer shall attend training programs for
new clerks and annual training programs of continuing education for clerks
that are provided by the Auditor of State pursuant to R.C. § 117.44.



(R.C. § 733.27)



   (C)   The Village Fiscal Officer shall demand and receive from the
County Treasurer taxes levied and assessments made and certified to the
County Auditor by the Legislative Authority, and placed on the tax list by
the Auditor for collection, moneys from persons authorized to collect or
required to pay them, accruing to the municipality from any judgments, fines,
penalties, forfeitures, licenses, and costs taxed in Mayor's Court, and debts
due the municipality.  These funds shall be disbursed by the Village Fiscal
Officer and County Auditor on the order of any person authorized by law or
ordinance to issue orders therefor.



   (D)   The Village Fiscal Officer of a village that does not have a
charter form of government shall not disburse any funds except upon an order
signed by at least one member of the Legislative Authority or the Village
Clerk and countersigned by the Village Fiscal Officer. The Clerk-Treasurer or
fiscal officer of a village that does not have a charter form of government
shall not disburse any funds except upon an order signed by at least one
member of the Legislative Authority and countersigned by the Clerk-Treasurer
or village fiscal officer.



(R.C. § 733.44)



§ 31.22  BOOKS AND ACCOUNTS.



   (A)   The Village Fiscal Officer shall keep the books of the
municipality, exhibit accurate statements of all moneys received and
expended, of all the property owned by the municipality and the income
derived therefrom, and of all taxes and assessments.



(R.C. § 733.28)



   (B)   The Village Fiscal Officer shall keep an accurate account of:



      (1)   All moneys received by him or her, showing the amount
thereof, the time received, from whom, and on what account received;



      (2)   All disbursements made by him or her, showing the amount
thereof, the time made, to whom, and on what account paid.



   (C)   He or she shall so arrange his or her books so that the amount
received and paid on account of separate funds, or specified appropriations,
shall be exhibited in separate accounts.  In addition to the ordinary duties
of the Treasurer, he or she shall have such powers and perform such duties as
are required by any ordinance of the municipality, not inconsistent with
Title VII of the Revised Code, and not incompatible with the nature of the
office.



(R.C. § 733.43)



§ 31.23  SEAL OF VILLAGE FISCAL OFFICER.



   The Legislative Authority shall provide a seal for the Village Fiscal
Officer, in the center of which shall be the name of the municipality, and
around the margin “Village Fiscal Officer,” an impression of which seal
shall be affixed to all transcripts, orders, certificates, or other papers
requiring authentication.



(R.C. § 733.29)



§ 31.24  QUARTERLY ACCOUNT; ANNUAL REPORT.



   The Village Fiscal Officer shall settle and account with the
Legislative Authority, quarterly, and at any other time which it by
resolution or ordinance requires.  At the first regular meeting of the
Legislative Authority in January of each year, the Village Fiscal Officer
shall report to it the condition of the finances of the municipality, the
amount received by the Village Fiscal Officer, the sources of the receipts,
the disbursements made by him or her, and on what account, during the year
preceding.  This account shall exhibit the balance due on each fund which
has come into the Village Fiscal Officer’s hands during the year.



(R.C. § 733.45)



§ 31.25  RECEIPT AND DISBURSEMENT OF FUNDS.



   (A)   The Village Fiscal Officer shall receive and disburse all
funds of the municipality and such other funds as arise in or belong to any
department or part of the municipality, except as provided in division (B) of
this section.



   (B)   The Treasurer of a village that does not have a charter form
of government shall not disburse any funds except upon an order signed by at
least one member of the Legislative Authority or the Village Clerk and
countersigned by the Treasurer. The Clerk-Treasurer or fiscal officer of a
village that does not have a charter form of government shall not disburse
any funds except upon an order signed by at least one member of the
Legislative Authority and countersigned by the Clerk-Treasurer or village
fiscal officer.



(R.C. § 733.46)



§ 31.26  DUTY OF DELIVERING MONEY AND PROPERTY.



   The Village Fiscal Officer, at the expiration of his or her term of
office, or on his or her resignation or removal, shall deliver to his or her
successor, all moneys, books, papers, and other property in his or her
possession as Village Fiscal Officer.  In the case of the death or
incapacity of the Village Fiscal Officer, his or her legal representatives
shall, in like manner, deliver the money and property which were in the
Village Fiscal Officer hands to the person entitled thereto.



(R.C. § 733.47)



OTHER OFFICIALS



§ 31.40  LEGAL COUNSEL.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, when it
considers it necessary, the Legislative Authority may provide legal counsel
for the municipality, or for any department or official of the municipality,
for a period not to exceed two years and shall provide compensation for the
legal counsel.



   (B)   (1)   A petition may be filed with the Clerk, signed by
registered electors residing in the municipality equal in number to not less
than 10% of the total vote cast for all candidates for Governor in the
municipality at the most recent general election at which a Governor was
elected, requesting that the question be placed before the electors whether,
instead of the Legislative Authority appointing legal counsel for the
municipality or for any department or official of the municipality, the Mayor
shall appoint an attorney or law firm as the legal counsel with the advice
and consent of the Legislative Authority. Within two weeks after receipt of
the petition, the Clerk shall certify it to the Board of Elections, which
shall determine its sufficiency and validity. The petition shall be certified
to the Board of Elections not less than 90 days prior to the election at
which the question is to be voted upon.



      (2)   At the election, if a majority of the electors of the
municipality approves the question, then effective immediately when the Mayor
considers it necessary, the Mayor shall appoint, with the advice and consent
of the Legislative Authority, an attorney or law firm as legal counsel for
the municipality, or for any department or official of the municipality, for
a period not to exceed two years. The appointment of legal counsel under this
division shall be pursuant to a contract approved by the Mayor and a majority
vote of the Legislative Authority. The contract shall provide for the
compensation and other terms of the engagement of the legal counsel, and the
Legislative Authority shall provide that compensation for the legal counsel.



   (C)   When acting under this section, the Legislative Authority acts
in its administrative capacity.



(R.C. § 733.48)



§ 31.41  ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   Creation of position. In accordance with R.C. § 735.271 there
is hereby created the position of Village Administrator.



(Ord. 73-1-3, passed 1-5-73)



   (B)   Powers and duties of the Administrator.



      (1)   The Administrator shall manage, conduct, and control the
water works, electric light plants, artificial or natural gas plants, or
other similar public utilities, furnish supplies of water, electricity, or
gas, and collect all water, electric and gas rents.



      (2)   The Administrator may make such bylaws and regulations
as it deems necessary for the safe, economical, and efficient management and
protection of such works, plants, and public utilities.  Such bylaws and
regulations, when not repugnant to municipal ordinances and resolutions or to
the Ohio Constitution, shall have the same validity of ordinances.



      (3)   The rates for service and charges for municipally owned
utilities shall be determined by the Legislative Authority.



      (4)   The Administrator shall have the same powers or perform
the same duties as are provided in R.C. §§ 743.05 to 743.07, 743.10,
743.11, 743.18, and 743.24, and all the powers and duties relating to water
works in any such sections shall extend to and include electric light, power,
gas plants, and other similar public utilities.



      (5)   The Administrator shall supervise the improvement and
repair of streets, avenues, alleys, lands, lanes, squares, landings, market
houses, bridges, viaducts, sidewalks, sewers, drains, ditches, culverts,
streams, and water courses as well as lighting, sprinkling, and cleaning of
all streets, alleys, and public buildings and places.



      (6)   The Administrator shall appoint officers, employees,
agents, clerks, and assistants, provided such positions are first authorized
by the Legislative Authority, but such appointments shall be subject to
approval by the Mayor.  Such appointments and the Mayor's approval shall be
in writing, and shall be filed with the Clerk-Treasurer.



      (7)   The Administrator shall be under the general supervision
and control of the Mayor, and shall have such other powers and duties as are
prescribed by ordinance or by law and which are not inconsistent herewith. 
The Administrator shall perform all duties and shall have all powers of
Boards of Public Affairs and Street Commissioners as prescribed by law,
except as otherwise provided by R.C. §§ 735.271 and 735.272.



(R.C. § 735.273)



CHAPTER 32:  LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY



Section



   32.01   Members of the Legislative Authority; election; terms of
office



   32.02   President Pro Tempore; employees



   32.03   Vacancy when President Pro Tempore becomes Mayor



   32.04   Qualifications of members of the Legislative Authority



   32.05   Compensation and bonds of municipal officers and employees



   32.06   Vacancy



   32.07   Judge of election and qualification of members; quorum and
special meetings



   32.08   Rules; journal; expulsion of members



   32.09   Meetings



   32.10   General powers



   32.11   Failure to take oath or give bond



   32.12   Notice when new bond required



   32.13   Care, supervision and management of public institutions



   32.14   Publication of ordinances and resolutions



   32.15   Central purchasing



Statutory reference:



   Purchase orders, requirements, see O.A.C. § 117-5-13



   Village accounting and financial reporting, State Auditor
administrative regulations, see O.A.C. Chapter 117-9



§ 32.01  MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE  AUTHORITY; ELECTION; TERMS OF OFFICE.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B) or (C) of this
section, the legislative power of each municipality shall be vested in, and
exercised by, a Legislative Authority, composed of six members, who shall be
elected by the electors of the municipality at large, for terms of four years.



   (B)   The Legislative Authority may adopt an ordinance or resolution
that, if approved by a majority of the electors voting on the issue, would
reduce the number of members of the Legislative Authority to five.  A
certified copy of the ordinance or resolution shall be filed with the Board
of Elections no later than 4:00 p.m. of the ninetieth day before the day of
the next election at which members of the Legislative Authority are to be
elected.



   (C)   The electors may propose a reduction in the number of members
of the Legislative Authority from six to five by initiative petition in
accordance with the procedure set forth in R.C. § 731.28.



   (D)   If a majority of the votes cast on the question proposed under
division (B) or (C) of this section is in the affirmative, the Legislative
Authority shall be composed of five members, who shall be elected at large,
for terms of four years.  If members of the Legislative Authority have
staggered terms of office as required by this section, the decrease in number
of members shall be implemented as necessary over the next two municipal
elections at which members of the Legislative Authority would be elected. 
If the Legislative Authority has adopted an ordinance or resolution to
eliminate staggered terms of office under division (E) of this section, the
five members shall be elected as set forth in division (E)(2)(b) of this
section.



(R.C. § 731.09)



   (E)   (1)   The Legislative Authority may, by the adoption of an
ordinance or resolution to eliminate staggered terms of office, determine
that all members of the Legislative Authority shall be elected at the same
municipal election as provided for in this section.



      (2)   At the regular municipal election occurring not less
than 90 days after the certification of the ordinance or resolution to the
Board of Elections eliminating staggered terms of office, the following apply:



         (a)   If there are six members of the Legislative
Authority, the number of members eligible for election at that regular
municipal election shall be elected to two-year nonstaggered terms, and all
members of the Legislative Authority shall be elected to four-year
nonstaggered terms at all following municipal elections.



         (b)   If there are five members of the Legislative
Authority, a number of members that is one less than the number of members
that would otherwise be eligible for election at that regular municipal
election but for the first-time implementation of the new membership of five,
or, in the case of a village that has previously reduced its number of
members to five, then the number of members eligible for election at that
regular municipal election shall be elected to two-year nonstaggered terms,
and all members shall be elected to four-year nonstaggered terms at all
following municipal elections.



(R.C. § 731.091)



§ 32.02  PRESIDENT PRO TEMPORE; EMPLOYEES.



   (A)   At the first meeting in January of each year, the Legislative
Authority shall immediately proceed to elect a President Pro Tempore from its
own number, who shall serve until the first meeting in January next after his
or her election.  The Legislative Authority may provide employees for the
municipality as it determines, and employees may be removed at any regular
meeting by a majority of the members elected to the Legislative Authority.



   (B)   When the Mayor is absent from the municipality, or is unable,
for any cause, to perform his or her duties, the President Pro Tempore shall
be the acting Mayor, and shall have the same powers and perform the same
duties as the Mayor.



(R.C. § 731.10)



§ 32.03  VACANCY WHEN PRESIDENT PRO TEMPORE BECOMES MAYOR.



   When the President Pro Tempore of the Legislative Authority becomes the
Mayor, the vacancy thus created shall be filled as provided in § 32.06, and
the Legislative Authority shall elect another President Pro Tempore from its
own number, who shall have the same rights, powers, and duties as his or her
predecessor.



(R.C. § 731.11)



§ 32.04  QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY.



   (A)   Each member of the Legislative Authority shall have resided in
the municipality for at least one year immediately preceding the member's
election, and shall be an elector of the municipality.  No member of the
Legislative Authority shall hold any other public office, be interested in
any contract with the municipality, or hold employment with the municipality,
except that the member may be a notary public, a member of the state militia,
or a volunteer firefighter of the village; provided that such member shall
not receive any compensation for his or her services as a volunteer
firefighter of the village in addition to his or her regular compensation as
a member of the Legislative Authority.  Any member who ceases to possess any
of these qualifications, or who moves from the municipality, shall forfeit
his or her office.



   (B)   The purpose of establishing a one-year residency requirement
in this section is to recognize that the municipality has a substantial and
compelling interest in encouraging qualified candidacies for election to the
office of member of the Legislative Authority by ensuring that a candidate
for the office has every opportunity to become knowledgeable with and
concerned about the problems and needs of the area the candidate seeks to
represent.  In enacting this requirement, the municipality finds that the
one-year period is reasonably related to this purpose, while leaving
unimpaired a person's right to travel, to vote, and to be a candidate for
public office.



(R.C. § 731.12)



§ 32.05  COMPENSATION AND BONDS OF MUNICIPAL OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.



   The Legislative Authority shall fix the compensation and bonds of all
officers, clerks, and employees of the municipality, except as otherwise
provided by law.  The Legislative Authority shall, in the case of elective
officers, fix their compensation for the ensuing term of office at a meeting
held not later than five days prior to the last day fixed by law for filing
as a candidate for such office.  All bonds shall be made with sureties
subject to the approval of the Mayor.  The compensation so fixed shall not
be increased or diminished during the term for which any officer is elected
or appointed.  This section does not prohibit the payment of any increased
costs of continuing to provide the identical benefits provided to an officer
at the commencement of his or her term of office.



(R.C. § 731.13)  (Ord. 95-5-3, passed  - -95)



Cross-reference:



   Bonds for officials, see § 30.03



§ 32.06  VACANCY.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B) of this section,
when the office of a member of the Legislative Authority becomes vacant, the
vacancy shall be filled by election by the Legislative Authority for the
unexpired term.  If the Legislative Authority fails within 30 days to fill
the vacancy, the Mayor shall fill it by appointment, except that subject to
division (B) of this section, when the vacancy occurs because of the
operation of R.C. § 733.25, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the successor shall hold office only for the period the President
Pro Tempore of the Legislative Authority holds the office of Mayor.



   (B)   When a vacancy occurs in the office of a member of the
Legislative Authority of a village with a population of less than 2,000
because of the operation of R.C. § 733.25, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, at the time the President Pro Tempore becomes Mayor, the
President Pro Tempore shall decide whether he or she wishes to serve the
remainder of his or her unexpired term as a member of the Legislative
Authority when the Mayor's successor is elected and qualified in accordance
with R.C. § 733.25, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.  If
the President Pro Tempore decides to serve the remainder of his or her
unexpired term as a member of the Legislative Authority, the vacancy on the
Legislative Authority shall not be filled and the President Pro Tempore shall
resume serving his or her unexpired term on the Legislative Authority as soon
as the Mayor's successor is elected and qualified.  If the President Pro
Tempore decides not to resume serving the remainder of his or her unexpired
term as a member of the Legislative Authority as soon as the Mayor's
successor is elected and qualified, then the vacancy in the office of the
member of the Legislative Authority shall be filled in accordance with this
section.



(R.C. § 731.43(A))



§ 32.07  JUDGE OF ELECTION AND QUALIFICATION OF MEMBERS; QUORUM AND SPECIAL
MEETINGS.



   The Legislative Authority shall be the judge of the election and
qualification of its members.  A majority of all the members elected shall
be a quorum, but a less number may adjourn from day to day and compel
attendance of absent members in a manner and under penalties as are
prescribed by ordinance.  The Legislative Authority shall provide rules for
the manner of calling special meetings.



(R.C. § 731.44)



Cross-reference:



   Open meetings, see § 30.10



§ 32.08  RULES; JOURNAL; EXPULSION OF MEMBERS.



   The Legislative Authority shall determine its own rules, and keep a
journal of its proceedings.  It may punish or expel any member for
disorderly conduct or violation of its rules, and declare his or her seat
vacant for absence without valid excuse, where the absence has continued for
two months.  No expulsion shall take place without the concurrence of
two-thirds of all the members elected, and until the delinquent member has
been notified of the charge against him or her, and has had an opportunity to
be heard.



(R.C. § 731.45)



§ 32.09  MEETINGS.



   The Council shall, except as otherwise provided in this section, meet
in regular session at the Council chambers at 7:30 p.m. on the first and
third Tuesdays of each month.



(Ord. 1966- , passed  - -66)



Cross-reference:



   Open meetings, see § 30.10



§ 32.10  GENERAL POWERS.



   The Legislative Authority shall have the management and control of the
finances and property of the municipality, except as otherwise provided.



(R.C. § 731.47)



§ 32.11  FAILURE TO TAKE OATH OR GIVE BOND.



   The Legislative Authority may declare vacant the office of any person
elected or appointed to the office who, within ten days after he or she has
been notified of his or her appointment or election, or obligation to give a
new or additional bond, fails to take the required official oath or to give
any bond required of him or her.



(R.C. § 731.49)



§ 32.12  NOTICE WHEN NEW BOND REQUIRED.



   (A)   When the Legislative Authority declares by resolution that an
officer shall give a new bond, written notice shall be served by the
Clerk-Treasurer upon the officer designated, and a copy of the notice, with a
statement of the time and place of service, shall be recorded in the
proceedings of the Legislative Authority.



   (B)   If the officer fails to give such new bond, with sureties, to
the satisfaction of the Mayor, within ten days after such service, the
Legislative Authority shall declare the office vacant, and the vacancy shall
be filled in the manner provided in Title VII of the Revised Code.



   (C)   When a new bond is accepted or the Legislative Authority
declares the office vacant, the sureties of the original bond shall cease to
be liable for the acts of such officer done thereafter, but shall continue to
be liable for his or her acts then already done.



(R.C. § 731.50)



§ 32.13  CARE, SUPERVISION AND MANAGEMENT OF PUBLIC INSTITUTIONS.



   The Legislative Authority shall provide by resolution or ordinance for
the care, supervision, and management of all public parks, baths, libraries,
market houses, crematories, sewage disposal plants, houses of refuge and
correction, workhouses, infirmaries, hospitals, pesthouses or any of such
institutions owned, maintained or established by the municipality. When the
Legislative Authority determines to plat any of the streets, it shall provide
for the platting thereof.



(R.C. § 735.27)



§ 32.14  PUBLICATION OF ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.



   (A)   All ordinances, resolutions and any orders, proclamations,
notices, or reports required by ordinance to be published, shall be published
pursuant to R.C. § 751.25 (A) by posting three copies thereof  for 15 days
in the following five public places within the village:



      (1)   One at the Office of the Village Clerk-Treasurer of
Minster, 5 W. Fourth St., Minster, Ohio;



      (2)   One at the United States Post Office, 62 E. Fourth
Street, Minster, Ohio;



      (3)   One at the Minster Bank, 95 W. Fourth St., Minster, Ohio;



      (4)   One at the Frances J. Stallo Memorial Library, 196 E.
Fourth Street, Minster, Ohio.



   (B)   The place of posting shall be in a conspicuous place in such
building and readily accessible to all members of the public at reasonable
hours.



(Ord. 95-4-1, passed  - -95)



§ 32.15  CENTRAL PURCHASING.



   Pursuant to the provisions of R.C. § 731.141, there shall be central
purchasing for all offices, departments, divisions, boards, and commissions
of the village, under the direction of the Village Administrator, who shall
make contracts, purchase supplies or materials, and provide labor for any
work of the village in the manner provided by law.



(Ord. 1985- , passed 12-30-85)



CHAPTER 33:  JUDICIAL AUTHORITY



Section




General Provisions




   33.01   Jurisdiction in ordinance cases and traffic violations



   33.02   Powers of Mayor and Mayor's Court Magistrate in criminal
matters



   33.03   Duties of Mayor and Mayor's Court Magistrate; fees; office;
seal



   33.04   Mayor's Court Magistrate



   33.05   Powers to suspend driver’s license in O.V.I. cases



   33.06   Mayor's Court Fine Fund




Contempt of Court




   33.20   Summary punishment for contempt



   33.21   Acts in contempt of court



   33.22   Hearing



   33.23   Contempt action for failure to pay support, failure to
comply or interference with a visitation order; summons



   33.24   Right of accused to bail



   33.25   Hearing on contempt; penalties; support orders; failure to
withhold or deduct money pursuant to support order



   33.26   Imprisonment until order obeyed



   33.27   Proceedings when party released on bail fails to appear



   33.28   Release of prisoner committed for contempt



   33.29   Judgment final



   33.30   Alternative remedy



Editor’s note:



   The ability of a Mayor to preside over a Mayor’s Court was
significantly affected by DePiero v. City of Macedonia, 180 F.3d 770 (6th
Cir. 1999), cert. denied, 120 S. Ct. 844 (2000). The DePiero case essentially
put all municipalities on notice that a defendant's due process rights may be
violated each time the Mayor presides over the Mayor's Court.  Such notice
suggests that a Mayor presiding over Mayor's Court after June 23, 1999 (the
date of issuance of the opinion) could be personally liable to such a
defendant for compensatory and punitive damages. As a result of this case,
many municipalities now have a Magistrate preside over their Mayor's Court
pursuant to R.C. § 1905.05.  Please consult your Village Attorney if you
have any questions regarding the impact of this case.



Cross-reference:



   Disposition of fines and other moneys, see § 31.13



Statutory reference:



   Notification to Registrar of Motor Vehicles regarding arrest warrants;
effect on certificates of registration and driver's licenses, see R.C. §§
4503.13 and 4507.091



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 33.01  JURISDICTION IN ORDINANCE CASES AND TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   In all municipalities having a population of more than 200 not
being the site of a municipal court nor a place where a judge sits pursuant
to R.C. § 1901.021 or by designation of the judges pursuant to R.C. §
1901.021, the Mayor has jurisdiction, except as provided in divisions (B),
(C) and (E) of this section and subject to the limitation contained in R.C.
§ 1905.03 and the limitation contained in R.C. § 1905.031, to hear and
determine any prosecution for the violation of an ordinance of the
municipality, to hear and determine any case involving a violation of a
vehicle parking or standing ordinance of the municipality unless the
violation is required to be handled by a parking violations bureau or joint
parking violations bureau pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4521, and to hear and
determine all criminal cases involving any moving traffic violation occurring
on a state highway located within the boundaries of the municipality, subject
to the limitations of R.C. §§ 2937.08 and 2938.04.



   (B)   (1)   In all municipalities having a population of more
than 200 not being the site of a municipal court nor a place where a judge of
a court sits as required pursuant to R.C. § 1901.021 or by designation of
the judges pursuant to R.C. § 1901.021, the Mayor has jurisdiction, subject
to the limitation contained in R.C. § 1905.03, to hear and determine
prosecutions involving a violation of an ordinance of the municipality
relating to operating a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug
of abuse, or a combination of them or relating to operating a vehicle with a
prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite
of a controlled substance in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath,
or urine, and to hear and determine criminal causes involving a violation of
R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance that occur
on a state highway located within the boundaries of the municipality, subject
to the limitations of R.C. §§ 2937.08 and 2938.04, only if the person
charged with the violation, within ten years of the date of the violation
charged, has not been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any of the following:



         (a)   A violation of an ordinance of any municipality
relating to operating a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug
of abuse, or a combination of them or relating to operating a vehicle with a
prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite
of a controlled substance in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath,
or urine;



         (b)   A violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance;



         (c)   A violation of any ordinance of any municipality
or of any section of the Revised Code that regulates the operation of
vehicles upon the streets, in relation to which all of the following apply:



            1.   The person, in the case in which the
conviction was obtained or the plea of guilty was entered, had been charged
with a violation of an ordinance of a type described in division (B)(1)(a) of
this section, or with a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance;



            2.   The charge of the violation described in
division (B)(1)(c)1. of this section was dismissed or reduced;



            3.   The violation of which the person was
convicted or to which he or she pleaded guilty arose out of the same facts
and circumstances and the same act as did the charge that was dismissed or
reduced;



         (d)   A violation of a statute of the United States or
any other state or a municipal ordinance of a municipality located in any
other state that is substantially equivalent to R.C. § 4511.19.



      (2)   The Mayor does not have jurisdiction to hear and
determine any prosecution or criminal cause involving a violation described
in division (B)(1)(a) or (b) of this section, regardless of where the
violation occurred, if the person charged with the violation, within ten
years of the violation charged, has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
any violation listed in division (B)(1)(a), (b), (c), or (d) of this section.



      (3)   If the Mayor, in hearing a prosecution involving a
violation of an ordinance of the municipality he or she serves relating to
operating a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
a combination of them or relating to operating a vehicle with a prohibited
concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a
controlled substance in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or
urine, or in hearing a criminal cause involving a violation of R.C. §
4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, determines that
the person charged, within ten years of the violation charged, has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation listed in division (B)(1)(a),
(B)(1)(b), (B)(1)(c), or (B)(1)(d) of this section, the Mayor immediately
shall transfer the case to the county court or municipal court with
jurisdiction over the violation charged, in accordance with R.C. § 1905.032.



   (C)   (1)   In all municipalities  having a population of more
than 200 not being the site of a municipal court and not being a place where
a judge of a court listed in division (A) of this section sits as required
pursuant to R.C. § 1901.021 or by designation of the judges pursuant to R.C.
§ 1901.021, the Mayor, subject to R.C. §§ 1901.031, 2937.08, and 2938.04,
has jurisdiction to hear and determine prosecutions involving a violation of
a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to R.C. §§
4510.14(A) or 4510.16 and to hear and determine criminal causes that involve
a moving traffic violation, that involve a violation of R.C. §§ 4510.14(A)
or 4510.16, and that occur on a state highway located within the boundaries
of the municipality only if all of the following apply regarding the
violation and the person charged:



         (a)   Regarding a violation of R.C. § 4510.16 or a
violation of a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to that
division, the person charged with the violation, within six years of the date
of the violation charged, has not been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any
of the following:



            1.   A violation of R.C. § 4510.16;



            2.   A violation of a municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to R.C. § 4510.16;



            3.   A violation of any municipal ordinance or
section of the Revised Code that regulates the operation of vehicles upon the
highways or streets, in a case in which, after a charge against the person of
a violation of a type described in division (C)(1)(a)1. or 2. of this section
was dismissed or reduced, the person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation that arose out of the same facts and circumstances and the same act
as did the charge that was dismissed or reduced.



         (b)   Regarding a violation of R.C. § 4510.14(A) or a
violation of a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to that
division, the person charged with the violation, within six years of the date
of the violation charged, has not been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any
of the following:



            1.   A violation of R.C. § 4510.14(A);



            2.   A violation of a municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to R.C. § 4510.14(A);



            3.   A violation of any municipal ordinance or
section of the Revised Code that regulates the operation of vehicles upon the
highways or streets, in a case in which, after a charge against the person of
a violation of a type described in division (C)(1)(b)1. or 2. of this section
was dismissed or reduced, the person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation that arose out of the same facts and circumstances and the same act
as did the charge that was dismissed or reduced.



      (2)   The Mayor does not have jurisdiction to hear and
determine any prosecution or criminal cause involving a violation described
in division (C)(1)(a)1. or 2. of this section if the person charged with the
violation, within six  years of the violation charged, has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to any violation listed in division (C)(1)(a)1. through 3.
of this section and does not have jurisdiction to hear and determine any
prosecution or criminal cause involving a violation described in division
(C)(1)(b)1. or 2. of this section if the person charged with the violation,
within six years of the violation charged, has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to any violation listed in division (C)(1)(b)1. through 3. of this
section.



      (3)   If the Mayor, in hearing a prosecution involving a
violation of an ordinance of the municipality he or she serves that is
substantially equivalent to R.C. §§ 4510.14(A) or 4510.16 or a violation of
R.C. §§ 4510.14(A) or 4510.16, determines that, under division (C)(2) of
this section, he or she does not have jurisdiction of the prosecution, the
Mayor immediately shall transfer the case to the county court or municipal
court with jurisdiction over the violation in accordance with R.C. §
1905.032.



   (D)   If the Mayor has jurisdiction pursuant to division (B)(1) of
this section to hear and determine a prosecution or criminal cause involving
a violation described in division (B)(1)(a) or (b) of this section, the
authority of the Mayor to hear or determine the prosecution or cause is
subject to the limitation contained in R.C. § 1905.03(C).  If the Mayor has
jurisdiction pursuant to division (A) or (C) of this section to hear and
determine a prosecution or criminal cause involving a violation other than a
violation described in division (B)(1)(a) or (b) of this section, the
authority of the Mayor to hear or determine the prosecution or cause is
subject to the limitation contained in R.C. § 1905.031(C).



   (E)   (1)   The Mayor of a municipal corporation does not have
the jurisdiction to hear and determine any prosecution or criminal cause
involving any of the following:



         (a)   A violation of R.C. § 2919.25 or 2919.27;



         (b)   A violation of R.C. § 2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13,
2903.211 or 2911.211 that involves a person who was a family or household
member of the defendant at the time of the violation;



         (c)   A violation a municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to an offense described in division (E)(1)(a) or
(E)(1)(b) of this section and that involves a person who was a family or
household member of the defendant at the time of the violation.



      (2)   The Mayor of a municipal corporation does not have the
jurisdiction to hear and determine a motion filed pursuant to R.C. § 2919.26
or filed pursuant to a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent
to that section or to issue a protection order pursuant to that section or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



      (3)   As used in this section, FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER has
the same meaning as in R.C. § 2919.25.



   (F)   In keeping his or her docket and files, the Mayor and a
Mayor's Court Magistrate appointed under R.C. § 1905.05 shall be governed by
the laws pertaining to county courts.



(R.C. § 1905.01)



Cross-reference:



   Mayor generally, see §§ 31.05 et seq.



§ 33.02  POWERS OF MAYOR AND MAYOR'S COURT MAGISTRATE IN CRIMINAL MATTERS.



   (A)   The Mayor has, within the corporation limits, all the powers
conferred upon sheriffs to suppress disorder the keep the peace.



   (B)   The Mayor shall award and issue all writs and process that are
necessary to enforce the administration of justice throughout the
municipality.  The Mayor shall subscribe his or her name and affix his or
her official seal to all writs, process, transcripts, and other official
papers.  A Mayor's Court Magistrate, in hearing and determining prosecutions
and criminal causes that are within the scope of his or her authority under
R.C. § 1905.05, has the same powers and duties as are granted to or imposed
upon a Mayor under this division.



   (C)   The Mayor shall be disqualified in any criminal case in which
he or she was the arresting officer, assisted in the arrest, or was present
at the time of arrest, and shall not hear the case.



(R.C. § 1905.20)



§ 33.03  DUTIES OF MAYOR AND MAYOR'S COURT MAGISTRATE; FEES; OFFICE; SEAL.



   (A)   The Mayor and a Mayor's Court Magistrate shall keep a
docket.  Neither the Mayor nor a Mayor's Court Magistrate shall retain or
receive for his or her own use any of the fines, forfeitures, fees, or costs
he or she collects.  A Mayor's Court Magistrate shall account for all such
fines, forfeitures, fees, and costs he or she collects and transfer them to
the Mayor.  The Mayor shall account for and dispose of all such fines,
forfeitures, fees, and costs he or she collects, including all such fines,
forfeitures, fees, and costs that are transferred to him or her by a Mayor's
Court Magistrate, as provided in R.C. § 733.40.



   (B)   The Mayor shall be paid such fixed annual salary as the
Legislative Authority provides under R.C. §§ 731.08 and 731.13, and a
Mayor's Court Magistrate shall receive compensation as provided in R.C. §
1905.05.



   (C)   The Mayor shall keep an office, provided by the Legislative
Authority, at a convenient place in the municipality, and shall be furnished
by the Legislative Authority with the corporate seal of the municipality. 
In the center of the seal shall be the words, “Mayor of the Village of
Minster”.



(R.C. § 1905.21)



§ 33.04  MAYOR'S COURT MAGISTRATE.



   (A)   A Mayor of a municipality that has a Mayor's Court may appoint
a person as Mayor's Court Magistrate to hear and determine prosecutions and
criminal cases in the Mayor's Court that are within the jurisdiction of the
Mayor's Court, as set forth in R.C. § 1905.01.  No person shall be
appointed as a Mayor's Court Magistrate unless the person has been admitted
to the practice of law in this state and, for a total of at least three years
preceding his or her appointment or the commencement of his or her service as
magistrate, has been engaged in the practice of law in this state or served
as a judge of a court of record in any jurisdiction in the United States, or
both.



      (1)   A person appointed as a Mayor's Court Magistrate under
this division is entitled to hear and determine prosecutions and criminal
cases in the Mayor's Court that are within the jurisdiction of the Mayor's
Court, as set forth in R.C. § 1905.01. If a Mayor is prohibited from hearing
or determining a prosecution or cause that charges a person with a violation
of R.C. § 4511.19 or a municipal OVI ordinance as defined in R.C. §
4511.181 due to the operation of R.C. § 1905.03(C), or is prohibited from
hearing or determining any other prosecution or cause due to the operation of
R.C. § 1905.031(C), the prohibition against the Mayor hearing or determining
the prosecution or causes does not affect and shall not be construed as
affecting the jurisdiction or authority of a person appointed as a Mayor's
Court Magistrate under this division to hear and determine the prosecution or
cause in accordance with this section. In hearing and determining such
prosecutions and causes, the magistrate has the same powers, duties, and
authority as does a Mayor who conducts a Mayor's Court to hear and determine
prosecutions and causes in general, including, but not limited to, the power
and authority to decide the prosecution or cause, enter judgement, and impose
sentence; the powers, duties, and authority granted to Mayors of Mayor's
Courts by this chapter, in relation to the hearing and determination of
prosecutions and causes in Mayor's Courts; and the powers, duties, and
authority granted to Mayors of Mayor's Courts by any provisions of the
Revised Code, in relation to the hearing and determination of prosecutions
and causes in Mayor's Courts. A judgement entered and a sentence imposed by a
Mayor's Court Magistrate do not have to be reviewed or approved by the Mayor
who appointed the Magistrate, and have the same force and effect as if they
had been entered or imposed by the Mayor.



      (2)   A person appointed as a Mayor's Court Magistrate under
this division is not entitled to hear or determine any prosecution or
criminal cause other than prosecutions and causes that are within the
jurisdiction of the Mayor's Court, as set forth in R.C. § 1905.01.



      (3)   A municipality that a Mayor's Court Magistrate serves
shall pay the compensation for the services of the Magistrate, which shall be
either a fixed annual salary set by the Legislative Authority or a fixed
annual amount or fees for services rendered set under a contract the
Magistrate and the municipality enter into.



   (B)   The appointment of a person as a Mayor's Court Magistrate
under division (A) of this section does not preclude the Mayor that appointed
the Magistrate, subject to the limitation contained in R.C. § 1905.03 and
the limitation contained in R.C. § 1905.031, from also hearing and
determining prosecutions and criminal causes in the Mayor's Court that are
within the jurisdiction of the Mayor's Court, as set forth in R.C. § 1905.01.



(R.C. § 1905.05)



§ 33.05  POWER TO SUSPEND DRIVER’S LICENSE IN O.V.I. CASES.



   (A)   (1)   The Mayor of a municipal corporation that has a
Mayor’s Court, and a Mayor’s Court Magistrate, are entitled to suspend,
and shall suspend, in accordance with R.C. §§ 4510.02, 4510.07, and
4511.19, the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or
nonresident operating privilege of any person who is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), of a municipal ordinance
relating to operating a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug
of abuse, or a combination of them, or of a municipal ordinance relating to
operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled
substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole blood,
blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine that is substantially equivalent to
R.C. § 4511.19(A).



      (2)   The Mayor of a municipal corporation that has a
Mayor’s Court, and a Mayor’s Court Magistrate, are entitled to suspend,
and shall suspend, in accordance with R.C. §§ 4510.02, 4510.07, and
4511.19, the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or
nonresident operating privilege of any person who is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(B) or of a municipal ordinance
relating to the operating of a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of
alcohol in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine that is
substantially equivalent to R.C. § 4511.19(B).



   (B)   Suspension of a commercial driver’s license under this
section shall be concurrent with any period of disqualification or suspension
under R.C. §§ 3123.58 or 4506.16. No person who is disqualified for life
from holding a commercial driver’s license under R.C. § 4506.16 shall be
issued a driver’s license under R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period for
which the commercial driver’s license was suspended under this section.



(R.C. § 1905.201)



Cross-reference:



   Driving while intoxicated or drugged, see § 73.01



§ 33.06  MAYOR'S COURT FINE FUND.



   There is hereby established a fund to be known as Mayor's Court Fine
Fund.



(Ord. 98-5-2, passed  - -98)



CONTEMPT OF COURT



§ 33.20  SUMMARY PUNISHMENT FOR CONTEMPT.



   A court, or judge at chambers, may summarily punish a person guilty of
misbehavior in the presence of or so near the court or judge as to obstruct
the administration of justice.



(R.C. § 2705.01)



§ 33.21  ACTS IN CONTEMPT OF COURT.



   (A)   A person guilty of any of the following acts may be punished
for contempt:



      (1)   Disobedience of, or resistance to, a lawful writ,
process, order, rule, judgment, or command of a court or officer;



      (2)   Misbehavior of an officer of the court in the
performance of official duties, or in official transactions;



      (3)   A failure to obey a subpoena duly served, or a refusal
to be sworn or to answer as a witness, when lawfully required;



      (4)   The rescue or attempted rescue of a person or of
property in the custody of an officer by virtue of an order or process of
court held by the officer;



      (5)   A failure upon the part of a person recognized to appear
as a witness in a court to appear in compliance with the terms of the
person's recognizance;



      (6)   A failure to comply with an order issued pursuant to
R.C. § 3109.19 or 3111.81;



      (7)   A failure to obey a subpoena issued by the Department of
Job and Family Services or a child support enforcement agency pursuant to
R.C. § 5101.37;



      (8)   A willful failure to submit to genetic testing, or a
willful failure to submit a child to genetic testing, as required by an order
for genetic testing issued under R.C. § 3111.41.



(R.C. § 2705.02)



   (B)   If a person summoned to appear as provided in R.C. §
2935.10(B) fails to appear without just cause and personal service of the
summons was had upon the person, he or she may be found guilty of contempt of
court, and may be fined not to exceed $20 for such contempt.  Upon failure
to appear, the court or magistrate may forthwith issue a warrant for his or
her arrest.



(R.C. § 2935.11)



§ 33.22  HEARING.



   In cases under § 33.21, a charge in writing shall be filed with the
Clerk of the Court, an entry thereof made upon the journal, and an
opportunity given to the accused to be heard, by himself, herself or
counsel.  This section does not prevent the court from issuing process to
bring the accused into court, or from holding him or her in custody pending
such proceedings.



(R.C. § 2705.03)



§ 33.23  CONTEMPT ACTION FOR FAILURE TO PAY SUPPORT, FAILURE TO COMPLY OR
INTERFERENCE WITH A VISITATION ORDER; SUMMONS.



   (A)   As used in this section, TITLE IV-D CASE has the same meaning
as in R.C. § 3125.01.



   (B)   (1)   Any party who has a legal claim to any support
ordered for a child, spouse, or former spouse may initiate a contempt action
for failure to pay the support.  In Title IV-D cases, the contempt action
for failure to pay support also may be initiated by an attorney retained by
the party who has the legal claim, the prosecuting attorney, or an attorney
of the Department of Job and Family Services or the child support enforcement
agency.



      (2)   Any parent who is granted parenting time rights under a
parenting time order or decree issued pursuant to R.C. § 3109.051 or
3109.12, any person who is granted visitation rights under a visitation order
or decree issued pursuant to R.C. § 3109.051, 3109.11 or 3109.12 or pursuant
to any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code, or any other person who is
subject to any parenting time or visitation order or decree, may initiate a
contempt action for the failure to comply with, or an interference with, the
order or decree.



   (C)   In any contempt action initiated pursuant to division (B) of
this section, the accused shall appear upon the summons and order to appear
that is issued by the court.  The summons shall include all of the following:



      (1)   Notice that failure to appear may result in the issuance
of an order of arrest, and in cases involving alleged failure to pay support,
the issuance of an order for the payment of support by withholding an amount
from the personal earnings of the accused or by withholding or deducting an
amount from some other asset of the accused;



      (2)   Notice that the accused has a right to counsel, and that
if indigent, the accused must apply for a public defender or court appointed
counsel within three business days after receipt of the summons;



      (3)   Notice that the court may refuse to grant a continuance
at the time of the hearing for the purposes of the accused obtaining counsel
if the accused fails to make a good faith effort to retain counsel or to
obtain a public defender;



      (4)   Notice of the potential penalties that could be imposed
upon the accused if the accused is found guilty of contempt for failure to
pay support or for a failure to comply with, or an interference with, a
parenting time or visitation order or decree ;



      (5)   Notice that the court may grant limited driving
privileges under R.C. § 4510.021 pursuant to a request made by the accused,
if the driver’s license was suspended based on a notice issued pursuant to
R.C. § 3123.54 by the child support enforcement agency and if the request is
accompanied by a recent non-certified copy of a driver’s abstract from the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles.



   (D)   If the accused is served as required by the Rules of Civil
Procedure or by any special statutory proceedings that are relevant to the
case, the court may order the attachment of the person of the accused upon
failure to appear as ordered by the court.



   (E)   The imposition of any penalty under § 33.25 shall not
eliminate any obligation of the accused to pay any past, present or future
support obligation or any obligation of the accused to comply with or refrain
from interfering with the parenting time or visitation order or decree.  The
court shall have jurisdiction to make a finding of contempt for the failure
to pay support and to impose the penalties set forth in § 33.25 in all cases
in which past due support is at issue even if the duty to pay support has
terminated, and shall have jurisdiction to make a finding of contempt for a
failure to comply with, or an interference with, a parenting time or
visitation order or decree and to impose the penalties set forth in § 33.25
in all cases in which the failure or interference is at issue even if the
parenting time or visitation order or decree is no longer in effect.



(R.C. § 2705.031) 



§ 33.24  RIGHT OF ACCUSED TO BAIL.



   (A)   In proceedings under § 33.21, if the writ is not returnable
forthwith, the court may fix the amount of a bond to be given by the accused,
with surety to the satisfaction of the sheriff.  Upon the return of a writ,
when it is not convenient to hear the charge without delay, the court shall
fix the amount of a bond to be given, with surety to the satisfaction of the
Clerk of the Court, for the appearance of the accused to answer the charge.



   (B)   On the execution of such bond, the accused shall be released
from custody.



(R.C. § 2705.04) 



§ 33.25  HEARING ON CONTEMPT; PENALTIES; SUPPORT ORDERS; FAILURE TO
WITHHOLD OR DEDUCT MONEY PURSUANT TO SUPPORT ORDER.



   (A)   In all contempt proceedings, the court shall conduct a
hearing.  At the hearing, the court shall investigate the charge and hear
any answer or testimony that the accused makes or offers and shall determine
whether the accused is guilty of the contempt charge.  If the accused is
found guilty, the court may impose any of the following penalties:



      (1)   For a first offense, a fine of not more than $250, a
definite term of imprisonment of not more than 30 days in jail, or both;



      (2)   For a second offense, a fine of not more than $500, a
definite term of imprisonment of not more than 60 days in jail, or both;



      (3)   For a third or subsequent offense, a fine of not more
than $1,000, a definite term of imprisonment of not more than 90 days in
jail, or both.



   (B)   In all contempt proceedings initiated pursuant to § 33.23
against an employer, the Bureau of Workers' Compensation, an employer that is
paying workers' compensation benefits, a board, board of trustees, or other
governing entity of a retirement system, person paying or distributing income
to an obligor under a support order, or financial institution that is ordered
to withhold or deduct an amount of money from the income or other assets of a
person required to pay support and that fails to withhold or deduct the
amount of money as ordered by the support order, the court may also require
the employer, the Bureau of Workers' Compensation, an employer that is paying
workers' compensation benefits, a board, board of trustees, or other
governing entity of a retirement system, person paying or distributing income
to an obligor under a support order, or financial institution to pay the
accumulated support arrearages.



(R.C. § 2705.05) 



§ 33.26  IMPRISONMENT UNTIL ORDER OBEYED.



   When the contempt consists of the omission to do an act which the
accused yet can perform, he or she may be imprisoned until he or she performs
it.



(R.C. § 2705.06) 



§ 33.27  PROCEEDINGS WHEN PARTY RELEASED ON BAIL FAILS TO APPEAR.



   If the party released on bail under § 33.24 fails to appear upon the
day named, the court may issue another order or arrest, or order the bond for
his or her appearance to be prosecuted, or both.  If the bond is prosecuted,
the measure of damages in the action is the extent of loss or injury
sustained by the aggrieved party by reason of the misconduct for which the
contempt was prosecuted, and the costs of the proceeding.  Such recovery is
for the benefit of the party injured.



(R.C. § 2705.07) 



§ 33.28  RELEASE OF PRISONER COMMITTED FOR CONTEMPT.



   When a person is committed to jail for contempt, the court or judge who
made the order may discharge him or her from imprisonment when it appears
that the public interest will not suffer thereby.



(R.C. § 2705.08) 



§ 33.29  JUDGMENT FINAL.



   The judgment and orders of a court or officer made in cases of contempt
may be reviewed on appeal.  Appeal proceedings shall not suspend execution
of the order or judgment until the person in contempt files a bond in the
court rendering the judgment, or in the court or before the officer making
the order, payable to the state, with sureties to the acceptance of the clerk
of that court, in an amount fixed by the reviewing court, or a judge thereof,
conditioned that if judgment is rendered against such person, he or she will
abide by and perform the order or judgment.



(R.C. § 2705.09) 



§ 33.30  ALTERNATIVE REMEDY.



   This subchapter furnishes a remedy in cases not provided for by another
section of this code or the Ohio Revised Code.



(R.C. § 2705.10)



CHAPTER 34:  POLICE DEPARTMENT



Section



   34.01   Marshal and Police Chief synonymous



   34.02   Appointment of Marshal



   34.03   Deputy marshals and police officers



   34.04   Auxiliary police units



   34.05   Offenses affecting employment of law enforcement officers;
probationary period; final appointment



   34.06   Removal proceedings; suspension; appeals



   34.07   General powers



   34.08   Powers and duties of Marshal



   34.09   Disposition of fines and penalties



   34.10   Property recovered by police



   34.11   Disposition to claimant



   34.12   Sale of unclaimed property; disposition of proceeds



   34.13   Expenses of storage and sale; notice



   34.14   [Reserved]



   34.15   Peace officer administering oaths; acknowledging complaints,
summonses, affidavits and returns of court orders



   34.16   Contracts for police protection; nonresident service without
contract



   34.17   Pickup of contributions to Police and Firemen’s Disability
and Pension Fund



   34.18   Manual of Policies, Procedures, Rules and Regulations adopted



   34.19   Funds established



§ 34.01  MARSHAL AND POLICE CHIEF SYNONYMOUS.



   The designation MARSHAL, wherever used in this code, is defined to
include the term POLICE CHIEF, and the designation POLICE CHIEF, wherever
used in this code, is defined to include the term MARSHAL.



§ 34.02  APPOINTMENT OF MARSHAL.



   (A)   Each municipality shall have a Marshal or designated Police
Chief, appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Legislative
Authority, who need not be a resident of the municipality at the time of
appointment, but shall become a resident thereof within six months after
appointment by the Mayor and confirmation by the Legislative Authority,
unless the residence requirement is waived by ordinance, and who shall
continue in office until removed therefrom as provided by § 34.06.



   (B)   No person shall receive an appointment under this section
unless, not more than 60 days prior to receiving an appointment, the person
has passed a physical examination given by a licensed physician, a physician
assistant, a clinical nurse specialist, a certified nurse practitioner, or a
certified nurse-midwife, showing that the person meets the physical
requirements necessary to perform the duties of Marshal as established by the
Legislative Authority.  The appointing authority shall, prior to making any
appointment, file with the Ohio police and fire pension fund a copy of the
report or findings of this licensed physician, physician assistant, clinical
nurse specialist, certified nurse practitioner, or certified nurse-midwife. 
The professional fee for the physical examination shall be paid for by the
Legislative Authority.



(R.C. § 737.15)



§ 34.03  DEPUTY MARSHALS AND POLICE OFFICERS.



   (A)   The Mayor shall, when provided for by the Legislative
Authority, and subject to its confirmation, appoint all deputy marshals,
police officers, night guards, and special police officers.  All officers
shall continue in office until removed therefrom for the cause and in the
manner provided by § 34.08.



   (B)   No person shall receive an appointment under this section
unless the person has, not more than 60 days prior to receiving appointment,
passed a physical examination given by a licensed physician, a physician
assistant, a clinical nurse specialist, a certified nurse practitioner, or a
certified nurse-midwife, showing that the person meets the physical
requirements necessary to perform the duties of the position to which the
person is to be appointed as established by the Legislative Authority.  The
appointing authority shall, prior to making any appointment, file with the
Ohio police and fire pension fund a copy of the report or findings of the
licensed physician, a physician assistant, a clinical nurse specialist, a
certified nurse practitioner, or a certified nurse-midwife.  The
professional fee for such physical examination shall be paid for by the
Legislative Authority.



(R.C. § 737.16) 



§ 34.04  AUXILIARY POLICE UNITS.



   (A)   The Legislative Authority may establish, by ordinance, an
auxiliary police unit within the police department, and provide for the
regulation of auxiliary police officers.  The Mayor shall be the executive
head of the auxiliary police unit, shall make all appointments and removals
of auxiliary police officers, subject to any general rules prescribed by the
Legislative Authority by ordinance, and shall prescribe rules for the
organization, training, administration, control, and conduct of the auxiliary
police unit.  The Marshal shall have exclusive control of the stationing and
transferring of all auxiliary police officers, under such general rules as
the Mayor prescribes.



   (B)   (1)   The Legislative Authority may establish, by
ordinance, a parking enforcement unit within the police department, and
provide for the regulation of parking enforcement officers.  The Mayor shall
be the executive head of the parking enforcement unit, shall make all
appointments and removals of parking enforcement officers, subject to any
general rules prescribed by the Legislative Authority by ordinance, and shall
prescribe rules for the organization, training, administration, control, and
conduct of the parking enforcement unit.  The Mayor may appoint parking
enforcement officers who agree to serve for nominal compensation, and persons
with physical disabilities may receive appointments as parking enforcement
officers.



      (2)   The authority of the parking enforcement officers shall
be limited to the enforcement of ordinances governing parking in handicapped
parking locations and fire lanes and any other parking ordinances specified
in the ordinance creating the parking enforcement unit.  Parking enforcement
officers shall have no other powers.



      (3)   The training of parking enforcement officers shall
include instruction in general administrative rules and procedures governing
the parking enforcement unit, the role of the judicial system as it relates
to parking regulations and enforcement, proper techniques and methods
relating to the enforcement of parking ordinances, human interaction skills,
and first aid.



(R.C. § 737.161)



§ 34.05  OFFENSES AFFECTING EMPLOYMENT OF LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS;
PROBATIONARY PERIOD; FINAL APPOINTMENT.



   (A)   Offenses affecting employment.



      (1)   As used in this section, FELONY has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 109.511.



      (2)   (a)   The Mayor shall not appoint a person as a
Marshal, a Deputy Marshal, a police officer, a night security officer, a
special police officer, or an auxiliary police officer on a permanent basis,
on a temporary basis, for a probationary term, or on other than a permanent
basis if the person previously has been convicted of or has pleaded guilty to
a felony.



         (b)   1.   The Mayor shall terminate the employment
of a Marshal, Deputy Marshal, police officer, night security officer, special
police officer, or auxiliary police officer who does either of the
following:  pleads guilty to a felony; or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor
pursuant to a negotiated plea agreement as provided in R.C. § 2929.29(D) in
which the Marshal, Deputy Marshal, police officer, night security officer,
special police officer, or auxiliary police officer agrees to surrender the
certificate awarded to that person under R.C. § 109.77.



            2.   The Mayor shall suspend from employment a
Marshal, Deputy Marshal, police officer, night security officer, special
police officer, or auxiliary police officer who is convicted, after trial, of
a felony.  If the Marshal, Deputy Marshal, police officer, night security
officer, special police officer, or auxiliary police officer files an appeal
from that conviction and the conviction is upheld by the highest court to
which the appeal is taken or if that person does not file a timely appeal,
the Mayor shall terminate that person's employment.  If the Marshal, Deputy
Marshal, police officer, night security officer, special police officer, or
auxiliary police officer files an appeal that results in that person's
acquittal of the felony or conviction of a misdemeanor, or in the dismissal
of the felony charge against that person, the Mayor shall reinstate that
person.  A Marshal, Deputy Marshal, police officer, night security officer,
special police officer, or auxiliary police officer who is reinstated under
this division shall not receive any back pay unless that person's conviction
of the felony was reversed on appeal, or the felony charge was dismissed,
because the court found insufficient evidence to convict that person of the
felony.



         (c)   This division (A)(2) of this section does not
apply regarding an offense that was committed prior to January 1, 1997.



         (d)   The suspension from employment, or the termination
of the employment, of a Marshal, Deputy Marshal, police officer, night
security officer, special police officer, or auxiliary police officer under
division (A)(2)(b) of this section shall be in accordance with R.C. Chapter
119.



(R.C. § 737.162)



   (B)   Probationary period; final appointment.  Any appointments
made shall be for a probationary period of six months continuous service, and
no appointments shall be deemed finally made until the appointee has
satisfactorily served his or her probationary period.  At the end of the
probationary period the Mayor shall transmit to the Legislative Authority a
record of the employee's service with his or her recommendations thereon; and
with the concurrence of the Legislative Authority, the Mayor may remove or
finally appoint the employee.



(R.C. § 737.17)



§ 34.06  REMOVAL PROCEEDINGS; SUSPENSION; APPEALS.



   (A)   Except as provided in § 34.05(A), if the Mayor has reason to
believe that a duly appointed Marshal of the municipality has been guilty of
incompetency, inefficiency, dishonesty, drunkenness, immoral conduct,
insubordination, discourteous treatment of the public, neglect of duty, or
any other acts of misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in the performance
of his or her official duty, the Mayor shall file with the Legislative
Authority written charges against the person, setting forth in detail the
reason therefor and immediately shall serve a true copy thereof upon the
person against whom they are made.



   (B)   Charges filed under this section shall be heard at the next
regular meeting of the Legislative Authority occurring not less that five
days after the date the charges have been served on the person against whom
they are made.  The person against whom charges are filed may appear in
person and by counsel at the hearing, examine all witnesses, and answer all
charges against him or her.



   (C)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the Legislative Authority
may dismiss the charges, suspend the accused from office for not more than 60
days, or remove the accused from office.



   (D)   Action of the Legislative Authority removing or suspending the
accused from office shall require the affirmative vote of two-thirds of all
elected members.



   (E)   In the case of removal from office, the person so removed may
appeal on questions of law and fact the decision of the Legislative Authority
to the Court of Common Pleas.  The person shall take the appeal within ten
days from the date of the finding of the Legislative Authority.



(R.C. § 737.171)



§ 34.07  GENERAL POWERS.



   (A)   The Marshal shall be the peace officer of the municipality and
the executive head, under the Mayor, of the police force.  The Marshal, and
the deputy marshals, police officers, or night security officers under him or
her shall have the powers conferred by law upon police officers in all
municipalities of the state, and other powers not inconsistent with the
nature of their offices as are conferred by ordinance.



   (B)   A Marshal, Deputy Marshal, or police officer of a municipality
may participate, as the director of an organized crime task force established
under R.C. § 177.02 or as a member of the investigatory staff of such a task
force, in an investigation of organized criminal activity in any counties in
this state under R.C. §§ 177.01 through 177.03.



(R.C. § 737.18)



§ 34.08  POWERS AND DUTIES OF MARSHAL.



   (A)   The Marshal has exclusive authority over the stationing and
transfer of all deputies, officers, and employees within the police
department under the general rules that the Mayor prescribes.



   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in § 34.05(A), the Marshal has
the exclusive right to suspend any of the deputies, officers, or employees in
the police department who are under the management and control of the Marshal
for incompetence, gross neglect of duty, gross immorality, habitual
drunkenness, failure to obey orders given them by the proper authority, or
for any other reasonable or just cause.



      (2)   If an employee is suspended under this section, the
Marshal immediately shall certify this fact in writing, together with the
cause for the suspension, to the Mayor and immediately shall serve a true
copy of the charge upon the person against whom they are made.  Within five
days after receiving this certification, the Mayor shall inquire into the
cause of the suspension and shall render a judgment on it.  If the Mayor
sustains the charges, the judgment of the Mayor may be for the person's
suspension, reduction in rank, or removal from the department.



      (3)   Suspensions of more than three days, reduction in rank,
or removal from the department under this section may be appealed to the
Legislative Authority within five days from the date of the Mayor's
judgment.  The Legislative Authority shall hear the appeal at its next
regularly scheduled meeting.  The person against whom the judgment has been
rendered may appear in person and by counsel at the hearing, examine all
witnesses and answer all charges against him or her.



      (4)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the Legislative
Authority may dismiss the charges, uphold the Mayor's judgment, or modify the
judgment to one of suspension for not more than 60 days, reduction in rank,
or removal from the department.



      (5)   Action of the Legislative Authority removing or
suspending the accused from the department requires the affirmative vote of
two-thirds of all members elected to it.



      (6)   In the case of removal from the department, the person
so removed may appeal on questions of law and fact the decision of the
Legislative Authority to the Court of Common Pleas of the county in which the
municipality is situated.  The person shall take the appeal within ten days
from the date of the finding of the Legislative Authority.



   (C)   The Marshal shall suppress all riots, disturbances, and
breaches of the peace, and to that end may call upon the citizens to aid him
or her.  The Marshal shall arrest all disorderly persons in the
municipality, and pursue and arrest any person fleeing from justice in any
part of the state.  The Marshal shall arrest any person in the act of
committing an offense against the laws of the state or the ordinances of the
municipality, and forthwith bring the person before the Mayor or other
competent authority for examination or trial.  The Marshal shall receive and
execute proper authority for the arrest and detention of criminals fleeing or
escaping from other places or states.



   (D)   In the discharge of his or her duties, the Marshal shall have
the powers and be subject to the responsibilities of constables, and for
services performed by the Marshal or his or her deputies the same fees and
expenses shall be taxed as are allowed constables.



(R.C. § 737.19)



§ 34.09  DISPOSITION OF FINES AND PENALTIES.



   All fees, costs, fines, and penalties collected by the Marshal shall
immediately be paid to the Mayor, who shall report to the Legislative
Authority monthly the amount thereof, from whom and for what purpose
collected, and when paid to the Mayor.



(R.C. § 737.20)



§ 34.10  PROPERTY RECOVERED BY POLICE.



   (A)   Stolen or other property recovered by members of the police
force shall be deposited and kept in a place designated by the Mayor.  Each
article shall be entered in a book kept for that purpose, with the name of
the owner, if ascertained, the person from whom taken, the place where found
with general circumstances, the date of its receipt, and the name of the
officer recovering it.



   (B)   An inventory of all money or other property shall be given to
the party from whom taken, and, in case it is not claimed by some person
within 30 days after arrest and seizure, it shall be delivered to the person
from whom taken, and to no other person, either attorney, agent, factor, or
clerk, except by special order of the Mayor.



(R.C. § 737.29)



§ 34.11  DISPOSITION TO CLAIMANT.



   If, within 30 days, the money or property recovered under § 34.10 is
claimed by any person other than the person from whom the property was
recovered from, it shall be retained by the custodian thereof until after the
discharge or conviction of the person from whom it was taken, and so long as
it may be required as evidence in any case in court.  If the claimant
establishes to the satisfaction of the court that he or she is the rightful
owner, it shall be restored to him or her; otherwise, it shall be returned to
the accused person, personally, and not to any attorney, agent, factor, or
clerk of the accused person, except upon special order of the Mayor after all
liens and claims in favor of the municipality have first been discharged and
satisfied.



(R.C. § 737.31)



§ 34.12  SALE OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY; DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this section and unless the
property involved is required to be disposed of pursuant to another section
of the Ohio Revised Code, property that is unclaimed for 90 days or more
shall be sold by the Marshal, Police Chief or licensed auctioneer at public
auction, after notice of the sale has been provided by publication once a
week for three successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the
county or as provided in R.C. § 7.16. The proceeds of the sale shall be paid
to the Treasurer and shall be credited to the general fund of the
municipality.



   (B)   If authorized to do so by an ordinance adopted by the
Legislative Authority of the municipality and if the property involved is not
required to be disposed of pursuant to another section of the Ohio Revised
Code, the Police Chief or Marshal may contribute property that is unclaimed
for 90 days or more to one or more public agencies, to one or more nonprofit
organizations no part of the net income of which inures to the benefit of any
private shareholder or individual and no substantial part of the activities
of which consists of carrying on propaganda or otherwise attempting to
influence legislation, or to one or more organizations satisfying IRC
501(c)(3) or (c)(19).



(R.C. § 737.32)



§ 34.13  EXPENSES OF STORAGE AND SALE; NOTICE.



   Upon the sale of any unclaimed or impounded property as provided in §
34.12, if any such unclaimed or impounded property was ordered removed to a
place of storage or stored, or both, by or under the direction of the Police
Chief or Marshal, any expenses or charges for such removal or storage, or
both, and costs of sale, provided the same are approved by such Police Chief
or Marshal, shall first be paid from the proceeds of such sale.  Notice
shall be given by registered mail 30 days before the date of sale to the
owner and mortgagee, or other lien holder, at their last known address.



(R.C. § 737.33)



§ 34.14  [RESERVED].



§ 34.15  PEACE OFFICER ADMINISTERING OATHS; ACKNOWLEDGING COMPLAINTS,
SUMMONSES, AFFIDAVITS AND RETURNS OF COURT ORDERS.



   (A)   As used in this section, PEACE OFFICER has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 2935.01, except that PEACE OFFICER does not include, for any
purpose, the superintendent or any trooper of the State Highway Patrol.



   (B)   A peace officer who has completed a course of in-service
training that includes training in the administration of oaths and the
acknowledgment of documents and that is approved by the chief legal officer
of the political subdivision in which the peace officer is elected or of the
political subdivision or other entity in which or by which the peace officer
is appointed or employed may administer oaths and acknowledge criminal and
juvenile complaints, summonses, affidavits, and returns of court orders in
matters related to the peace officer's official duties.



   (C)    A trooper of the State Highway Patrol who has completed a
course of in-service training that includes training in the administration of
oaths and the acknowledgment of documents and that is approved by the Ohio
Director of Public Safety may administer oaths and acknowledge criminal and
juvenile court complaints, summonses, affidavits, and returns of court orders
in matters related to the trooper's official duties.



   (D)   Excepts a authorized by division (B) or (C) of this section,
no peace officer or trooper who has completed a course of in-service training
of a type described in division (B) or (C) of this section shall knowingly
perform any act that is specifically required of a notary public unless the
peace officer or trooper has complied with R.C. Chapter 147.



(R.C. § 2935.081)



§ 34.16  CONTRACTS FOR POLICE PROTECTION; NONRESIDENT SERVICE WITHOUT
CONTRACT.



   (A)   The Legislative Authority, in order to obtain police
protection or to obtain additional police protection or to allow police
officers to work in multi-jurisdictional drug, gang or career criminal task
forces, may enter into contracts with one or more municipal corporations,
townships, township police districts, joint police districts, or county
sheriffs in the state, with one or more park districts created pursuant to
R.C. § 511.18 or 1545.01, with one or more port authorities, or with a
contiguous municipal corporation in an adjoining state, upon any terms that
are agreed upon, for services of police departments or the use of police
equipment or for the interchange of services of police departments or police
equipment within the several territories of the contracting subdivisions.



   (B)   The provisions of R.C. Chapter 2744, insofar as it applies to
the operation of police departments, shall apply to the contracting political
subdivisions and to the Police Department members when they are rendering
service outside their own subdivisions pursuant to the contracts.



   (C)   Police Department members acting outside the subdivision in
which they are employed, pursuant to a contract entered into under this
section, shall be entitled to participate in any indemnity fund established
by their employer to the same extent as while acting within the employing
subdivision. Those members shall be entitled to all the rights and benefits
of R.C. Chapter 4123, to the same extent as while performing service within
the subdivision.



   (D)   The contracts may provide for:



      (1)   A fixed annual charge to be paid at the times agreed
upon and stipulated in the contract;



      (2)   Compensation based upon:



         (a)   A stipulated price for each call or emergency;



         (b)   The number of members or pieces of equipment
employed; or



         (c)   The elapsed time of service required in each call
or emergency;



      (3)   Compensation for loss or damage to equipment while
engaged in rendering police services outside the limits of the political
subdivision owning and furnishing the equipment; and



      (4)   Reimbursement of the political subdivision in which the
police department members are employed for any indemnity award or premium
contribution assessed against the employing subdivision for workers’
compensation benefits for injuries or death of its police department members
occurring while engaged in rendering police services pursuant to the contract.



(R.C. § 737.04)



   (E)   Nonresident service without contract.



      (1)    The Police Department may provide police protection to
any county, municipal corporation, township or township police district, or
joint police district of the state, to a park district created pursuant to
R.C. § 511.18 or 1545.01, to a port authority, to any multi-jurisdictional
drug, gang or career criminal task force, or to a governmental entity of an
adjoining state without a contract to provide police protection, upon the
approval, by resolution, of the Legislative Authority and upon authorization
by an officer or employee of the Police Department who is designated by title
of office or position, pursuant to the resolution of the Legislative
Authority, to give the authorization.



      (2)   The provisions of R.C. Chapter 2744, insofar as it
applies to the operation of police departments, shall apply to the
municipality and to members of its Police Department when the members are
rendering police services pursuant to this section outside the municipality.



      (3)   Police Department members acting, as provided in this
section, outside the municipality, shall be entitled to participate in any
pension or indemnity fund established by their employer to the same extent as
while acting within the municipality. Those members shall be entitled to all
the rights and benefits of R.C. Chapter 4123, to the same extent as while
performing services within the municipality.



(R.C. § 737.041)



§ 34.17  PICK UP OF CONTRIBUTIONS TO POLICE AND FIREMEN’S DISABILITY AND
PENSION FUND.



   (A)   Effective May 31, 1998, the full amount of the statutorily
required contributions to the Police and Firemen's Disability and Pension
Fund of Ohio shall be withheld from the gross pay of each person within any
of the classes established in division (B) below shall be “picked up”
(assumed and paid to the Police and Firemen's Disability and Pension Fund of
Ohio) by the village. This “pick up” by the village, is and shall be
designated as, public employee contributions and shall be in lieu of
contributions to the Police and Firemen's Disability and Pension Fund of Ohio
by each person within any of the classes established in division (B) below.
No person subject to this “pick up” shall have the option of choosing to
receive the statutorily required contribution to the Police and Firemen's
Disability and Pension Fund of Ohio directly instead of having it “picked
up” by the village or of being excluded from the “pick up.” The village
shall, in reporting and making remittance to the Police and Firemen's
Disability and Pension Fund of Ohio report that the public employee's
contribution for each person subject to this “pick up” has been made as
provided by the statute.



   (B)   The “pick up” by the village provided by this section
shall apply to all persons that are employees of the village who are or
become contributing members of the Police and Firemen's Disability and
Pension Fund of Ohio, except those deemed seasonal and part-time employees.



   (C)   The village's method of payment of salary to employees who are
participants in PFDPF is hereby modified as follows, in order to provide for
a salary reduction pick up of employee contributions to PFDPF.



   (D)   The total salary for each employee shall be the salary
otherwise payable under the village policies. Such total salary of each
employee shall be payable by the village in two parts: (a) deferred salary
and (b) cash salary. An employee's deferred salary shall be equal to that
percentage of that employee's total salary which is required from time to
time by PFDPF to be paid as an employee contribution by that employee, and
shall be paid by the Village to PFDPF on behalf of that employee as a pick up
in lieu of the PFDPF employee contribution otherwise payable by that
employee. An employee's cash salary shall be equal to that employee's total
salary less the amount of the pick up for that employee, and shall be
payable, subject to applicable payroll deductions, to that employee. The
village shall compute and remit its employer contributions to PFDPF based
upon an employee's total salary. The total combined expenditures of the
village for such employees' total salaries payable under applicable village
policies and the pick-up provisions of this section shall not be greater than
the amounts it would have paid for those items had this provision not been in
effect.



   (E)   The Clerk-Treasurer and/or Deputy Clerk are hereby authorized
and directed to implement the provisions of this section to institute the
“pick up” of the statutorily required contributions to the Police and
Firemen's Disability and Pension Fund of Ohio for those persons reflected in
division (B) herein so as to enable them to obtain the result in federal and
state tax deferments and other benefits.



(Ord. 98-4-5, passed 5-5-98)



§ 34.18  MANUAL OF POLICIES, PROCEDURES, RULES AND REGULATIONS ADOPTED.



   (A)   There is hereby adopted the Manual of Policies, Procedures,
Rules and Regulations, most current edition, as the governing policies,
procedures, rules and regulations for the Police Department.  The Manual is
adopted by reference and made a part of this code, the same as if set forth
in full herein.



   (B)   The Chief of Police shall have authority to establish
additional policies, procedures, rules and regulations, and shall have
authority to abolish, revise or modify existing policies, procedures, rules
and regulations, after consultation with, and approval by, the Mayor.



   (C)   The Council retains all of its lawful authority to adopt, by
ordinance or resolution, policies, procedures, rules and regulations
governing the Police Department. In any case of conflict between an ordinance
or resolution and a policy, procedure, rule or regulation established by the
Chief of Police, the ordinance or resolution shall be given effect.



(Ord. 86-  , passed 12-15-86)



§ 34.19  FUNDS ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   A Law Enforcement Trust Fund is hereby established pursuant to
the provisions of R.C. § 2933.43 (D)(1) for the receipt of proceeds and
monies forfeited pursuant to provisions of the Ohio Revised Code.



   (B)   A Mandatory Drug Fund is hereby established pursuant to the
provisions of R.C. § 2925.03 (F) for the  receipt of mandatory drug
offenses fines imposed pursuant to the Ohio Revised Code.



   (C)   A Law Enforcement and Education Fund is hereby established
pursuant to the provisions of R.C. § 4511.99 (A)(1) for receipt of funds
from fines imposed for violations of provisions of the Ohio Revised Code
prohibiting the operation of a motor vehicle while under the influence of
alcohol or drugs.



(Ord. 95-3-4, passed 3-21-95)



CHAPTER 35:  VILLAGE INVESTMENT POLICY



Section



   35.01   Purpose



   35.02   Policy statement



   35.03   Scope



   35.04   Investment objectives



   35.05   Personal conduct and qualifications



   35.06   Delegation of authority



   35.07   Ethics



   35.08   Internal controls



   35.09   Treasury Investment Board



   35.10   Transactions



   35.11   Authorized investments



   35.12   Prohibited investments



   35.13   Diversification



   35.14   Competitive bidding



   35.15   Safekeeping and custody



   35.16   Collateralization of village deposits



   35.17   Reporting and performance standards



   35.18   Legislative action required



   35.19   List of authorized investment instruments



§ 35.01  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of this policy is to provide for the prudent
management of all public funds in accordance with the stated investment
philosophy of the Clerk-Treasurer as fiscal officer for the village. The
Fiscal Officer and all staff members shall adhere to this policy, R.C.
Chapter 135, and all other applicable laws and regulations at all times.



   (B)   This policy has been approved and adopted by the Fiscal
Officer, and the Village Council, and a copy has been filed with the Auditor
of the State of Ohio as required by R.C. § 135.14.



(Ord. 98-6-7, passed  - -98)



§ 35.02  POLICY STATEMENT.



   It is the policy of the village to deposit and invest public funds in a
manner which will provide the maximum security with adequate investment
return while meeting the daily cash flow demands of the village and
conforming to all state and local statutes governing the investment of public
funds.



(Ord. 98-6-7, passed  - -98)



§ 35.03  SCOPE.



   This investment and deposit policy applies to all moneys of the
village, except for moneys whose investment and deposit are otherwise
controlled by an independent board, advisory council, or trustee under
requirements of bond indentures or endowment trusts (as in the case of
certain bond debt service funds and debt service reserve funds, and certain
nonexpandable trust funds). The village funds subject to this policy are
hereinafter referred to as the “active portfolio.” Cash balances from the
several different funds of the village may be pooled for investment purposes.
Unless otherwise restricted by law, ordinance or trust agreement, all
interest earnings will be credited to the general fund of the village.



(Ord. 98-6-7, passed  - -98)



§ 35.04  INVESTMENT OBJECTIVES.



   (A)   Preservation of principal. The primary investments objective
is preservation of principal. To meet this objective, portfolio
diversification will be established and maintained with a goal of generating
portfolio income that exceeds any losses in individual security values. The
village will diversify its investments to avoid incurring unreasonable and
avoidable risks regarding specific security types or individual financial
institutions. It is recognized that occasional losses are inevitable and such
possibility will be considered in evaluating diversification decisions and
investment strategy. All investment and deposit transactions must be made in
conformance with all applicable laws and ordinances prevailing at the time of
transaction.



   (B)   Liquidity. The second investment objective is maintenance of
liquidity of assets. The village's investment portfolio will remain
sufficiently liquid to enable the village to meet operating requirements
which might be reasonably anticipated. No investment will be made unless, at
the time the investment is made, the Fiscal Officer reasonably believes that
the investment can be held until maturity. However, an investment may be sold
prior to maturity if the Fiscal Officer determines that such sale is prudent.



   (C)   Income maximization. Income maximization is the third
investment objective. To accomplish this objective, the investment portfolio
will be managed with the goal of producing income returns within acceptable
risk parameters. High financial risk is unacceptable. Thus, moderate income
volatility will be permitted, but no investments which are expected to be
subject to large interest rate fluctuations will be made.



   (D)   Minimization of cost of services. The fourth objective is to
minimize transaction costs. To meet this objective, relationships with
securities dealers, investment bankers and other entities providing
investment services will be carefully managed to secure high quality services
while simultaneously minimizing costs.



(Ord. 98-6-7, passed  - -98)



§ 35.05  PERSONAL CONDUCT AND QUALIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Standards of conduct.



      (1)   The Fiscal Officer and staff must continually be aware
of the fiduciary nature of their responsibility for investing the public
funds under their control. All persons responsible for investment decisions
or who are involved in the management of the village's assets shall comply
with all applicable Ohio and federal statutes and regulations, the codes of
conduct established by the National Association of Securities Dealers and the
Securities and Exchange Commission, and the Code of Ethics and Standards of
Professional Conduct of the Association for Investment Management and
Research.



      (2)   The Fiscal Officer and staff members are prohibited from
having any direct or indirect interests in any of the investments made by the
Fiscal Officer and from receiving payment, bonuses, or other compensation for
investment services in excess of their regular compensation.



   (B)   Continuing education. The Fiscal Officer will annually
complete the continuing education programs provided by the Treasurer of State
and as required pursuant to R.C. §§ 117.44, 135.22 and 733.27. Through
participation in these programs, the Fiscal Officer will develop an enhanced
working knowledge and background in investment, case management, and ethics.



(Ord. 98-6-7, passed  - -98)



§ 35.06  DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY.



   Authority to manage the village's deposits and investment program is
derived from the Ohio Revised Code. The Fiscal Officer, as Chief Financial
Officer of the village, shall be charged with the administration of this
policy. The Fiscal Officer shall have the right to assign such duties and
responsibilities as he or she deems appropriate in keeping with the efficient
and prudent management of such policy. Such assignment shall include explicit
delegation of authority to persons responsible for investment transactions.
No person may engage in an investment transaction except as provided under
the terms of this policy and the procedures adopted by the Treasury
Investment Board.



(Ord. 98-6-7, passed  - -98)



§ 35.07  ETHICS.



   (A)   Officers and employees involved in the deposit and investment
process shall refrain from personal business activity that could conflict
with proper execution of the investment program, or which could impair their
ability to make impartial investment decisions.



   (B)   Officers and employees involved in the deposit and investment
of village funds shall disclose to the village's independent auditors any
material financial interests in financial institutions that conduct business
with the village and further disclose any large personal financial/investment
positions that could be related to the performance of the village's portfolio.



   (C)   Officers and employees involved in the investment of village
funds shall subordinate their personal investment transactions to those of
the village's particularly with regard to the time of purchases and sales.



(Ord. 98-6-7, passed  - -98)



§ 35.08  INTERNAL CONTROLS.



   The Fiscal Officer shall have established a system of internal controls
to regulate the activities of subordinate officials. Such internal controls
and compliance therewith shall be subject to review during the annual audit
conducted by or on behalf of the Auditor of the State of Ohio.



(Ord. 98-6-7, passed  - -98)



§ 35.09  TREASURY INVESTMENT BOARD.



   (A)   The Mayor, the Clerk-Treasurer, Village Administrator and the
Village Solicitor shall constitute the Treasury Investment Board.



   (B)   The Treasury Investment Board shall monitor the investment of
village funds in conformance with the investment policy herein established.
Monitoring shall consist of a review performed at least quarterly of reports
from the Fiscal Officer as required by the appropriate section of this policy.



   (C)   The Treasury Investment Board may order the Fiscal Officer to
liquidate current holdings for good cause.



(Ord. 98-6-7, passed  - -98)



§ 35.10  TRANSACTIONS.



   (A)   A copy of this policy shall be provided to all securities
dealers, investment bankers, and other entities doing investment business
with the village. Other interested parties may receive a copy upon request.



   (B)   No securities dealer, investment banker or other entity may
provide investment services to the village unless its representative has
reviewed, signed and agreed on behalf of the entity to abide by the terms of
this policy. In signing this policy, the representative acknowledges that the
entity assumes full responsibility for recommending and making investments in
violation of any Ohio or federal statute or  regulation, regulation or code
of conduct established by the National Association of Securities Dealers or
the Securities and Exchange Commission, the terms of this policy, or any
other applicable law.



   (C)   While every effort will be made to obtain appropriate
discounts, investment firms will be selected to achieve the best possible
transaction execution. The fact that a particular firm provides statistical
and market information and services will be considered in the selection
process. All investment firms selected shall be qualified to do business in
the State of Ohio, have all appropriate licenses, be in good standing with
the Securities and Exchange Commission, the National Association of
Securities Dealers, the Ohio Department of Commerce' s Division of
Securities, and be on the list of investment firms approved by the Fiscal
Officer. A periodic review of the investment firm's capital and disciplinary
standing will be conducted and necessary changes in the list of approved
investment firms will be approved by the Fiscal Officer.



   (D)   All securities orders shall be placed according to accepted
investment practices. All receipts confirming securities transactions will
include the trade date, par value, maturity, interest rate, price, yield,
settlement date, description of securities purchased, investment firm, amount
due, and third party custodial information. Confirmation receipts will be
received within three business days after the trade, and payment for
investments shall only be made upon receipt of the securities.



   (E)   All securities dealers, investment bankers, and other entities
providing investment services to the village are prohibited from having any
direct or indirect interests in any of the investments made by the Fiscal
Officer and from receiving payment, bonuses or other compensation for
investment services in excess of their regular compensation. As used in this
policy, REGULAR COMPENSATION includes the reasonable and agreed upon fees,
commissions and other compensation customarily associated with securities
transactions earned by outside securities dealers, investment bankers and
other entities providing investment services to the village.



(Ord. 98-6-7, passed  - -98)



§ 35.11  AUTHORIZED INVESTMENTS.



   (A)   The Fiscal Officer may invest on behalf of the and in the name
of the village in only those instruments which appear on the List of
Authorized Investment Instruments (§ 35.19) and only at a price not
exceeding their fair market value. The List of Authorized Investment
Instruments will be updated by the Fiscal Officer as necessary and will be
kept on file in the Clerk-Treasurer's Office.



   (B)   Securities eligible for inclusion in the list of authorized
investments are defined by R.C. §§ 135.14 and 135.45 and include:



      (1)   Bonds, notes or other obligations of or guaranteed by
the United States, or those for which the faith of the United States is
pledged for the payment of principal and interest thereon;



      (2)   Bonds, notes, debentures, or any other obligations or
securities issued by any federal government agency or instrumentality;



      (3)   Deposits in eligible financial institutions;



      (4)   Bonds, notes, or other obligations of the State of Ohio.



   (C)   The State Treasury Asset Reserve of Ohio (STAR Ohio);
effective July 1, 1997, the village may not invest in STAR Ohio if the fund
does not maintain the highest letter ratings provided by at least one of the
nationally recognized standard rating services.



   (D)   No-load money market mutual funds consisting exclusively of
obligations described in divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2) above.



   (E)   Repurchase agreements with institutions which have executed a
master repurchase agreement entered into between the village and that
particular institution. Each master repurchase agreement will provide for:



      (1)   Collateralization of each repurchase agreement
consisting exclusively of obligations described in divisions (B)(1) and
(B)(2) above, and having a market value which is not less than 102% of the
principal amount of each repurchase agreement plus accrued interest;



      (2)   Safekeeping of the collateral through a third party that
is acceptable to the Fiscal Officer; and



      (3)   Settlement of each repurchase agreement on a
delivery-versus-payment basis.



   (F)   Master repurchase agreements may provide for substitution of
collateral by the broker/dealer with the agreement of the village.



(Ord. 98-6-7, passed  - -98)



§ 35.12  PROHIBITED INVESTMENTS.



   (A)   The following investments and investment practices are
prohibited.



      (1)   Investments in derivatives or in no-load money market
mutual funds that invest in derivatives. DERIVATIVE is defined by R.C. §
135.01(0) as any financial instrument that is separate from the financial
instrument itself. Any security that is based upon an issue of the United
States Treasury or an obligation of the federal agency is a derivative.
However, a security issued by the United States Treasury, other federal
agency or instrumentality, the State of Ohio, or any political subdivision of
the state is not considered to be a derivative even though it has a variable
interest rate based upon a single interest payment or single index consisting
of other securities issued or guaranteed by the United States, provided that
such variable interest rate investment has a maximum maturity of two years.



      (2)   Investments in stripped principal or interest
obligations.



      (3)   Investments in a fund established by another county,
subdivision, treasurer, or governing board for the purpose of investing the
public funds of other subdivisions, other than STAR Ohio and funds
established to acquire, construct, lease or operate a municipal utility.



      (4)   Repurchase agreements whereby the Fiscal Officer agrees
to repurchase securities (reverse repos).



      (5)   Sale of taxable notes for the purpose of arbitrage.



      (6)   Use of current investment assets as collateral to
purchase other assets.



      (7)   Contracting to sell securities that have not yet been
acquired on speculation that bond prices will decline.



   (B)   To the extent possible, the village will attempt to match the
term to maturity of its investments with anticipated cash flow requirements.
The village will not directly invest in securities maturing more than five
years from the date of settlement. A security trading on a “When Issued”
basis may be purchased or sold if all aspects of the security and the trade
meet the requirements of this policy and the settlement date is no longer
than 30 days after the trade date.



(Ord. 98-6-7, passed  - -98)



§ 35.13  DIVERSIFICATION.



   (A)   To avoid incurring unreasonable risks inherent in
over-investment in specific instruments, individual financial institutions,
dealers or maturities, the Fiscal Officer will diversify the active portfolio
as follows:



 


Instrument Type

 

Maximum Percent of Active Portfolio

 

Maximum Percent of Portfolio by Obligor



U.S. Treasury obligations
 

100%

 

100%



Authorized U.S. Federal Agency Securities and U.S. government-sponsored
corporations and instrumentalities
 

100%

 

50%



Nonnegotiable certificates of deposit
 

100%

 

50%



State of Ohio Treasurer’s Investment Pool (STAR Ohio)
 

100%

 

100%




 



   (B)   With regard to secondary market securities, no more than 50%
of the village's active portfolio at any point in time will have been
purchased through any one broker/dealer.



   (C)   No transaction needs to be executed when, through inadvertence
or unusual circumstances, a maturity in the active portfolio causes the
percentage of a type or category of investment to exceed the diversification
limits set forth above. Any transactions after such infraction shall work
toward returning to compliance.



   (D)   The Treasury Investment Board may set lower limits on the
amount of funds which can be placed at any investment category.



(Ord. 98-6-7, passed  - -98)



§ 35.14  COMPETITIVE BIDDING.



   (A)   The purpose of competitive bidding is to strengthen the
investment program in terms of level and consistency of performance. When
purchasing securities, the Fiscal Officer will obtain the minimum number of
offerings as follows:



 


Type of Security

 

Minimum Acceptable Number of Offerings



Government securities (secondary market)
 

2



Nonnegotiable certificates of deposit
 

2




 



   (B)   When selling any type of security, the Fiscal Officer will use
his/her best efforts to obtain a minimum of three bids. The right is reserved
to reject the offering or bid yielding the highest return if inconsistent
with the village's investment strategy, i.e., maturity, risk,
diversification, liquidity, etc.



   (C)   Price and rate quotations on all trades shall be obtained from
authorized financial institutions and dealers within and outside the village.
In the case of the purchase or sale of securities where all other factors are
considered by the Fiscal Officer to be equal, placement will be made in favor
of the institution situated within the village if two or more offerings or
bids are the same.



(Ord. 98-6-7, passed  - -98)



§ 35.15  SAFEKEEPING AND CUSTODY.



   In order to minimize default-risk the Fiscal Officer will require
delivery of investment instruments as follows:



   (A)   Government securities.



      (1)   All authorized investment securities shall be settled
“delivery versus payment” method. Book entry or physical securities shall
be safe kept by a third-party safekeeping agent, in the agent's (a) Federal
Reserve customer account, (b) correspondent money center bank customer
custody account, or (c) Depository Trust Corporation (DTC) customer custody
account.



      (2)   As an alternative, at the option of the village,
securities may be safe kept by recognized primary government securities
dealers and the securities dealer subsidiaries of Ohio based financial
institutions if the securities are segregated from dealer securities into
customer custodial accounts.



      (3)   Each delivery and safekeeping shall be evidenced by a
safekeeping receipt.



   (B)   Nonnegotiable interest bearing time certificates of deposit



      (1)   The village will take possession for safekeeping in its
own vaults, all certificates of deposit or document(s) evidencing a
certificate of deposit in accordance with R.C. § 135.14, the acceptable time
of delivery being not later than 2:00 p.m. the day of settlement.



      (2)   In the event that the certificate of deposit or
document(s) evidencing the certificate of deposit must be prepared at a home
office of the issuing bank outside the village, the village will require an
overnight safekeeping document and delivery of the certificate of deposit or
document(s) evidencing a certificate of deposit no later than 12:00 noon the
first business day after the date of settlement.



   (C)   Repurchase agreements. See section on Authorized Investment
Instruments. (§ 35.11)



(Ord. 98-6-7, passed  - -98)



§ 35.16  COLLATERALIZATION OF VILLAGE DEPOSITS.



   (A)   With the approval of the Fiscal Officer, a depository may
provide collateral for deposits of the village with a single pool of
securities pledged toward all deposits of public funds held by the depository
in the manner provided in R.C. § 135.181.



   (B)   Unless secured in the manner provided in R.C. § 135.181, all
deposits of the village shall be secured by pledged collateral in the manner
provided in R.C. § 135.18.



   (C)   The method of collateralization of village deposits shall be
set forth in a depository agreement between the village and the depository
institution. The depository agreement, in accordance with requirements set
forth by the Federal Depository Insurance Corporation, shall be:



      (1)   In writing;



      (2)   Executed by the depository institution and any person
claiming as adverse interest thereunder, including the obligor,
contemporaneously with the acquisition of the asset by the depository
institution;



      (3)   Approved by the board of directors of the depository
institution or its loan committee, which approval shall be reflected in the
minutes of said board of committee;



      (4)   Be continuously, from the date of its execution, an
official record of the depository institution; and



      (5)   Approved by the Village Solicitor.



(Ord. 98-6-7, passed  - -98)



§ 35.17  REPORTING AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   (A)   The Fiscal Officer will be responsible for providing regular
quarterly reports to the Treasury Investment Board and regular semi-annual
reports to the Village Council about the village's investment activities. The
report should include at least a summary of the village's portfolio by
institution and types of instruments, average maturity and changes in
portfolio size by fund.



   (B)   In order to give the Treasury Investment Board a basis by
which to determine whether market yields have been achieved, the quarterly
reports shall show the active portfolio's average current yield for the
quarter as compared to that quarter's average current yield of U.S. treasury
bills or notes of similar average maturity. When this comparison produces a
positive or negative variance in excess of 100 basis points such variance
shall be explained in writing within the quarterly report.



(Ord. 98-6-7, passed  - -98)



§ 35.18  LEGISLATIVE ACTION REQUIRED.



   Inasmuch that this policy has been enacted by Ordinance of the Village
Council, any modifications hereto shall be made only by the appropriate
legislative action of the Village Council. The only exception to this section
being those periodic updates to the list of authorized investment instruments
appearing in § 35.19 as required by such section of this policy.



(Ord. 98-6-7, passed  - -98)



§ 35.19  LIST OF AUTHORIZED INVESTMENT INSTRUMENTS.



   The following are authorized investment instruments for the investment
of village funds. The Fiscal Officer may invest on behalf of and in the name
of the village in only the following instruments at a price not to exceed
their fair market value.



   (A)   Obligations of the U.S. Treasury, Federal Agencies, and U.S.
Government-sponsored Corporations and Instrumentalities follows:



      (1)   Treasury bills;



      (2)   Treasury notes and bonds, including zero-coupon
variations;



      (3)   Federal Farm Credit System (FFC);



      (4)   Federal Home Loan Bank (FHLB)



      (5)   Federal Home Loan Mortgage Company (FHLMC)



      (6)   Federal National Mortgage Association (FNMA);



      (7)   Government National Mortgage Association (GNMA);



      (8)   Resolution Funding Corporation (REFCORP);



      (9)   Student Loan Marketing Association (SLMA);



      (10)   Repurchase agreements.



   (B)   Nonnegotiable interest bearing time certificates of deposit
and savings accounts. Nonnegotiable interest bearing time certificates of
deposit and savings accounts only in commercial banks organized under the
laws of this state, national banks organized under the laws of the United
States, doing business in and situated in or operating a full service branch
office within the boundaries of the village, provided that any such deposits
and savings accounts are secured by collateral as prescribed in the section
of the investment and deposit policy.



   (C)   STAR Ohio.



   (D)   NOW Accounts (Interest Bearing, Negotiable Order of Withdrawal
Accounts) which are collateralized as prescribed in the section of the
Investment and Deposit Policy.



   (E)   SWEEP Purchase Agreements.



   (F)   Obligation of the State of Ohio.



(Ord. 98-6-7, passed  - -98)



CHAPTER 36:  PERSONNEL POLICIES



Section



   36.01   Employee handbook adopted by reference



   36.02   Employee classification and compensation plan adopted



   36.03   Pick up of contributions to public employees retirement
system



   36.04   Adoption of alcohol and controlled substance testing policy



§ 36.01  EMPLOYEE HANDBOOK ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The Employee Handbook, most current edition, is hereby approved as a
policy of the village, and is adopted and made a part of this code, the same
as if set forth in full herein.



(Ord. 00- , passed  - -00; Am. Ord. 06-08-01, passed 10-3-06; Am. Ord.
14-08-01, passed 9-2-14)



§ 36.02  EMPLOYEE CLASSIFICATION AND COMPENSATION PLAN ADOPTED.



   The employee classification and compensation plan, which is adopted
annually by the village, is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of
this code, the same as if set forth in full herein.



(Ord. 99-12-3, passed  - -99)



§ 36.03  PICK UP OF CONTRIBUTIONS TO PUBLIC EMPLOYEES RETIREMENT SYSTEM.



   (A)   Effective May 31, 1998, the full amount of the statutorily
required contributions to the Public Employees Retirement System of Ohio
shall be withheld from the gross pay of each person within any of the classes
established in division (B) below and shall be “picked up” (assumed and
paid to the Public Employees Retirement System of Ohio) by the village. This
“pick up” by the Village of Minster, is and shall be designated as,
public employee contributions and shall be in lieu of contributions to the
Public Employees Retirement System of Ohio by each person within any of the
classes established in division (B) below. No person subject to this “pick
up” shall have the option of choosing to receive the statutorily required
contribution to the Public Employees Retirement System of Ohio directly
instead of having it “picked up” by the village or of being excluded from
the “pick up.” The village shall, in reporting and making remittance to
the Public Employees Retirement System of Ohio report that the public
employee's contribution for each person subject to this “pick up” has
been made as provided by the statute.



   (B)   The "pick up" by the village provided by this section shall
apply to all persons that are employees of the village who are or become
contributing members of the Public Employees Retirement System of Ohio,
except those deemed seasonal or part-time employees.



   (C)   The village's method of payment of salary to employees who are
participants in PERS is hereby modified as follows, in order to provide for a
salary reduction pick up of employee contributions to PERS. 



   (D)   The total salary for each employee shall be the salary
otherwise payable under the village policies. Such total salary of each
employee shall be payable by the village in two parts: (a) deferred salary
and (b) cash salary. An employee's deferred salary shall be equal to that
percentage of that employee's total salary which is required from time to
time by PERS to be paid as an employee contribution by that employee, and
shall be paid by the Village to PERS on behalf of that employee as a pick up
in lieu of the PERS employee contribution otherwise payable by that employee.
An employee's cash salary shall be equal to that employee's total salary less
the amount of the pick-up for that employee, and shall be payable, subject to
applicable payroll deductions, to that employee. The village shall compute
and remit its employer contributions to PERS based upon an employee's total
salary. The total combined expenditures of the village for such employees'
total salaries payable under applicable village policies and the pick-up
provisions of this section shall not be greater than the amounts it would
have paid for those items had this provision not been in effect.



   (E)   The Clerk-Treasurer and/or Deputy Clerk are hereby authorized
and directed to implement the provisions of this section to institute the
“pick-up” of the statutorily required contributions to the Public
Employees Retirement System of Ohio for those persons reflected in division
(B) above so as to enable them to obtain the result in federal and state tax
deferments and other benefits.



(Ord. 98-4-4, passed  - -98)



§ 36.04  ADOPTION OF ALCOHOL AND CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE TESTING POLICY.



   The Alcohol and Controlled Substance Testing Policy dated February 19,
1996 is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this code, the same as
if set forth in full herein.



(Ord. 96-3-1, passed  2-19-96)



CHAPTER 37:  INCOME TAX EFFECTIVE THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 2015



Section



   37.01   Purpose



   37.02   Imposition of tax



   37.03   Effective date



   37.04   Return and payment of tax



   37.05   Collection at source



   37.06   Declarations



   37.07   Duties of the Tax Commissioner



   37.08   Powers of the Tax Commissioner



   37.09   Board of Review



   37.10   Interest and penalties



   37.11   Collection of unpaid taxes



   37.12   Credit for tax paid to other municipalities



   37.13   Allocation apportionment of funds



   37.14   Severability



   37.15   Violations



   37.16   Rules and regulations to complement income tax ordinance
adopted by reference



 



   37.99   Penalty



§ 37.01  PURPOSE.



   To provide funds for the purposes of constructing, maintaining,
operating and acquiring of capital improvements, including street drainage
and for general municipal operations in the village and there shall be and
hereby is levied a tax on qualifying wages, commissions and other
compensation and on net profits as hereinafter provided.



(Ord. 04-05-01, passed 6-29-04)



§ 37.02  IMPOSITION OF TAX.



   (A)   Subject to the provisions of § 37.14, an annual tax for the
purpose specified in § 37.01 above, shall be levied at a rate of 1-1/2% per
annum on the following:



      (1)   On all qualifying wages, commissions, rentals, and other
compensation earned or received on and after January 1, 1978, by the
residents of the village.



      (2)   On all qualifying wages, commissions, rentals and other
compensation earned or received on and after January 1, 1978, by
non-residents for works done or services performed or rendered in the village.



      (3)   For the total amount of lottery winnings, when those
winnings are in excess of $5,000,000 and are received as winnings from the
Ohio Lottery and/or any other lottery of any other state or country as
reported on IRS Form W-2G, Form 5754 and/or any other form required by the
Internal Revenue Service that reports winnings from lottery winnings. The
village income tax shall begin taxation on the first dollar but will only be
imposed when the winnings exceed $5,000,000.  This applies to winnings
income received by residents and winnings income received by non-residents
derived from lottery purchases made within the village.



      (4)   On the portion attributable to the village of net
profits earned on and after January 1, 1978, of all resident associations,
unincorporated businesses, pass-through entities, professions, or other
activities derived from work done or services performed or rendered, and
business conducted in the village.



      (5)   On a resident partner's or owner's share of the net
profits of a resident association or other unincorporated business entity not
attributable to the village and not levied against such association or other
unincorporated business entity.



      (6)   On the portion attributable to the village of the net
profits earned on and after January 1, 1978, of all non-resident
associations, unincorporated businesses, professions or other activities,
derived from sales made, work done, or services performed or rendered or
business or other activities derived from work done or services performed or
rendered, and business or other activities conducted in the village, whether
or not such association or unincorporated business entity has an office or
place of business in the village.



      (7)   On a resident partner's or owner's share of the net
profits of a non-resident association or other business entity not
attributable to the village and not levied against such association or other
business entity.



      (8)   Distributions received by an owner domiciled in the
village from any such pass-through entity from a non-resident pass-through
entity such as a partnership, limited partnership, limited liability company
or Subchapter S corporation shall be considered as income from an association
as defined in division (A)(7) of this section. A credit shall be given for
any Ohio municipal income tax paid by the non-resident entity at the entity
level, (i.e. in the hands of the entity), where such non-resident entity is
domiciled. This division (A)(8) codifies the interpretation of this section
as of January 1, 2003.



      (9)   On the portion attributable to the village of the net
profits earned on and after January 1, 1978, of all corporations derived from
sales made, work done or services performed or rendered and business or other
activities conducted in the village, whether or not such corporations have an
office or place of business in the village.



      (10)   The tax imposed by this chapter on corporations shall
apply at the entity level to resident corporations which have elected to be
taxed as a Subchapter S corporation under the Internal Revenue Code. This
division (A)(10) codifies the interpretation as of January 1, 2003.



   (B)   An employee who pays his or her business expenses from his or
her commissions or other compensation, without reimbursement from his or her
employer, may deduct from his or her gross commissions or other compensation
business expenses allowed by the Internal Revenue Service for federal income
tax purposes but only to the extent that said expenses are incurred in
earning commissions or other compensation subject to the tax imposed by this
chapter.



   (C)   Net profit from a business or profession conducted both within
and without the boundaries of the municipal corporation shall be considered
as having a taxable situs in the municipal corporation for purposes of
municipal income taxation in the same proportions as the average ratio of the
following:



      (1)   Multiply the entire net profits of the business by a
business apportionment percentage to be determined by:



         (a)   The average original cost of the real and tangible
personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in business or profession in
such municipal corporation during the taxable period to the average original
cost of all the real and tangible personal property owned or used by the
taxpayer in the business or profession during the same period, wherever
situated.



         (b)   Ascertaining the percentage which the gross
receipts of the business from sales made and services performed in the
village, during the period covered by the return, are of the total gross
receipts from all sales and services, wherever made or performed, during such
period.



            1.   Sales made within the village shall be deemed
to include all sales of tangible personal property which is delivered within
the village regardless of where title passes if shipped or delivered from a
stock of goods within the village.



            2.   All sales of tangible personal property which
is delivered within the village, regardless of where title passes, even
though transported from a point outside the village, if the taxpayer is
regularly engaged through its own employees in the solicitation or promotion
of sales within the village and the sales result from such solicitation or
promotion.



            3.   All sales of tangible personal property which
is shipped from a place within the village to purchasers outside the village,
regardless of where title passes, if the taxpayer is not, through its own
employee, regularly engaged in the solicitation and promotion of sales at the
place where the delivery is made.



         (c)   Ascertaining the percentage which the total wages,
salaries, qualifying and other compensation paid during the period covered by
the return, to employees for services performed in the village is of the
total qualifying wages, commissions and other compensation paid, during such
period, to all employees within and outside the village.



         (d)   Adding together the percentage determined in
accordance with divisions (a), (b) and (c) above or such of the aforesaid
percentages as are applicable to the particular taxpayer and dividing the
total so obtained by the number of percentages used in deriving said total. A
factor is applicable even though it may be allocable entirely in or outside
the village.



      (2)   Provided, however, that in the event a just and
equitable result cannot be obtained under the formula provided for herein,
the Board of Review, upon application of the taxpayer or the Tax
Commissioner, shall, under uniform regulations adopted by the Board, have the
authority to substitute other factors or methods calculated to effect a fair
and proper apportionment.



   (D)   The tax provided for herein shall not be levied upon the
following:



      (1)   The military pay or allowances of members of the Armed
Forces of the United States and of members of their reserve components,
including the Ohio National Guard;



      (2)   Poor relief, pensions, unemployment compensation or
similar payments, including disability benefits received from local, state or
federal governments or from charitable, religious or education organizations;



      (3)   Alimony received;



      (4)   Income, dues, contributions, receipts from casual
entertainment, amusements, sports events and health and welfare activities
received by religious, fraternal, charitable, scientific, literary,
educational institutions or organizations, labor unions, lodges and similar
organizations;



      (5)   Any association, organization, corporation, club or
trust, which is exempt from federal taxes or income by reason of its
charitable, religious, educational, literary, scientific, etc. purposes;



      (6)   Gains from involuntary conversion, cancellation of
indebtedness, interest on federal obligations, items of income already taxed
by the state, and income of a decedent's estate during the period of
administration, except such income from the operation of a business;



      (7)   Earnings and income of all persons under 18 years of age
whether residents or non- residents;



      (8)   Compensation paid under R.C. §§ 3501.28 or 3501.36 to
a person serving as a precinct election official, to the extent that such
compensation does not exceed $1,000 annually;



      (9)   Parsonage allowance pursuant to Section 107 of the
Internal Revenue Code;



      (10)   Compensation paid to an employee of a transit authority
for operating a transit bus in or through the municipal corporation, unless
the bus is operated on a regularly scheduled route, the operator is a
resident or domiciled in the village, or the headquarters of the authority or
commission is located within the village; and



      (11)   Intangible income.



(Ord. 04-05-01, passed 6-29-04; Am. Ord. 05-11-02, passed 11-1-05)



Statutory reference:



   Income on or of pass-through entities, See R.C. § 718.14



§ 37.03  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   The tax shall be levied, collected and paid with respect to the
qualifying wages, commissions and other compensation earned on and after
January 1, 1978, and with respect to the net profits of businesses,
professions, or other activities earned on and after January 1, 1978.



(Ord. 04-05-01, passed 6-29-04)



§ 37.04  RETURN AND PAYMENT OF TAX.



   (A)   Each person who engages in business, or whose salary, wages,
commissions and other compensation are subject to the tax imposed by the
commissions and other compensation are subject to the tax imposed by this
chapter shall, whether or not a tax be due thereon, make and file on or
before April 15 of each year a return with the village on a form or forms
furnished or obtained upon request setting forth:



      (1)   The aggregate amounts of qualifying wages, commissions,
other compensation received, allocated, apportioned or set aside, other
income defined by statute as taxable, and gross income from any business,
profession, or other activities, less allowable expenses incurred in the
acquisition of such gross income earned during the preceding year and subject
to said tax;



      (2)   The amount of the tax imposed by this chapter; and



      (3)   Such other pertinent statements, information returns or
other information returns or information as the Tax Commissioner requires,
including a statement that figures used in the return are the figures used in
the return for federal income tax, adjusted to set forth only such income as
is taxable under the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   A taxpayer on a fiscal year accounting basis for federal tax
purposes shall, beginning with said taxpayer's first fiscal year any part of
which falls within the tax period, pay the tax on the basis of the said
taxpayer's fiscal year and shall file the annual returns by the fifteenth day
of the fourth month following the end of the fiscal year or period.



   (C)   Any taxpayer that has requested an extension for filing a
federal income tax return may request an extension for the filing of the
village income tax return by filing a copy of the taxpayer's federal
extension request with the Department of Taxation. Any taxpayer not required
to file a federal income tax return may request an extension for filing a
village income tax return in writing. The request for extension must be filed
on or before the original due date for the annual return. If the request is
granted, the extended due date of the municipal income tax return shall be
the last date of the month following the month to which the due date of the
federal income tax return has been extended. The Tax Commissioner may deny a
taxpayer's request for an extension if the taxpayer fails to timely request;
or fails to file a copy of the federal extension request; or owes the village
any delinquent income tax, penalty, or interest; or has failed to file any
required income tax returns, report, or other related document for a prior
tax period.



   (D)   The taxpayer making such return shall, at the time of the
filing thereof, pay to the village the amount of taxes shown as due thereon;
provided, however, that where any portion of the tax so due shall be deducted
at the source, pursuant to the provisions of § 37.05, or where any portion
of said tax shall have been paid by the taxpayer, pursuant to the provisions
of § 37.06, credit for the amount so paid shall be deducted from the amount
shown to be due and only the balance, if any, shall be due and payable at the
time of filing the return. Should it then appear that the taxpayer had paid
more than the amount of tax to which the village is entitled under the
provisions of this chapter, such over payments shall be refunded, or at the
option of the taxpayer, credited to said taxpayer's next year's tax
liability; provided, however that no additional taxes or refunds of less than
$1 shall be collected or refunded. Within three months from the final
determinations of any federal tax liability affecting the taxpayer's village
tax liability, such taxpayer shall make and file and amended village return
showing income subject to the village tax based upon such final determination
of federal tax liability, and pay any additional tax shown due thereon or
make claim for refund of any overpayment.



   (E)   The Tax Commissioner is hereby authorized to accept the return
of a resident employer, or employers, showing the total of the amount of tax
deductible by said employer or employers from the qualifying wages,
commissions or other compensation of employees, and paid by said taxpayer or
taxpayers to the village Income Tax Department as the return required of any
employee whose sole income, subject to the tax or taxes under this chapter is
such salary, wages, commissions, or other compensation.



   (F)   A corporation if that affiliated group of corporations filed a
consolidated return with the Internal Revenue Service pursuant to Section
1501 of the Internal Revenue Code.



   (G)   An adjustment made to a tax return by the Department of
Taxation, after the return has been filed in good faith by the taxpayer, will
not be made by the Department if the result of the adjustment is equal to or
less than $5 as underpayment or overpayment of tax.



(Ord. 04-05-01, passed 6-29-04)



§ 37.05  COLLECTION AT SOURCE.



   (A)   (1)   Each employer within or doing business with the
village who employs one or more persons on a salary, wage, commission or
other compensation basis shall at the time of the payment thereof, deduct
therefrom 1-1/2% of the qualifying wages, commissions or other compensation
due from said employer to said employee. On or before the last day of each
month following the close of the calendar quarter, a return must be filed and
payment made to the village Income Tax Department covering the previous
quarter's liability. An employer who withholds $1,200 or more per year must,
before the twentieth of each following month, pay the taxes so withheld to
the Income Tax Department on a monthly basis. Said return shall be on a form
or forms prescribed by or acceptable to the Income Tax Department and shall
be subject to the rules and regulations prescribed by the village.



      (2)   The Tax Commissioner is authorized to enter into
agreements with employers outside the village, provided they have the written
consent of the employees affected, to collect such taxes at the source in the
same manner as provided above.



   (B)   (1)   Such employer in collecting said tax shall be deemed
to hold the same until payment is made by such employer to the village, as a
Trustee for the benefit of the village and any such tax collected by such
employers shall, until the same is paid to the village, be deemed a trust
fund in the hands of such employer.



      (2)   However, no person shall be required to withhold the tax
on the wages, or other compensation paid domestic servants employed
exclusively in or about such person's residence.



(Ord. 04-05-01, passed 6-29-04)



§ 37.06  DECLARATIONS.



   (A)   Every person who anticipates any taxable income which is not
subject to the provisions of § 37.05, or who engages in any business shall
file a declaration setting forth such estimated income or the estimated
profit or loss from such business during the year covered by the declaration,
together with the estimated tax due thereon, if any.



   (B)   Exclusive of taxpayers filing on a fiscal basis, such
declaration, each person required to file a declaration shall file such
declaration on or before April 15 of each year. In the case of a person
starting in business, such declaration shall be filed within four months of
the date said taxpayer starts such business.



   (C)   Such declaration shall be filed upon a form or forms furnished
by, or obtainable upon request from the Income Tax Department, which form or
forms may contain a statement that the figures used in making such
declaration are the figures used in making the declaration of the estimate
for federal income tax, adjusted to set forth only such income as is taxable
under the provisions of this chapter.



   (D)   (1)   Such declaration of estimated tax to be paid to the
village shall be accompanied by a payment of at least 22.5% of the estimated
tax.



      (2)   Exclusive of taxpayers filing on a fiscal year basis, at
least a similar amount shall be paid on or before July 31, October 31, and
January 31 of each year. Such estimate may be amended at any time.



   (E)   (1)   A taxpayer reporting on a fiscal year basis shall
file, beginning with the taxpayer's first fiscal year any part of which falls
within the tax period, a declaration on or before the fifteenth day of the
fourth month of the taxpayer's taxable year accompanied by a payment of at
least 22.5% of the estimated tax shown due thereon. At least a similar amount
shall be paid on or before the fifteenth day of the sixth month, the
fifteenth day of the ninth month and the fifteenth day of the twelfth month
of the taxpayer's taxable year.



      (2)   Taxpayers that are not individuals must remit 22.5% of
the estimated tax liability for the current year on or before the day on
which the annual tax return for the prior year is required to be filed
disregarding any extension or, in the case of a fiscal year taxpayer, the
fifteenth day of the fourth month of the taxpayer's taxable year. Exclusive
of taxpayer's filing on a fiscal year basis, at least a similar amount shall
be paid on or before June 15, September 15 and December 15 of each year. Such
estimate may be amended at any time.



   (F)   Penalty and interest will not be imposed for the late payment
or nonpayment of estimated tax liability if the taxpayer has remitted an
amount at least equal to 100% of the taxpayer's liability for the preceding
year, provided that the return for the preceding year reflected a 12-month
period and the taxpayer filed a return for the preceding year, or if the
taxpayer, which is an individual, was not domiciled within the village on the
first day of January of the current calendar year.



(Ord. 04-05-01, passed 6-29-04)



§ 37.07  DUTIES OF THE TAX COMMISSIONER.



   (A)   The Tax Commissioner is hereby charged with the enforcement of
provisions of this chapter and is hereby empowered, subject to the approval
of the Board of Review, to adopt and promulgate and enforce rules and
regulations relating to any matter or thing pertaining to the collection of
taxes and the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter, for the re-examination and correction of returns. The Commissioner
is authorized to arrange for the payment of unpaid taxes, interest and
penalties on a schedule of installment payments, when the taxpayer had proven
to the Commissioner that due to certain hardship conditions, said taxpayer is
unable to pay the full amount of the tax due. Such authorization shall not be
granted until proper returns are filed by the taxpayer for all amounts owed
by taxpayer under this chapter.



   (B)   Failure to make any deferred payments when due, shall cause
the total unpaid amount, including penalty and interest, to become payable on
demand and the provision of §§ 37.10 and 37.15 shall apply.



   (C)   It shall be the duty of the Tax Commissioner to prescribe the
form and method of keeping the accounts and reports to be rendered to said
office and shall maintain accurate records showing the amount received from
each taxpayer and the date of said receipt. The Tax Commissioner is hereby
charged with the internal audit of all accounts and returns including
re-examination and correction of the returns. The Tax Commissioner shall
further fix the amount of tax due from a taxpayer who fails to file a return
or who has filed a return which does not show the proper amount of tax due
after said taxpayer has established the same from an audit or examination of
the taxpayers income and shall send to the taxpayer by certified mail a
written statement showing the amount of tax so fixed together with the
interest and penalties thereon, if any.



   (D)   The Tax Commissioner shall demand and receive all taxes due
the village and shall make a written report to Council each month of all
monies collected during the preceding month.



   (E)   The Tax Commissioner shall be the administrative head of the
Income Tax Division under the supervision of the Mayor, subject to the
approval of Council.



   (F)   Subject to the consent of the Board of Review or pursuant to
regulations approved by said Board, the Commissioner shall have the power to
compromise any interest or penalty, or both, imposed by § 37.10.



(Ord. 04-05-01, passed 6-29-04)



§ 37.08  POWERS OF THE TAX COMMISSIONER.



   (A)   The Tax Commissioner and any authorized employee is hereby
authorized to examine the books, papers and records of any employers, or of
any taxpayer or person subject to the tax, for the purpose of verifying the
accuracy of any return made, or if no return was made, to ascertain the tax
due. Every such employer, supposed employer, taxpayer or supposed taxpayer is
hereby directed and required to furnish to the Tax Commission or duly
authorized agent or employee, the means, facilities and opportunity for
making such examination and investigation as are hereby authorized.



   (B)   The Tax Commissioner or duly authorized agent or employee is
hereby authorized to examine any person, employer or employee under oath
concerning any income which was or should have been returned for taxation and
for this purpose may compel the production of books, papers and records and
the attendance of all persons before the Tax Commissioner or duly authorized
agent or employee, whether as parties or witnesses, wherever it is believed
such persons have knowledge of such income.



   (C)   The refusal to produce books, papers, records and federal
income tax returns or the refusal to submit to such examination by any
employer or subject to or presumed to be subject to the tax or by any
officer, agent or employer of a person subject to tax or required to withhold
tax or the failure of any person to comply with the provisions of this
section or with an order of subpoena of the Commissioner authorized hereby
shall be deemed a violation of this chapter punishable as prescribed in §
37.15.



   (D)   Any information gained as a result of any returns,
investigations, hearing or verification required or authorized by this
chapter or authorized by these rules and regulations shall be confidential
and no disclosure thereof shall be made except for official purposes or as
ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. Any person divulging such
information shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a maximum fine of
$500 or imprisonment for not more than six months or both, each disclosure
shall constitute a separate offense.



   (E)   In addition to the above penalty, any employee of this
municipality who violates the provisions of this section relative to the
disclosure of confidential information shall be guilty of an offense
punishable by immediate dismissal.



(Ord. 04-05-01, passed 6-29-04)



§ 37.09  BOARD OF REVIEW.



   (A)   A Board of Review, consisting of a chairman and two other
individuals to be appointed by the Mayor, is hereby created. A majority of
the members of the Board shall constitute a quorum. The Board shall adopt its
own procedural rules and shall adopt its own procedural rules and shall keep
a record of its transactions. Any hearing by the Board may be conducted
privately, and the provisions of § 37.08 with reference to the confidential
character of information required to be disclosed by the chapter shall apply
to such matters as may be heard before the Board on appeal.



   (B)   All rules and regulations and amendments or changers thereto,
which are adopted by the Tax Commissioner under the authority conferred by
this chapter must be approved by the Board of Review before the same becomes
effective. The Board shall hear and pass on appeals from any ruling or
decision of the Tax Commissioner, and, at the request of the taxpayer or Tax
Commissioner, is empowered to substitute alternate method of allocation
apportionment.



   (C)   An appeal from a ruling of the Commissioner by a taxpayer or
employer is effected by filing a notice of appeal with the Board within 30
days after the announcement of the Commissioner's ruling or decision from
which the appeal is taken. A copy of such notice of appeal must be filed with
the Commissioner, and shall state why the decision should be deemed incorrect
or unlawful.



   (D)   The Board shall schedule a hearing within 45 days after
receiving the request, unless the taxpayer waives a hearing. If the taxpayer
does not waive the hearing, the taxpayer may appear before the Board and may
be represented by any person of his or her choosing.



   (E)   The Board, by a majority vote, may affirm, modify, or reverse,
in whole or in part, any such ruling or decision of the Commissioner. The
Board shall issue a decision on the appeal within 90 days after the Board's
final hearing on the appeal, and send notice of its decision by ordinary mail
to the petitioner within 15 days after issuing the decision.



(Ord. 04-05-01, passed 6-29-04)



§ 37.10  INTEREST AND PENALTIES.



   (A)   All taxes imposed and monies withheld or required to be
withheld by employers under the provision of this chapter and remaining
unpaid after they become due shall bear interest at a rate of 12% per annum.



   (B)   In addition to interest as provided in division (A) above,
penalties based on the unpaid tax are hereby imposed as follows.  The
taxpayer upon whom said taxes are imposed and any employer required by this
chapter to deduct, withhold and pay taxes imposed by this chapter shall be
liable in addition hereto to penalty of 5% of the amount of the unpaid tax
for each month after the tax becomes due, up to a maximum of 25%.



   (C)   A penalty shall not be assessed on an additional tax
assessment made by the Tax Commissioner when a return has been filed in good
faith and the tax paid thereon within the time prescribed by the Tax
Commissioner; and provided further, that, in the absence of fraud, neither
penalty nor interest shall be assessed on any additional tax assessment
resulting from a federal audit, providing an amended return is filed and the
additional tax is paid within three months after final determinations of the
federal tax liability.



   (D)   Upon recommendation of the Tax Commissioner, the Board of
Review may abate penalty or interest, or both, or upon an appeal from the
refusal of the Tax Commissioner to recommend abatement of penalty and
interest, the Board of Review may nevertheless abate penalty or interest or
both.



(Ord. 04-05-01, passed 6-29-04)



§ 37.11  COLLECTION OF UNPAID TAXES.



   All taxes imposed by this chapter shall be collectible, together with
any interest and penalties thereon, by suit as other debts of like amount are
recoverable. No additional assessment shall be made after three years from
the time of payment of any tax due hereunder, provided however, there shall
be no period of limitation on an additional assessment in a case of a return
that omits gross income in excess of 25% of that required to be reported or
in the case of filing a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade the
tax or in the case of failure to file a return. In those cases in which the
Director of Internal Revenue and the taxpayer have executed a waiver of the
federal statute of limitations, the period within which an additional
assessment may be made by the Tax Commissioner shall be extended three years
from the time of the final determination of the federal tax liability.



(Ord. 04-05-01, passed 6-29-04)



§ 37.12  CREDIT FOR TAX PAID TO OTHER MUNICIPALITIES.



   Resident individuals of the village, who are required to pay and do pay
tax to a municipality other than Minster on qualifying wages, commissions,
and other compensation for work done or services performed outside the
village or net profits from businesses, professions or other activities
conducted outside the village, may claim a credit of the amount of tax paid
by them or on their behalf to such other municipality but only to the extent
of the tax imposed by this chapter on such income, such credit being limited
to 1-1/2% of the amount of income tax by both the village and such other
municipality. A return must be filed for the purpose of claiming such credit
or allowance, together with such evidence of the payment of similar tax to
the municipality in which such resident has a source of income as the Tax
Commissioner may require.



(Ord. 04-05-01, passed 6-29-04)



§ 37.13  ALLOCATION APPORTIONMENT OF FUNDS.



   (A)   The income derived from § 37.02 shall be appropriated, as
provided by law, as follows:



      (1)   For the payment of administrative costs and refunds.



      (2)   Five thousand dollars to the swimming pool fund.



      (3)   Forty percent of the balance to the general fund.



      (4)   Sixty percent of the balance to the Waste Water
Treatment Plant Renovation Fund until $2,700,000 is placed in such fund.



   (B)   Upon the collection of $2,700,000 in the Waste Water Treatment
Plant Renovation Fund, the income derived from § 37.02 shall be
appropriated, as provided by law, as follows:



      (1)   For the payment of administrative costs and refunds.



      (2)   Sixty percent of the balance to the general fund.



      (3)   Forty percent of the balance to the Capital Improvement
Fund.



(Ord. 04-05-01, passed 6-29-04; Am. Ord. 13-07-01, passed 7-16-13; Am. Ord.
15-01-04, passed 2-3-15)



§ 37.14  SEVERABILITY.



   This chapter shall not apply to any person, firm, or corporation, or to
any property as to whom or which it is beyond the power of Council to impose
the tax herein provided for. Any sentence, clause, or part of this section,
or any tax against or exemption granted any individual, or any of the several
groups of persons, or forms of income specified herein is found to be
unconstitutional or illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality,
or invalidity shall affect only such clause, sentence, or part of this
section and shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses, or other parts of this section. It is hereby declared to
be the intention of Council that this section would have been adopted had
such unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid sentence or part hereof not been
included therein.



(Ord. 04-05-01, passed 6-29-04)



§ 37.15  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Any person who shall:



      (1)   Fail, neglect or refuse to make a return or declaration
required by this chapter;



      (2)   Knowingly make any incomplete, false or fraudulent tax
return;



      (3)   Fail, neglect, or refuse to pay the tax, penalties or
interest imposed by this chapter;



      (4)   Fail, neglect, or refuse to withhold the tax from
taxpayer employees or remit such withholding to the Commissioner;



      (5)   Refuse to permit the Commissioners or any duly
authorized agent or employee to examine taxpayer books, records, papers and
federal income tax returns relating to the income or net profits of a
taxpayer;



      (6)   Fail to appear before the Tax Commissioner to produce
taxpayer's books, records, papers or federal income tax returns relating to
the income or net profits of a taxpayer upon order or subpoena of the Tax
Commissioner;



      (7)   Refuse to disclose to the Tax Commissioner any
information with respect to the income or net profits of a taxpayer;



      (8)   Fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter or
any order or subpoena of the Tax Commissioner authorized hereby;



      (9)   Give to an employer false information as to said
person's true name, correct Social Security number and residence address or
fails to promptly notify an employer of any change in residence address and
date thereof;



      (10)   Fail to use ordinary diligence in maintaining proper
records of employees' addresses, total wages paid and village tax withheld or
to knowingly give the Tax Commissioner false information; or



      (11)   Attempt to do anything whatever to avoid the payment of
the whole or any part of the tax, penalties or interest imposed by this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than
$500 or imprisoned not more than six months or both, for each offense.



   (B)   All prosecutions under this section must be commenced within
the time limits set forth in R.C. § 718.12



   (C)   The failure of any employer or person to receive or procure a
return, declaration or other required form shall not excuse said employer or
person from making any information return, return or declaration, from filing
such form or from paying the tax.



(Ord. 04-05-01, passed 6-29-04)



§ 37.16  RULES AND REGULATIONS TO COMPLEMENT INCOME TAX ORDINANCE ADOPTED
BY REFERENCE.



   The rules and regulations to complement the Minster income tax
ordinance are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this code the
same as if set forth in full herein.



(Ord. 00-12-01, passed  - -00; Am. Ord. 04-05-01, passed 6-29-04; Am. Ord.
06-03-01, passed 4-4-06)



§ 37.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of § 37.15 shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned not more than
six months or both, for each offense.



(Ord. 00-12-01, passed  - -00)



CHAPTER 38:  FIRE DEPARTMENT



Section




General Provisions




   38.01   Municipal fire regulations; fire department



   38.02   Fire Chief; Fire Prevention Officer; employment of
firefighters; criminal records check for firefighters



   38.03   Schooling of officers and firefighters of fire department



   38.04   Legislative Authority may purchase engines and equipment



   38.05   Buildings for department



   38.06   Records



   38.07   Maximum consecutive hours for firefighters on duty



   38.08   Investigation of cause of fire



   38.09   Right to examine buildings, premises, and vehicles



   38.10   Burning buildings for firefighting instruction or research



   38.11   Impersonating fire safety inspector



   38.12   Standards for equipment



   38.13   Persons entitled to be known as firefighters



   38.14   Firefighting and emergency services agreements



   38.15   Regulation of construction in fire limits




Volunteer Firefighters’ Dependents Fund Board




   38.30   Definitions



   38.31   Establishment



   38.32   Membership; vacancies



   38.33   Election and term of members



   38.34   Organization; rules and regulations; roster



   38.35   Compensation and expenses of Board; legal advisor




Natural Hazard Mitigation Plan




   38.45   County plan adopted by reference



Statutory reference:



   Fire service training, see O.A.C. Chapter 3301-63



   Power of municipality to establish a fire department, see R.C. § 715.05



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 38.01  MUNICIPAL FIRE REGULATIONS; FIRE DEPARTMENT.



   The Legislative Authority may establish all necessary regulations to
guard against the occurrence of fires and protect the property and lives of
its citizens against damage and accidents resulting therefrom, and for that
purpose may establish and maintain a fire department, provide for the
establishment and organization of fire engine and hose companies and rescue
units, establish the hours of labor of the members of its fire department who
shall not be required to be on duty continuously more than six days in every
seven, and provide bylaws and regulation for the government of companies and
their members as is necessary and proper.



(R.C. § 737.21)



§ 38.02  FIRE CHIEF; FIRE PREVENTION OFFICER; EMPLOYMENT OF FIREFIGHTERS.



   (A)   Each municipality establishing a fire department shall have a
Fire Chief as the Department's head, appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of the Legislative Authority, who shall continue in office until
removed from office as provided by R.C. §§ 733.35 through 733.39. Neither
this section nor any section of the Revised Code requires, or shall be
construed to require, that the Fire Chief be a resident of the municipality.



   (B)   In each municipality not having a fire department, the Mayor
shall, with the advice and consent of the Legislative Authority, appoint a
Fire Prevention Officer who shall exercise all of the duties of a Fire Chief,
except those involving the maintenance and operation of fire apparatus.



   (C)   The Legislative Authority may fix the compensation it
considers best. The appointee shall continue in office until removed from
office as provided by R.C. §§ 733.35 to 733.39. The provisions of § 35.03
shall extend to the Fire Prevention Officer.



   (D)   The Legislative Authority may provide for the appointment of
permanent full-time paid firefighters as it considers best and fix their
compensation, or for the services of volunteer firefighters, who shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Legislative
Authority, and shall continue in office until removed from office.



   (E)   No person shall be appointed as a permanent full-time paid
firefighter of the municipality unless either of the following applies:



      (1)   The person has received a certificate issued under
former R.C. § 3303.07 or R.C. § 4765.55 evidencing satisfactory completion
of a firefighter training program;



      (2)   The person began serving as a permanent full-time paid
firefighter with the municipality prior to July 2, 1970, and receives a fire
training certificate issued under R.C. § 4765.55.



   (F)   No person who is appointed as a volunteer firefighter of the
municipality shall remain in that position unless either of the following
applies:



      (1)   Within one year of the appointment, the person has
received a certificate issued under former R.C. § 3303.07 or R.C. § 4765.55
evidencing satisfactory completion of a firefighter training program;



      (2)   The person has served as a permanent full-time paid
firefighter with the municipality prior to July 2, 1970, or as a volunteer
firefighter with the municipality prior to July 2, 1979, and receives a
certificate issued under R.C. § 4765.55(C)(3).



   (G)   No person shall receive an appointment under this section
unless the person has, not more than 60 days prior to receiving the
appointment, passed a physical examination given by a licensed physician, a
physician assistant, a clinical nurse specialist, a certified nurse
practitioner, or a certified nurse- midwife, showing that the person meets
the physical requirements necessary to perform the duties of the position to
which the person is to be appointed as established by the Legislative
Authority. The appointing authority shall, prior to making an appointment,
file with the Ohio Police and Fire Pension Fund or the Local Volunteer
Firefighter's Dependents Fund Board a copy of the report or findings of that
licensed physician, physician assistant, clinical nurse specialist, certified
nurse practitioner, or certified nurse-midwife. The professional fee for the
physical examination shall be paid for by the Legislative Authority.



(R.C. § 737.22)



   (H)   Criminal records check for firefighters.



      (1)   The Fire Chief may request the Superintendent of the
Ohio Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation (“BCII”) to
conduct a criminal records check with respect to any person who is under
consideration for appointment or employment as a permanent, full-time paid
firefighter or any person who is under consideration for appointment as a
volunteer firefighter.



      (2)   (a)   The Fire Chief may request that the
Superintendent of BCII obtain information from the Federal Bureau of
Investigation as a part of the criminal records check requested pursuant to
division (H)(1) of this section.



         (b)   The Fire Chief, authorized by division (H)(1) of
this section to request a criminal records check, shall provide to each
person for whom the Fire Chief intends to request a criminal records check a
copy of the form prescribed pursuant to R.C. § 109.578(C)(1) and a standard
impression sheet to obtain fingerprint impressions prescribed pursuant to
R.C. § 109.578(C)(2), obtain the completed form and impression sheet from
the person, and forward the completed form and impression sheet to the
Superintendent of BCII at the time the criminal records check is requested.



         (c)   Any person subject to a criminal records check who
receives a copy of the form and a copy of the impression sheet pursuant to
division (H)(2)(b) of this section and who is requested to complete the form
and provide a set of fingerprint impressions shall complete the form or
provide all the information necessary to complete the form and shall provide
the impression sheet with the impressions of the person's fingerprints. If a
person fails to provide the information necessary to complete the form or
fails to provide impressions of the person's fingerprints, the appointing
authority shall not appoint or employ the person as a permanent full-time
paid firefighter or a volunteer firefighter.



      (3)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division
(H)(3)(b) of this section, an appointing authority shall not appoint or
employ a person as a permanent, full-time paid firefighter or a volunteer
firefighter if the Fire Chief has requested a criminal records check pursuant
to division (H)(1) of this section and the criminal records check indicates
that the person previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any of
the following:



            1.   A felony;



            2.   A violation of R.C. § 2909.03;



            3.   A violation of an existing or former law of
this state, any other state, or the United States that is substantially
equivalent to any of the offenses described in division (H)(3)(a)1. or
(H)(3)(a)2. of this section.



         (b)   Notwithstanding division (H)(3)(a) of this
section, an appointing authority may appoint or employ a person as a
permanent, full-time paid firefighter or a volunteer firefighter if all of
the following apply:



            1.   The Fire Chief has requested a criminal
records check pursuant to division (H)(1) of this section.



            2.   The criminal records check indicates that the
person previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any of the
offenses described in division (H)(3)(a) of this section.



            3.   The person meets rehabilitation standards
established in rules adopted under division (H)(5) of this section.



         (c)   If the Fire Chief requests a criminal records
check pursuant to division (H)(1) of this section, an appointing authority
may appoint or employ a person as a permanent, full-time paid firefighter or
volunteer firefighter conditionally until the criminal records check is
completed and the Fire Chief receives the results. If the results of the
criminal records check indicate that, pursuant to division (H)(3)(a) of this
section, the person subject to the criminal records check is disqualified
from appointment or employment, the Fire Chief shall release the person from
appointment or employment.



      (4)   The Fire Chief shall pay to the BCII the fee prescribed
pursuant to R.C. § 109.578(C)(3) for each criminal records check conducted
in accordance with that section. The Fire Chief may charge the applicant who
is subject to the criminal records check a fee for the costs the Fire Chief
incurs in obtaining the criminal records check. A fee charged under this
division shall not exceed the amount of fees the Fire Chief pays for the
criminal records check. If a fee is charged under this division, the Fire
Chief shall notify the applicant at the time of the applicant's initial
application for appointment or employment of the amount of the fee and that,
unless the fee is paid, the applicant will not be considered for appointment
or employment.



      (5)   The appointing authority shall adopt rules in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 119 to implement this division (H). The rules shall include
rehabilitation standards a person who has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to an offense listed in division (H)(3)(a) of this section must meet for the
appointing authority to appoint or employ the person as a permanent,
full-time paid firefighter or a volunteer firefighter.



      (6)   The Fire Chief requesting a criminal records check for
an applicant shall inform each applicant, at the time of the person's initial
application for appointment or employment, that the applicant is required to
provide a set of impressions of the person's fingerprints and that the Fire
Chief requires a criminal records check to be conducted and satisfactorily
completed in accordance with R.C. § 109.578.



      (7)   As used in this section:



         APPOINTING AUTHORITY. Means any person or body that has the
authority to hire, appoint, or employ permanent, full-time paid firefighters
and volunteer firefighters under R.C. § 737.22.



         CRIMINAL RECORDS CHECK. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
109.578.



         SUPERINTENDENT OF BCII. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2151.86.



(R.C. § 737.221)



§ 38.03  SCHOOLING OF OFFICERS AND FIREFIGHTERS OF FIRE DEPARTMENT.



   The Legislative Authority may send any of the officers and firefighters
of its fire department to schools of instruction designed to promote the
efficiency of firefighters, and, if authorized in advance, may pay their
necessary expenses from the funds used for the maintenance and operation of
the fire department.



(R.C. § 737.23)



§ 38.04  LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY MAY PURCHASE ENGINES AND EQUIPMENT.



   The Legislative Authority may purchase the necessary fire engines and
other equipment as is necessary for the extinguishment of fires and the
saving of lives, and may establish lines of fire alarm telegraph within the
limits of the municipality.



(R.C. § 737.24)



§ 38.05  BUILDINGS FOR DEPARTMENT.



   The Legislative Authority may provide or erect necessary and suitable
buildings containing rooms for fire engines and other equipment, and provide
for the meetings of the fire and hose companies.



(R.C. § 737.25)



§ 38.06  RECORDS.



   The Fire Chief shall keep in convenient form a complete record of all
fires.  The record shall include the time of the alarm, location of fire,
cause of fire (if known), type of building, name of owner and tenant, purpose
for which occupied, value of building and contents, members of the department
responding to the alarm, and other information as he or she may deem
advisable, or as may be required from time to time by the Legislative
Authority.



§ 38.07  MAXIMUM CONSECUTIVE HOURS FOR FIREFIGHTERS ON DUTY.



   (A)   Whenever the municipality employs three or more full-time paid
firefighters, the Fire Chief shall divide the uniform force into not less
than two platoons, and where the uniform force is so divided into two
platoons, the Chief shall keep a platoon of the uniform force on duty 24
hours after which the platoon serving 24 consecutive hours shall be allowed
to remain off duty for at least 24 consecutive hours, except in cases of
extraordinary emergency.  Each individual member of the platoons, in
addition to receiving a minimum of 24 hours off duty in each period of 48
hours, shall receive an additional period of 24 consecutive hours off duty in
each period of eight days, so that no individual member shall be on duty more
than a total of 72 hours in any period of eight days.  The Chief shall
arrange the schedule of working hours to comply with this section.  The
Chief may, however, in cases of sickness, death, or on other necessary
occasions, permit the exchange of working hours between members of the
department.  All employees of the fire department shall be given not less
than two weeks' leave of absence annually, with full pay.  This section,
insofar as it relates to off duty periods, does not apply to the municipality
if it adopts a 40-hour week, or if it has a three platoon system, the members
of which work 24 consecutive hours, immediately followed by 48 consecutive
hours off duty, but the provisions relating to the two weeks' leave of
absence do apply.



   (B)   FULL-TIME PAID FIREFIGHTERS, as used in this section, does not
include volunteer firefighters, or firefighters who work part time.



(R.C. § 4115.02)



§ 38.08  INVESTIGATION OF CAUSE OF FIRE.



   (A)   Investigation of fires generally.



      (1)   The Legislative Authority may invest any officer of the
fire or police department with the power, and impose on him or her the duty,
to be present at all fires, investigate the cause thereof, examine witnesses,
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books and papers,
and to do and perform all other acts necessary to the effective discharge of
such duties.



      (2)   Such officer may administer oaths, make arrests, and
enter for the purpose of examination any building which, in his or her
opinion, is in danger from fire.  The officer shall report his or her
proceedings to the Legislative Authority at such times as are required.



(R.C. § 737.27)



   (B)   Investigation of major fires.



      (1)   The Fire Chief, or the Fire Prevention Officer, shall
investigate the cause, origin, and circumstances of each major fire, as
determined by the rules of the State Fire Marshal, occurring in the
municipality by which property has been destroyed or damaged, and shall make
an investigation to determine whether the fire was the result of carelessness
or design.  The investigation shall be commenced within two days, not
including Sunday, if the fire occurred on that day.  The State Fire Marshal
may superintend the investigation.



      (2)   An officer making an investigation of a fire occurring
in the municipality shall notify the State Fire Marshal, and within one week
of the occurrence of the fire shall furnish him or her a written statement of
all facts relating to its cause and origin, and other information as is
required by forms provided by the State Fire Marshal.



      (3)   In the performance of the duties imposed by this
chapter, the Fire Chief or Fire Prevention Officer, at any time of day or
night, may enter upon and examine any building or premises where a fire has
occurred, and other buildings and premises adjoining or near thereto.



(R.C. § 3737.24)



§ 38.09  RIGHT TO EXAMINE BUILDINGS, PREMISES, AND VEHICLES.



   The Fire Chief, other members of the department as may be designated by
the Chief, and the Fire Prevention Officer may at all reasonable hours enter
into all buildings and upon all premises and vehicles within their
jurisdiction for the purpose of examination.



(R.C. § 3737.14(A))



§ 38.10  BURNING BUILDINGS FOR FIREFIGHTING INSTRUCTION OR RESEARCH.



   No building that contains asbestos shall be burned for the purpose of
instruction in the methods of firefighting or research in the control of
fires.



(R.C. § 3737.14(B))  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Notification requirements, see R.C. § 3737.14(C) and (D)



§ 38.11  IMPERSONATING FIRE SAFETY INSPECTOR.



   (A)   No person who is not a certified fire safety inspector shall
act as such or hold himself or herself out to be such, unless prior to
commencing any inspection function, he or she discloses the purpose for which
he or she is making such inspection and the fact that he or she is not
employed by any state or local fire service or agency, and that he or she is
not acting in an official capacity for any governmental subdivision or agency.



(R.C. § 3737.64)



   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 3737.99(D))



§ 38.12  STANDARDS FOR EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   No person shall sell, offer for sale, or use any fire
protection or fire fighting equipment that does not meet the minimum
standards established by the State Fire Marshal in the Ohio Fire Code.



   (B)   Except for public and private mobile fire trucks, no person
shall service, test, repair, or install for profit any fire protection or
fire fighting equipment without a certificate or a provisional certificate
issued by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to R.C. § 3737.65.



(R.C. § 3737.65(A), (B))



   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) or (B) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 3737.99(E))



§ 38.13  PERSONS ENTITLED TO BE KNOWN AS FIREFIGHTERS.



   (A)   As used in this section, FIREFIGHTING AGENCY and PRIVATE FIRE
COMPANY have the same meanings as in R.C. § 9.60.



   (B)   No person shall claim to the public to be or act as a
firefighter, volunteer firefighter, member of a fire department, Fire Chief,
or Fire Prevention Officer unless the person is recognized as a firefighter,
volunteer firefighter, member of a fire department, member of a private fire
company, Fire Chief, or Fire Prevention Officer by the State Fire Marshal or
has received a certificate issued under R.C. § 4765.55 or former R.C. §
3303.07 evidencing satisfactory completion of a firefighter training program
and has been appointed by the governing board of a firefighting agency or, in
the case of a volunteer firefighter, receives such a certificate within one
year after appointment by the governing board of a firefighting agency.



(R.C. § 3737.66) 



   (C)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 3737.99(G))



§ 38.14  FIREFIGHTING AND EMERGENCY SERVICES AGREEMENTS.



   (A)   As used in this section:



      EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE and EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE
ORGANIZATION. Have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4765.01.



      FIRE PROTECTION. Means the use of firefighting equipment by the
Fire Department of a firefighting agency or a private fire company, and
includes the provision of ambulance, emergency medical, and rescue services
by those entities.



      FIREFIGHTING AGENCY. Means the municipality, other municipal
corporation, a township, township fire district, joint ambulance district,
joint emergency medical services district or joint fire district and the
office of the State Fire Marshal.



      MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.



      PRIVATE FIRE COMPANY. Means a nonprofit group or organization
owning and operating firefighting equipment not controlled by a firefighting
agency.



   (B)   Any firefighting agency, private fire company, or emergency
medical service organization may contract with any governmental entity in
this state or another jurisdiction to provide fire protection or emergency
medical services, as appropriate, whether on a regular basis or only in times
of emergency, upon the approval of the governing boards or administrative
heads of the entities that are parties to the contract.



   (C)   The municipality may contract with any firefighting agency,
private fire company, or emergency medical service organization of this state
or another jurisdiction to obtain fire protection or emergency medical
services, as appropriate, whether on a regular basis or only in times of
emergency, upon the approval of the governing boards or administrative heads
of the entities that are parties to the contract.



   (D)   (1)   Any firefighting agency other than the office of the
State Fire Marshal, private fire company, or emergency medical service
organization may provide fire protection or emergency medical services, as
appropriate, to any governmental entity in this state or another
jurisdiction, without a contract to provide fire protection or emergency
medical services, upon the approval of the governing board of the agency,
company, or organization and upon authorization by an officer or employee of
the agency, company, or organization designated by that individual’s title,
office, or position pursuant to the authorization of the governing board of
the agency, company, or organization.



      (2)   The office of the State Fire Marshal may provide fire
protection or emergency medical services, as appropriate, to any governmental
entity, firefighting agency, private fire company, or emergency medical
service organization in this state or another jurisdiction, without a
contract to provide fire protection or emergency medical services, upon the
authorization of the State Fire Marshal.



   (E)   (1)   The provisions of R.C. Chapter 2744, insofar as it is
applicable to the operation of fire departments or emergency medical service
organizations, applies to a political subdivision that is operating a fire
department or emergency medical service organization, and to the members of
the fire department or emergency medical service organization, when the
members are rendering service pursuant to this section outside the boundaries
of the political subdivision.



      (2)   Members acting outside the boundaries of the political
subdivision that is operating the fire department or emergency medical
service organization may participate in any pension or indemnity fund
established by the political subdivision to the same extent as while acting
within the boundaries of the political subdivision, and are entitled to all
the rights and benefits of R.C. Chapter 4123, to the same extent as while
performing service within the boundaries of the political subdivision.



   (F)   A private fire company or private, nonprofit emergency medical
service organization providing service pursuant to this section to a
governmental entity in this state or another jurisdiction has the same
immunities and defenses in a civil action that a political subdivision has
under R.C. § 2744.02. The employees of such a fire company or emergency
medical service organization have the same immunities and defenses in a civil
action that employees of a political subdivision have under R.C. § 2744.03.



   (G)   (1)   The office of the State Fire Marshal, when providing
services pursuant to this section, is liable for injury, death, or loss to
person or property caused by the negligent operation of any motor vehicle by
its employees upon the public roads, highways, or streets in the state when
the employees are engaged within the scope of their employment and authority,
without regard to the proximity of that operation to the office of the State
Fire Marshal. Notwithstanding R.C. § 2743.02(A)(1), the following are full
defenses to that liability:



         (a)   An employee providing fire protection was
operating a motor vehicle while engaged in duty at a fire, proceeding toward
a place where a fire is in progress or is believed to be in progress, or
answering any other emergency and the operation of the vehicle did not
constitute willful or wanton misconduct.



         (b)   An employee providing emergency medical services
was operating a motor vehicle while responding to or completing a call for
emergency medical care or treatment, the employee was holding a valid
driver's license issued under R.C. Chapter 4507, the operation of the vehicle
did not constitute willful or wanton misconduct, and the operation complies
with the precautions described in R.C. § 4511.03.



      (2)   An employee of the office of the State Fire Marshal,
when providing service pursuant to this section, is immune from liability for
injury, death, or loss to person or property caused by the operation of any
motor vehicle upon the public roads, highways, or streets in the state,
without regard to the proximity of that operation to the office of the State
Fire Marshal, unless one of the following applies:



         (a)   The operation of the vehicle was manifestly
outside the scope of the employee’s employment of official responsibilities.



         (b)   The operation of the vehicle constituted willful
or wanton misconduct.



(R.C. § 9.60)



§ 38.15  REGULATION OF CONSTRUCTION IN FIRE LIMITS.



   The Legislative Authority  may regulate the erection of houses and
business structures and prohibit the erection of buildings within such limits
as it deems proper, unless the outer walls are constructed of noncombustible
material, and, on the petition of the owners of not less than two-thirds of
the ground included in any square or half-square, may prohibit the erection
thereon of any building, or addition to any building more than ten feet high,
unless the outer walls are made of iron, stone, brick and mortar, or of some
of them, and may provide for the removal of any building or additions erected
in violation of such prohibition.



(R.C. § 737.28)



VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTERS’ DEPENDENTS FUND BOARD



§ 38.30  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this subchapter:



   FIRE DEPARTMENT. Means a volunteer fire department, a fire department
of a political subdivision or fire district of the state, or a private
volunteer company that has elected to participate in the Volunteer
Firefighters' Dependents Fund pursuant to R.C. § 146.02.



   MEMBER OF THE FUND. Includes a political subdivision or fire district
of the state that maintains, in whole or in part, a volunteer fire department
or employs volunteer firefighters, and a private volunteer fire company that
has elected to participate in the Volunteer Firefighters' Dependents Fund.



   PRIVATE VOLUNTEER FIRE COMPANY. Means a company of trained volunteer
firefighters having a contract to furnish fire protection or emergency
service or both to a political subdivision or fire district of the state.



   TOTALLY AND PERMANENTLY DISABLED. Means that a volunteer firefighter is
unable to engage in any substantial gainful employment for a period of not
less than twelve months by reason of a medically determinable physical
impairment that is permanent or presumed to be permanent.



   VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTER.



      (1)   VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTER means both of the following,
subject to division (2) of this definition:



         (a)   A duly appointed member of a fire department on
either a non-pay or part-pay basis who is ineligible to be a member of the
Ohio Police and Fire Pension Fund, or whose employment as a firefighter does
not in itself qualify any such person for membership in the Public Employees
Retirement System, or who has wived membership in the Public Employees
Retirement System;



         (b)   Firefighters drafted, requisitioned, or appointed
to serve in an emergency.



      (2)   (a)   A volunteer firefighter who is a member of the
Public Employees Retirement System shall be considered a volunteer
firefighter for purposes of this chapter and R.C. Chapter 146 and, in
particular, for purposes of R.C. § 146.12(A) and (B), until the firefighter
has at least one and one-half years of Ohio service credit for purposes of
R.C. § 145.45(B);



         (b)   A volunteer firefighter who is a member of the
Public Employees Retirement System shall be considered a volunteer
firefighter for purposes of this chapter and R.C. Chapter 146 and, in
particular, for purposes of R.C. § 146.12(C), until the firefighter has at
least five years of total service credit for purposes of R.C.  §§ 145.35
and 145.36 or 145.361.



   VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTERS' DEPENDENTS FUND. Means the fund established by
R.C. § 146.07.



(R.C. § 146.01) 



§ 38.31  ESTABLISHMENT.



   (A)   If and when the municipality has a Fire Department employing
volunteer firefighters, it shall be a member of the Volunteer Firefighters'
Dependents Fund and shall establish a Volunteer Firefighters' Dependents Fund
Board.



   (B)   A private volunteer fire company which has contracted to
afford fire protection to a political subdivision or fire district may become
a member of the Volunteer Firefighters' Dependents Fund by election and
shall, if it so elects, establish a Volunteer Firefighters' Dependents Fund
Board. The company shall notify the State Fire Marshal and the governing body
of the political subdivision or fire district with which it has its major
contract of the election to become a member of the Fund.



(R.C. § 146.02)



§ 38.32  MEMBERSHIP; VACANCIES.



   (A)   A Volunteer Firefighters' Dependents Fund Board provided for
in § 38.31(A) shall consist of five members chosen as follows:



      (1)   Two members elected by the Legislative Authority of the
political subdivision or the legislative authority of the fire district;



      (2)   Two members elected by the Fire Department or the
volunteer firefighters;



      (3)   One member elected by the Board members who were elected
pursuant to divisions (A)(1) and (A)(2) of this section. This member shall be
an elector of the municipality or the fire district, but not a public
employee, a member of Legislative Authority or a member of the Fire
Department.



   (B)   A Volunteer Firefighters' Dependents Fund Board provided for
in § 38.31(B) shall consist of five members chosen as follows:



      (1)   Two members elected by Legislative Authority of the
political subdivision or the legislative authority of the fire district with
which the private volunteer fire company has its major contract;



      (2)   Two members elected by the private volunteer fire
company;



      (3)   One member elected by the Board members who were elected
pursuant to divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2) of this section. This member shall be
an elector of a political subdivision or fire district with which the private
volunteer fire company has contracted to afford fire protection, but not a
public employee, a member of the Legislative Authority or a member of the
fire company.



   (C)   Any vacancy occurring in a Volunteer Firefighters' Dependents
Fund Board shall be filled at a special election called by the Secretary of
the Board.



(R.C. § 146.03)



§ 38.33  ELECTION AND TERM OF MEMBERS.



   (A)   The term of each member of the Volunteer Firefighters'
Dependents Fund Board is one year and begins on January 1.



   (B)   Election of Board members provided for in § 38.32(A)(1) and
(B)(1) shall be held each year no earlier than November 1 and no later than
the second Monday in December, and the election of the Board members provided
for in § 38.32(A)(3) and (B)(3) shall be held each year on or before
December 31.



   (C)   The Board members provided for in § 38.32 (A)(2) and (B)(2)
shall be elected on or before the second Monday in December, as follows:



      (1)   The Secretary of the Board shall give notice of the
election by posting it in a conspicuous place at the headquarters of the Fire
Department or fire company and at the house of each company composing the
Fire Department. Between 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on the day designated, each
member of the Department or company shall send in writing the name of two
persons, members of the Department or company, who are the member's choices.



      (2)   All votes cast at the election shall be counted and
recorded by the Board which shall announce the result. The two members
receiving the highest number of votes are elected. If any two persons receive
a tie vote, it shall be decided by lot or in any other way agreed upon by the
persons for whom such tie vote was cast.



(R.C. § 146.04)



§ 38.34  ORGANIZATION; RULES AND REGULATIONS; ROSTER.



   (A)   The Volunteer Firefighters' Dependents Fund Board shall meet
promptly after its election and organize. A Chairperson and a Secretary shall
be elected. The Secretary shall keep a complete record of the proceedings of
the Board, which record shall be maintained as a permanent file.



   (B)   The Board may adopt rules necessary for the handling and
processing of claims and shall perform such other duties as are necessary to
carry out this subchapter and R.C. §§ 146.01 through 146.19.



   (C)   The Secretary of the Board shall immediately certify to the
State Fire Marshal the names and addresses of the members elected, by whom
elected, and the names of the Board Chairperson and Secretary. The Secretary
shall also forward a certificate prepared by the Municipal Clerk or the clerk
of the fire district of the current assessed valuation of the municipality or
fire district if the municipality or fire district is a member of the Fund.



   (D)   A private volunteer fire company which is a member of the Fund
shall provide the Secretary of the Board with a roster of the fire company
members and shall report any changes to the Secretary when they occur. Only
persons whose names appear on the list, and in no event more than an average
number of 50 names per station operated by the volunteer fire company, are
eligible for benefits under this subchapter and R.C. §§ 146.01 through
146.19.



(R.C. § 146.05)



§ 38.35  COMPENSATION AND EXPENSES OF BOARD; LEGAL ADVISOR.



   (A)   The members of the Volunteer Firefighters' Dependents Fund
Board shall serve without compensation. The municipality or the fire district
within which the Board operates shall provide the necessary meeting place,
stationery, postage, and supplies for the efficient conduct of its business.



   (B)   The legal advisor for the Board is the prosecuting attorney of
the county in which the Board is located.



(R.C. § 146.06)



NATURAL HAZARD MITIGATION PLAN



§ 38.45  COUNTY PLAN ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The village hereby adopts by reference, and makes a part of this code,
the same as if set forth in full herein, the Auglaize County
Multi-Jurisdictional Natural Hazard Mitigation Plan.



(Res. 09-04-02, passed 5-5-09)



CHAPTER 39:  INCOME TAX EFFECTIVE BEGINNING JANUARY 1, 2016



Section



   39.01   Authority to levy tax; purposes of tax; rate



   39.011   Authority to levy tax



   39.012   Purposes of tax; rate 



   39.013   Allocation of funds



   39.014   Statement of procedural history; state mandated changes to
municipal income tax



   39.02   Effective date



   39.03   Definitions



   39.04   Income subject to tax for individuals



   39.041   Determining municipal taxable income for individuals



   39.042   Domicile



   39.043   Exemption for member or employee of general assembly and
certain judges



   39.05   Collection at source



   39.051   Collection at source; withholding from wages



   39.052   Collection at source; occasional entrant



   39.053   Collection at source; casino and VLT



   39.06   Income subject to net profit tax



   39.061   Determining municipal taxable income for taxpayers who are
not individuals



   39.062   Net profit; income subject to net profit tax; alternative
apportionment



   39.063   Consolidated federal income tax return



   39.064   Tax credit for businesses that foster new jobs in Ohio 



   39.065   Tax credits to foster job retention 



   39.07   Declaration of estimated tax



   39.08   Credit for tax paid



   39.081   Credit for tax paid to another municipality



   39.082   Refundable credit for qualifying loss



   39.083   Credit for person working in joint economic development
district



   39.084   Credit for tax beyond statute for obtaining refund



   39.09   Annual return



   39.091   Return and payment of tax



   39.092   Return and payment of tax; individuals serving in combat
zone



   39.093   Use of Ohio Business Gateway; types of filings authorized



   39.094   Extension of time to file



   39.095   Amended returns



   39.096   Refunds



   39.10   Penalty, interest, fees and charges



   39.11   Audit



   39.12   Rounding



   39.13   Authority and powers of the Tax Administrator



   39.131   Authority of Tax Administrator; administrative powers of
the Tax Administrator



   39.132   Authority of Tax Administrator; compromise of claim and
payment over time



   39.133   Authority of Tax Administrator; right to examine



   39.134   Authority of Tax Administrator; requiring identifying
information



   39.14   Confidentiality



   39.15   Fraud



   39.16   Opinion of the Tax Administrator



   39.17   Assessment; appeal based on presumption of delivery



   39.18   Board of Tax Review; appeal to Local Board of Tax Review



   39.19   Actions to recover; statute of limitations



   39.20   Adoption of rules



 



   39.97   Collection of tax after termination of chapter



   39.98   Savings clause



   39.99   Violations - penalty



§ 39.01  AUTHORITY TO LEVY TAX; PURPOSES OF TAX; RATE.



§ 39.011  AUTHORITY TO LEVY TAX.



   (A)   The tax on income and the withholding tax established by this
Chapter 39 are authorized by Article XVIII, Section 3 of the Ohio
Constitution. The tax on income and the withholding tax established by this
Chapter 39 are deemed to be levied in accordance with, and to be consistent
with, the provisions and limitations of R.C. Chapter 718.  This chapter is
deemed to incorporate the provisions of R.C. Chapter 718.



   (B)   The tax is an annual tax levied on the income of every person
residing in or earning or receiving income in the municipal corporation, and
shall be measured by municipal taxable income. The municipality shall tax
income at a uniform rate. The tax is levied on municipal taxable income, as
defined herein.



(Ord. 15-10-03, passed 11-17-15)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to tax income and withhold tax, see R.C. § 718.04



§ 39.012  PURPOSES OF TAX; RATE



   (A)   To provide funds for the purposes of constructing,
maintaining, operating and acquiring of capital improvements, including
street drainage and for general municipal operations in the village and there
shall be and hereby is levied a tax on qualifying wages, commissions, and
other compensation and on net profits as hereinafter provided.



   (B)   An annual tax for the purpose specified in § 39.012(A) above,
shall be levied at a rate of 1-1/2% per annum.



(Ord. 15-10-03, passed 11-17-15)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to tax income and withhold tax, see R.C. § 718.04



§ 39.013  ALLOCATION OF FUNDS.



   The income derived from § 39.012 shall be appropriated, as provided by
law, as follows:



   (A)   Administrative costs and refunds.



   (B)   Sixty percent of the balance to the general fund.



   (C)   Forty percent of the balance to the capital improvement fund.



(Ord. 15-10-03, passed 11-17-15)



§ 39.014  STATEMENT OF PROCEDURAL HISTORY; STATE MANDATED CHANGES TO
MUNICIPAL INCOME TAX.



   (A)   Significant and wide-ranging amendments to R.C. Chapter 718
were enacted by Am Sub HB 5, passed by the 130th General Assembly, and signed
by Governor Kasich on December 19, 2014, and H.B. 5 required municipal
corporations to conform to and adopt the provisions of R.C. Chapter 718 in
order to have the authority to impose, enforce, administer and collect a
municipal income tax.



   (B)   As mandated by H.B. 5, municipal income tax Ordinance
15-10-03, effective January 1, 2016, comprehensively amends Chapter 37 in
accordance with the provisions of R.C. Chapter 718 to allow the municipality
to continue the income tax and withholding tax administration and collection
efforts on behalf of the municipality.



(Ord. 15-10-03, passed 11-17-15)



§ 39.02  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   (A)   Ordinance 15-10-03, effective January 1, 2016, and
corresponding changes to R.C. Chapter 718, apply to municipal taxable years
beginning on or after January 1, 2016. All provisions of this Chapter 39
apply to taxable years beginning 2016 and succeeding taxable years.



   (B)   Ordinance 15-10-03 does not repeal the existing sections of
Chapter 37 for any taxable year prior to 2016, but rather amends Chapter 37
effective January 1, 2016.  For municipal taxable years beginning before
January 1, 2016, the municipality shall continue to administer, audit, and
enforce the income tax of the municipality under R.C. Chapter 718 and
ordinances and resolutions of the municipality as that chapter and those
ordinances and resolutions existed before January 1, 2016.



(Ord. 15-10-03, passed 11-17-15)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to tax income and withhold tax, see R.C. § 718.04



§ 39.03  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Any term used in this chapter that is not otherwise defined in
this chapter has the same meaning as when used in a comparable context in
laws of the United States relating to federal income taxation or in Title
LVII of the Ohio Revised Code, unless a different meaning is clearly
required. If a term used in this chapter that is not otherwise defined in
this chapter is used in a comparable context in both the laws of the United
States relating to federal income tax and in Title LVII of the Ohio Revised
Code and the use is not consistent, then the use of the term in the laws of
the United States relating to federal income tax shall control over the use
of the term in Title LVII of the Ohio Revised Code.



   (B)   For purposes of this section, the singular shall include the
plural, and the masculine shall include the feminine and the gender-neutral.



   (C)   As used in this chapter:



      (1)   ADJUSTED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME, for a person required
to file as a C corporation, or for a person that has elected to be taxed as a
C corporation under division (C)(23)(d) of this section, means a C
corporation’s federal taxable income before net operating losses and
special deductions as determined under the Internal Revenue Code, adjusted as
follows:



         (a)   Deduct intangible income to the extent included in
federal taxable income. The deduction shall be allowed regardless of whether
the intangible income relates to assets used in a trade or business or assets
held for the production of income.



         (b)   Add an amount equal to 5% of intangible income
deducted under division (C)(1)(a) of this section, but excluding that portion
of intangible income directly related to the sale, exchange, or other
disposition of property described in section 1221 of the Internal Revenue
Code;



         (c)   Add any losses allowed as a deduction in the
computation of federal taxable income if the losses directly relate to the
sale, exchange, or other disposition of an asset described in section 1221 or
1231 of the Internal Revenue Code;



         (d)   1.   Except as provided in division (C)(1)(d)2.
of this section, deduct income and gain included in federal taxable income to
the extent the income and gain directly relate to the sale, exchange, or
other disposition of an asset described in section 1221 or 1231 of the
Internal Revenue Code;



            2.   Division (C)(1)(d)1. of this section does not
apply to the extent the income or gain is income or gain described in section
1245 or 1250 of the Internal Revenue Code.



         (e)   Add taxes on or measured by net income allowed as
a deduction in the computation of federal taxable income;



         (f)   In the case of a real estate investment trust or
regulated investment company, add all amounts with respect to dividends to,
distributions to, or amounts set aside for or credited to the benefit of
investors and allowed as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable
income;



         (g)   Deduct, to the extent not otherwise deducted or
excluded in computing federal taxable income, any income derived from a
transfer agreement or from the enterprise transferred under that agreement
under R.C. § 4313.02;



         (h)   1.   Except as limited by divisions
(C)(1)(h)2., 3. and 4. of this section, deduct any net operating loss
incurred by the person in a taxable year beginning on or after January 1,
2017. The amount of such net operating loss shall be deducted from net profit
that is reduced by exempt income to the extent necessary to reduce municipal
taxable income to zero, with any remaining unused portion of the net
operating loss carried forward to not more than five consecutive taxable
years following the taxable year in which the loss was incurred, but in no
case for more years than necessary for the deduction to be fully utilized.



            2.   No person shall use the deduction allowed by
division (C)(1)(h) of this section to offset qualifying wages.



            3.   a.   For taxable years beginning in 2018,
2019, 2020, 2021, or 2022, a person may not deduct, for purposes of an income
tax levied by a municipal corporation that levies an income tax before
January 1, 2016, more than 50% of the amount of the deduction otherwise
allowed by division (C)(1)(h)1. of this section.



               b.   For taxable years beginning in 2023 or
thereafter, a person may deduct, for purposes of an income tax levied by a
municipal corporation that levies an income tax before January 1, 2016, the
full amount allowed by division (C)(1)(h)1. of this section.



            4.   Any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward
deduction that is available must be utilized before a taxpayer may deduct any
amount pursuant to division (C)(1)(h) of this section.



            5.   Nothing in division (C)(1)(h)3.a. of this
section precludes a person from carrying forward, for use with respect to any
return filed for a taxable year beginning after 2018, any amount of net
operating loss that was not fully utilized by operation of division
(C)(1)(h)3.a. of this section. To the extent that an amount of net operating
loss that was not fully utilized in one or more taxable years by operation of
division (C)(1)(h)3.a. of this section is carried forward for use with
respect to a return filed for a taxable year beginning in 2019, 2020, 2021,
or 2022, the limitation described in division (C)(1)(h)3.a. of this section
shall apply to the amount carried forward.



         (i)   Deduct any net profit of a pass-through entity
owned directly or indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer’s
federal taxable income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes
that net profit in the group’s federal taxable income in accordance with §
39.063(E)(3)(b) of this chapter. 



         (j)    Add any loss incurred by a pass-through entity
owned directly or indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer’s
federal taxable income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes
that loss in the group’s federal taxable income in accordance with §
39.063(E)(3)(b) of this chapter.



         (k)   If the taxpayer is not a C corporation, is not a
disregarded entity that has made the election described in division
(C)(47)(b) of this section, is not a publicly traded partnership that has
made the election described in division (C)(23)(d) of this section, and is
not an individual, the taxpayer shall compute adjusted federal taxable income
under this section as if the taxpayer were a C corporation, except guaranteed
payments and other similar amounts paid or accrued to a partner, former
partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member shall not
be allowed as a deductible expense unless such payments are in consideration
for the use of capital and treated as payment of interest under section 469
of the Internal Revenue Code or United States treasury regulations. Amounts
paid or accrued to a qualified self-employed retirement plan with respect to
a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former
member of the taxpayer, amounts paid or accrued to or for health insurance
for a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or
former member, and amounts paid or accrued to or for life insurance for a
partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former
member shall not be allowed as a deduction. Nothing in division (C)(1) of
this section shall be construed as allowing the taxpayer to add or deduct any
amount more than once or shall be construed as allowing any taxpayer to
deduct any amount paid to or accrued for purposes of federal self-employment
tax.



      (2)   (a)   ASSESSMENT means any of the following:



            1.   A written finding by the Tax Administrator
that a person has underpaid municipal income tax, or owes penalty and
interest, or any combination of tax, penalty, or interest, to the municipal
corporation;



            2.   A full or partial denial of a refund request
issued under § 39.096(B)(2) of this chapter;



            3.   A Tax Administrator’s denial of a
taxpayer’s request for use of an alternative apportionment method, issued
under § 39.062(B)(2) of this chapter; or



            4.   A Tax Administrator’s requirement for a
taxpayer to use an alternative apportionment method, issued under §
39.062(B)(3) of this chapter.



            5.   For purposes of division (C)(2)(a)1., 2., 3.
and 4. of this section, an assessment shall commence the person’s time
limitation for making an appeal to the Local Board of Tax Review pursuant to
§ 39.18 of this chapter, and shall have “ASSESSMENT” written in all
capital letters at the top of such finding.



         (b)   ASSESSMENT does not include notice(s) denying a
request for refund issued under § 39.096(B)(3) of this chapter, a billing
statement notifying a taxpayer of current or past-due balances owed to the
municipal corporation, a Tax Administrator’s request for additional
information, a notification to the taxpayer of mathematical errors, or a Tax
Administrator’s other written correspondence to a person or taxpayer that
does not meet the criteria prescribed by division (C)(2)(a) of this section.



      (3)   AUDIT means the examination of a person or the
inspection of the books, records, memoranda, or accounts of a person, ordered
to appear before the Tax Administrator, for the purpose of determining
liability for a municipal income tax.



      (4)   BOARD OF REVIEW has same meaning as “Local Board of
Tax Review”. 



      (5)   CALENDAR QUARTER means the three-month period ending on
the last day of March, June, September, or December.



      (6)   CASINO OPERATOR and CASINO FACILITY have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 3772.01.



      (7)   CERTIFIED MAIL, EXPRESS MAIL, UNITED STATES MAIL, POSTAL
SERVICE, and similar terms include any delivery service authorized pursuant
to R.C. § 5703.056.



      (8)   COMPENSATION means any form of remuneration paid to an
employee for personal services.



      (9)   DISREGARDED ENTITY means a single member limited
liability company, a qualifying subchapter S subsidiary, or another entity if
the company, subsidiary, or entity is a disregarded entity for federal income
tax purposes.



      (10)   DOMICILE means the true, fixed and permanent home of
the taxpayer to which, whenever absent, the taxpayer intends to return.



      (11)   EXEMPT INCOME means all of the following:



         (a)   The military pay or allowances of members of the
armed forces of the United States or members of their reserve components,
including the national guard of any state;



         (b)   1.   Except as provided in division
(C)(11)(b)2. of this section, intangible income;



            2.   A municipal corporation that taxed any type
of intangible income on March 29, 1988, pursuant to Section 3 of S.B. 238 of
the 116th general assembly, may continue to tax that type of income if a
majority of the electors of the municipal corporation voting on the question
of whether to permit the taxation of that type of intangible income after
1988 voted in favor thereof at an election held on November 8, 1988.



         (c)   Social security benefits, railroad retirement
benefits, unemployment compensation, pensions, retirement benefit payments,
payments from annuities, and similar payments made to an employee or to the
beneficiary of an employee under a retirement program or plan, disability
payments received from private industry or local, state, or federal
governments or from charitable, religious or educational organizations, and
the proceeds of sickness, accident, or liability insurance policies. As used
in division (C)(11)(c) of this section, “unemployment compensation” does
not include supplemental unemployment compensation described in section
3402(o)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code.



         (d)   The income of religious, fraternal, charitable,
scientific, literary, or educational institutions to the extent such income
is derived from tax-exempt real estate, tax-exempt tangible or intangible
property, or tax-exempt activities.



         (e)   Compensation paid under R.C. §§ 3501.28 or
3501.36 to a person serving as a precinct election official to the extent
that such compensation does not exceed $1,000 for the taxable year. Such
compensation in excess of $1,000 for the taxable year may be subject to
taxation by a municipal corporation. A municipal corporation shall not
require the payer of such compensation to withhold any tax from that
compensation.



         (f)   Dues, contributions, and similar payments received
by charitable, religious, educational, or literary organizations or labor
unions, lodges, and similar organizations;



         (g)   Alimony and child support received;



         (h)   Awards for personal injuries or for damages to
property from insurance proceeds or otherwise, excluding compensation paid
for lost salaries or wages or awards for punitive damages;



         (i)   Income of a public utility when that public
utility is subject to the tax levied under R.C. §§ 5727.24 or 5727.30.
Division (C)(11)(i) of this section does not apply for purposes of R.C.
Chapter 5745.



         (j)   Gains from involuntary conversions, interest on
federal obligations, items of income subject to a tax levied by the state and
that a municipal corporation is specifically prohibited by law from taxing,
and income of a decedent’s estate during the period of administration
except such income from the operation of a trade or business;



         (k)   Compensation or allowances excluded from federal
gross income under section 107 of the Internal Revenue Code;



         (l)   Employee compensation that is not qualifying wages
as defined in division (C)(34) of this section;



         (m)   Compensation paid to a person employed within the
boundaries of a United States air force base under the jurisdiction of the
United States air force that is used for the housing of members of the United
States air force and is a center for air force operations, unless the person
is subject to taxation because of residence or domicile. If the compensation
is subject to taxation because of residence or domicile, tax on such income
shall be payable only to the municipal corporation of residence or domicile.



         (n)   INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK.



         (o)   All of the municipal taxable income earned by
individuals under 18 years of age.



         (p)   1.   Except as provided in divisions
(C)(11)(p)2., 3., and 4. of this section, qualifying wages described in §
39.052(B)(1) or (E) of this chapter to the extent the qualifying wages are
not subject to withholding for the municipality under either of those
divisions.



            2.   The exemption provided in division
(C)(11)(p)1. of this section does not apply with respect to the municipal
corporation in which the employee resided at the time the employee earned the
qualifying wages.



            3.   The exemption provided in division
(C)(11)(p)1. of this section does not apply to qualifying wages that an
employer elects to withhold under § 39.052(D)(2) of this chapter.



            4.   The exemption provided in division
(C)(11)(p)1. of this section does not apply to qualifying wages if both of
the following conditions apply:



               a.   For qualifying wages described in §
39.052(B)(1) of this chapter, the employee’s employer withholds and remits
tax on the qualifying wages to the municipal corporation in which the
employee’s principal place of work is situated, or, for qualifying wages
described in § 39.052(E) of this chapter, the employee’s employer
withholds and remits tax on the qualifying wages to the municipal corporation
in which the employer’s fixed location is located;



               b.   The employee receives a refund of the
tax described in division (C)(11)(p)4.a. of this section on the basis of the
employee not performing services in that municipal corporation.



         (q)   1.   Except as provided in division
(C)(11)(q)2. or 3. of this section, compensation that is not qualifying wages
paid to a nonresident individual for personal services performed in the
municipality on not more than 20 days in a taxable year.



            2.   The exemption provided in division
(C)(11)(q)1. of this section does not apply under either of the following
circumstances:



               a.   The individual’s base of operation is
located in the municipality.



               b.   The individual is a professional
athlete, professional entertainer, or public figure, and the compensation is
paid for the performance of services in the individual’s capacity as a
professional athlete, professional entertainer, or public figure. For
purposes of division (C)(11)(q)2.b. of this section, “professional
athlete,” “professional entertainer,” and “public figure” have the
same meanings as in § 39.052 of this chapter.



            3.   Compensation to which division (C)(11)(q) of
this section applies shall be treated as earned or received at the
individual’s base of operation. If the individual does not have a base of
operation, the compensation shall be treated as earned or received where the
individual is domiciled.



            4.   For purposes of division (C)(11)(q) of this
section, “base of operation” means the location where an individual owns
or rents an office, storefront, or similar facility to which the individual
regularly reports and at which the individual regularly performs personal
services for compensation.



         (r)   Compensation paid to a person for personal
services performed for a political subdivision on property owned by the
political subdivision, regardless of whether the compensation is received by
an employee of the subdivision or another person performing services for the
subdivision under a contract with the subdivision, if the property on which
services are performed is annexed to a municipal corporation pursuant to R.C.
§ 709.023 on or after March 27, 2013, unless the person is subject to such
taxation because of residence. If the compensation is subject to taxation
because of residence, municipal income tax shall be payable only to the
municipal corporation of residence.



         (s)   Income the taxation of which is prohibited by the
constitution or laws of the United States. Any item of income that is exempt
income of a pass-through entity under division (C)(11) of this section is
exempt income of each owner of the pass-through entity to the extent of that
owner’s distributive or proportionate share of that item of the entity’s
income.



      (12)   FORM 2106 means Internal Revenue Service form 2106
filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.



      (13)   GENERIC FORM means an electronic or paper form that is
not prescribed by a particular municipal corporation and that is designed for
reporting taxes withheld by an employer, agent of an employer, or other
payer, estimated municipal income taxes, or annual municipal income tax
liability, including a request for refund.



      (14)   INCOME means the following:



         (a)   1.   For residents, all income, salaries,
qualifying wages, commissions, and other compensation from whatever source
earned or received by the resident, including the resident’s distributive
share of the net profit of pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly
by the resident and any net profit of the resident, except as provided in
division (C)(23)(d) of this section.



            2.   For the purposes of division (C)(14)(a)1. of
this section:



               a.   Any net operating loss of the resident
incurred in the taxable year and the resident’s distributive share of any
net operating loss generated in the same taxable year and attributable to the
resident’s ownership interest in a pass-through entity shall be allowed as
a deduction, for that taxable year and the following five taxable years,
against any other net profit of the resident or the resident’s distributive
share of any net profit attributable to the resident’s ownership interest
in a pass-through entity until fully utilized, subject to division
(C)(14)(a)4. of this section;



               b.   The resident’s distributive share of
the net profit of each pass-through entity owned directly or indirectly by
the resident shall be calculated without regard to any net operating loss
that is carried forward by that entity from a prior taxable year and applied
to reduce the entity’s net profit for the current taxable year.



            3.   Division (C)(14)(a)2. of this section does
not apply with respect to any net profit or net operating loss attributable
to an ownership interest in an S corporation unless shareholders’
distributive shares of net profits from S corporations are subject to tax in
the municipal corporation as provided in division (C)(14)(e) of this section.



            4.   Any amount of a net operating loss used to
reduce a taxpayer’s net profit for a taxable year shall reduce the amount
of net operating loss that may be carried forward to any subsequent year for
use by that taxpayer. In no event shall the cumulative deductions for all
taxable years with respect to a taxpayer’s net operating loss exceed the
original amount of that net operating loss available to that taxpayer.



         (b)    In the case of nonresidents, all income,
salaries, qualifying wages, commissions, and other compensation from whatever
source earned or received by the nonresident for work done, services
performed or rendered, or activities conducted in the municipality, including
any net profit of the nonresident, but excluding the nonresident’s
distributive share of the net profit or loss of only pass-through entities
owned directly or indirectly by the nonresident.



         (c)   For taxpayers that are not individuals, net profit
of the taxpayer;



         (d)   Lottery, sweepstakes, gambling and sports
winnings, winnings from games of chance, and prizes and awards. If the
taxpayer is a professional gambler for federal income tax purposes, the
taxpayer may deduct related wagering losses and expenses to the extent
authorized under the Internal Revenue Code and claimed against such winnings.
Credit for tax withheld or paid to another municipal corporation on such
winnings paid to the municipal corporation where winnings occur is limited to
the credit as specified in § 39.081 of this chapter.



         (e)   For residents, an S corporation shareholder’s
distributive share of net profits of an S corporation to the extent the
distributive share would be allocated or apportioned to this state under R.C.
§ 5733.05(B)(1) and (2) if the S corporation were a corporation subject to
taxes imposed under R.C. Chapter 5733, and the tax shall apply to the
distributive share of a shareholder of an S corporation in the hands of the
shareholder of the S corporation.



      (15)   INTANGIBLE INCOME means income of any of the following
types: income yield, interest, capital gains, dividends, or other income
arising from the ownership, sale, exchange, or other disposition of
intangible property including, but not limited to, investments, deposits,
money, or credits as those terms are defined in R.C. Chapter 5701, and
patents, copyrights, trademarks, trade names, investments in real estate
investment trusts, investments in regulated investment companies, and
appreciation on deferred compensation. “Intangible income” does not
include prizes, awards, or other income associated with any lottery winnings,
gambling winnings, or other similar games of chance.



      (16)   INTERNAL REVENUE CODE means the “Internal Revenue
Code of 1986,” 100 Sta. 2085, 26 U.S.C.A. 1, as amended.



      (17)   LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY means a limited liability
company formed under R.C. Chapter 1705 or under the laws of another state.



      (18)   LOCAL BOARD OF TAX REVIEW and BOARD OF TAX REVIEW means
the entity created under § 39.18 of this chapter.



      (19)   MUNICIPAL CORPORATION means, in general terms, a status
conferred upon a local government unit, by state law giving the unit certain
autonomous operating authority such as the power of taxation, power of
eminent domain, police power and regulatory power, and includes a joint
economic development district or joint economic development zone that levies
an income tax under R.C. §§ 718.691, 715.70, 715.71, or 715.74.



      (20)   (a)   MUNICIPAL TAXABLE INCOME means the following:



            1.   For a person other than an individual, income
reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income and then,
as applicable, apportioned or sitused to the municipality under § 39.062 of
this chapter, and further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss
carryforward available to the person for the municipality.



            2.   a.   For an individual who is a resident
of a municipality other than a qualified municipal corporation, income
reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income, then
reduced as provided in division (C)(20)(b) of this section, and further
reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward available to the
individual for the municipality.



               b.   For an individual who is a resident of
a qualified municipal corporation, Ohio adjusted gross income reduced by
income exempted, and increased by deductions excluded, by the qualified
municipal corporation from the qualified municipal corporation’s tax on or
before December 31, 2013. If a qualified municipal corporation, on or before
December 31, 2013, exempts income earned by individuals who are not residents
of the qualified municipal corporation and net profit of persons that are not
wholly located within the qualified municipal corporation, such individual or
person shall have no municipal taxable income for the purposes of the tax
levied by the qualified municipal corporation and may be exempted by the
qualified municipal corporation from the requirements of R.C. § 718.03.



            3.   For an individual who is a nonresident of the
municipality, income reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise
included in income and then, as applicable, apportioned or sitused to the
municipality under § 39.062 of this chapter, then reduced as provided in
division (C)(20)(b) of this section, and further reduced by any pre-2017 net
operating loss carryforward available to the individual for the municipality.



         (b)   In computing the municipal taxable income of a
taxpayer who is an individual, the taxpayer may subtract, as provided in
division (C)(20)(a)2.a. or 3. of this section, the amount of the
individual’s employee business expenses reported on the individual’s form
2106 that the individual deducted for federal income tax purposes for the
taxable year, subject to the limitation imposed by section 67 of the Internal
Revenue Code. For the municipal corporation in which the taxpayer is a
resident, the taxpayer may deduct all such expenses allowed for federal
income tax purposes. For a municipal corporation in which the taxpayer is not
a resident, the taxpayer may deduct such expenses only to the extent the
expenses are related to the taxpayer’s performance of personal services in
that nonresident municipal corporation.



      (21)   MUNICIPALITY means the Village of Minster.



      (22)   NET OPERATING LOSS means a loss incurred by a person in
the operation of a trade or business.  “Net operating loss” does not
include unutilized losses resulting from basis limitations, at-risk
limitations, or passive activity loss limitations.



      (23)   (a)   NET PROFIT for a person other than an
individual means adjusted federal taxable income.



         (b)   NET PROFIT for a person who is an individual means
the individual’s net profit required to be reported on schedule C, schedule
E, or schedule F reduced by any net operating loss carried forward. For the
purposes of division (C)(23)(a) of this section, the net operating loss
carried forward shall be calculated and deducted in the same manner as
provided in division (C)(1)(h) of this section.



         (c)   For the purposes of this chapter, and
notwithstanding division (C)(23)(a) of this section, net profit of a
disregarded entity shall not be taxable as against that disregarded entity,
but shall instead be included in the net profit of the owner of the
disregarded entity.



         (d)   1.   For purposes of this chapter, “publicly
traded partnership” means any partnership, an interest in which is
regularly traded on an established securities market. A “publicly traded
partnership” may have any number of partners.



            2.   For the purposes of this chapter, and not
withstanding any other provision of this chapter, the net profit of a
publicly traded partnership that makes the election described in division
(C)(23)(d) of this section shall be taxed as if the partnership were a C
corporation, and shall not be treated as the net profit or income of any
owner of the partnership.



            3.   A publicly traded partnership that is treated
as a partnership for federal income tax purposes and that is subject to tax
on its net profits in one or more municipal corporations in this state may
elect to be treated as a C corporation for municipal income tax purposes. 
The publicly traded partnership shall make the election in every municipal
corporation in which the partnership is subject to taxation on its net
profits. The election shall be made on the annual tax return filed in each
such municipal corporation. Once the election is made, the election is
binding for a five-year period beginning with the first taxable year of the
initial election. The election continues to be binding for each subsequent
five-year period unless the taxpayer elects to discontinue filing municipal
income tax returns as a C corporation for municipal purposes under division
(C)(23)(d)4. of this section.



            4.   An election to discontinue filing as a C
corporation must be made in the first year following the last year of a
five-year election period in effect under division (C)(23)(d)3. of this
section.  The election to discontinue filing as a C corporation is binding
for a five-year period beginning with the first taxable year of the election
and continues to be binding for each subsequent five-year period unless the
taxpayer elects to discontinue filing municipal income tax returns as a
partnership for municipal purposes.  An election to discontinue filing as a
partnership must be made in the first year following the last year of a
five-year election period.



            5.   The publicly traded partnership shall not be
required to file the election with any municipal corporation in which the
partnership is not subject to taxation on its net profits, but division
(C)(23)(d) of this section applies to all municipal corporations in which an
individual owner of the partnership resides. 



            6.   The individual owners of the partnership not
filing as a C Corporation shall be required to file with their municipal
corporation of residence, and report partnership distribution of net profit.



      (24)   NONRESIDENT means an individual that is not a resident
of the municipality.



      (25)   OHIO BUSINESS GATEWAY means the online computer network
system, created under R.C. § 125.30, that allows persons to electronically
file business reply forms with state agencies and includes any successor
electronic filing and payment system.



      (26)   OTHER PAYER means any person, other than an
individual’s employer or the employer’s agent, that pays an individual
any amount included in the federal gross income of the individual. “Other
payer” includes casino operators and video lottery terminal sales agents.



      (27)   PASS-THROUGH ENTITY means a partnership not treated as
an association taxable as a C corporation for federal income tax purposes, a
limited liability company not treated as an association taxable as a C
corporation for federal income tax purposes, an S corporation, or any other
class of entity from which the income or profits of the entity are given
pass-through treatment for federal income tax purposes. “Pass-through
entity” does not include a trust, estate, grantor of a grantor trust, or
disregarded entity.



      (28)   PENSION means any amount paid to an employee or former
employee that is reported to the recipient on an IRS form 1099-R, or
successor form. “Pension” does not include deferred compensation, or
amounts attributable to nonqualified deferred compensation plans, reported as
FICA/Medicare wages on an IRS form W-2, wage and tax statement, or successor
form.



      (29)   PERSON includes individuals, firms, companies, joint
stock companies, business trusts, estates, trusts, partnerships, limited
liability partnerships, limited liability companies, associations, C
corporations, S corporations, governmental entities, and any other entity.



      (30)   POSTAL SERVICE means the United States postal service,
or private delivery service delivering documents and packages within an
agreed upon delivery schedule, or any other carrier service delivering the
item.



      (31)   POSTMARK DATE, DATE OF POSTMARK, and similar terms
include the date recorded and marked by a delivery service and recorded
electronically to a database kept in the regular course if its business and
marked on the cover in which the payment or document is enclosed, the date on
which the payment or document was given to the delivery service for delivery.



      (32)   (a)   PRE-2017 NET OPERATING LOSS CARRYFORWARD means
any net operating loss incurred in a taxable year beginning before January 1,
2017, to the extent such loss was permitted, by a resolution or ordinance of
the municipality that was adopted by the municipality before January 1, 2016,
to be carried forward and utilized to offset income or net profit generated
in such municipality in future taxable years.



         (b)   For the purpose of calculating municipal taxable
income, any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward may be carried forward
to any taxable year, including taxable years beginning in 2017 or thereafter,
for the number of taxable years provided in the resolution or ordinance or
until fully utilized, whichever is earlier.



      (33)   QUALIFIED MUNICIPAL CORPORATION means a municipal
corporation that, by resolution or ordinance adopted on or before December
31, 2011, adopted Ohio adjusted gross income, as defined by R.C. § 5747.01,
as the income subject to tax for the purposes of imposing a municipal income
tax.



      (34)   QUALIFYING WAGES means wages, as defined in section
3121(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, without regard to any wage limitations,
adjusted as follows:



         (a)   Deduct the following amounts:



            1.   Any amount included in wages if the amount
constitutes compensation attributable to a plan or program described in
section 125 of the Internal Revenue Code.



            2.   Any amount included in wages if the amount
constitutes payment on account of a disability related to sickness or an
accident paid by a party unrelated to the employer, agent of an employer, or
other payer.



            3.   INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK.



            4.   INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK.



            5.   Any amount included in wages that is exempt
income.



         (b)   Add the following amounts:



            1.   Any amount not included in wages solely
because the employee was employed by the employer before April 1, 1986.



            2.   Any amount not included in wages because the
amount arises from the sale, exchange, or other disposition of a stock
option, the exercise of a stock option, or the sale, exchange, or other
disposition of stock purchased under a stock option. Division (C)(34)(b)2. of
this section applied only to those amounts constituting ordinary income.



            3.   Any amount not included in wages if the
amount is an amount described in section 401(k), 403(b), or 457 of the
Internal Revenue Code. Division (C)(34)(b)3. of this section applies only to
employee contributions and employee deferrals.



            4.   Any amount that is supplemental unemployment
compensation benefits described in section 3402(o)(2) of the Internal Revenue
Code and not included in wages.



            5.   Any amount received that is treated as
self-employment income for federal tax purposes in accordance with section
1402(a)(8) of the Internal Revenue Code.



            6.   Any amount not included in wages if all of
the following apply:



               a.   For the taxable year the amount is
employee compensation that is earned outside of the United States and that
either is included in the taxpayer’s gross income for federal income tax
purposes or would have been included in the taxpayer’s gross income for
such purposes if the taxpayer did not elect to exclude the income under
section 911 of the Internal Revenue Code;



               b.   For no preceding taxable year did the
amount constitute wages as defined in section 3121(a) of the Internal Revenue
Code;



               c.   For no succeeding taxable year will the
amount constitute wages; and



               d.   For any taxable year the amount has not
otherwise been added to wages pursuant to either division (C)(34)(b) of this
section or R.C. § 718.03, as that section existed before the effective date
of H.B. 5 of the 130th general assembly, March 23, 2015.



      (35)   RELATED ENTITY means any of the following:



         (a)   An individual stockholder, or a member of the
stockholder’s family enumerated in section 318 of the Internal Revenue
Code, if the stockholder and the members of the stockholder’s family own
directly, indirectly, beneficially, or constructively, in the aggregate, at
least 50% of the value of the taxpayer’s outstanding stock;



         (b)   A stockholder, or a stockholder’s partnership,
estate, trust, or corporation, if the stockholder and the stockholder’s
partnerships, estates, trusts, or corporations own directly, indirectly,
beneficially, or constructively, in the aggregate, at least 50% of the value
of the taxpayer’s outstanding stock;



         (c)   A corporation, or a party related to the
corporation in a manner that would require an attribution of stock from the
corporation to the party or from the party to the corporation under division
(C)(35)(d) of this section, provided the taxpayer owns directly, indirectly,
beneficially, or constructively, at least 50% of the value of the
corporation’s outstanding stock;



         (d)   The attribution rules described in section 318 of
the Internal Revenue Code apply for the purpose of determining whether the
ownership requirements in divisions (C)(35)(a) to (c) of this section have
been met.



      (36)   RELATED MEMBER means a person that, with respect to the
taxpayer during all or any portion of the taxable year, is either a related
entity, a component member as defined in section 1563(b) of the Internal
Revenue Code, or a person to or from whom there is attribution of stock
ownership in accordance with section 1563(e) of the Internal Revenue Code
except, for purposes of determining whether a person is a related member
under this division, “20%” shall be substituted for “5%” wherever
“5%” appears in section 1563(e) of the Internal Revenue Code.



      (37)   RESIDENT means an individual who is domiciled in the
municipality as determined under § 39.042 of this chapter.



      (38)   S CORPORATION means a person that has made an election
under subchapter S of Chapter 1 of Subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code
for its taxable year.



      (39)   SCHEDULE C means Internal Revenue Service schedule C
(form 1040) filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.



      (40)   SCHEDULE E means Internal Revenue Service schedule E
(form 1040) filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.



      (41)   SCHEDULE F Means Internal Revenue Service schedule F
(form 1040) filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.



      (42)   SINGLE MEMBER LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY means a limited
liability company that has one direct member.



      (43)   SMALL EMPLOYER means any employer that had total
revenue of less than $500,000 during the preceding taxable year. For purposes
of this division, “total revenue” means receipts of any type or kind,
including, but not limited to, sales receipts; payments; rents; profits;
gains, dividends, and other investment income; commissions; premiums; money;
property; grants; contributions; donations; gifts; program service revenue;
patient service revenue; premiums; fees, including premium fees and service
fees; tuition payments; unrelated business revenue; reimbursements; any type
of payment from a governmental unit, including grants and other allocations;
and any other similar receipts reported for federal income tax purposes or
under generally accepted accounting principles. “Small employer” does not
include the federal government; any state government, including any state
agency or instrumentality; any political subdivision; or any entity treated
as a government for financial accounting and reporting purposes.



      (44)   TAX ADMINISTRATOR means the individual charged with
direct responsibility for administration of an income tax levied by a
municipal corporation in accordance with this chapter, and also includes the
following:



         (a)   A municipal corporation acting as the agent of
another municipal corporation;



         (b)   A person retained by a municipal corporation to
administer a tax levied by the municipal corporation, but only if the
municipal corporation does not compensate the person in whole or in part on a
contingency basis;



         (c)   The Central Collection Agency (CCA) or the
Regional Income Tax Agency (RITA) or their successors in interest, or another
entity organized to perform functions similar to those performed by the
Central Collection Agency and the Regional Income Tax Agency.



      (45)   TAX RETURN PREPARER means any individual described in
section 7701(a)(36) of the Internal Revenue Code and 26 C.F.R. 301.7701-15.



      (46)   TAXABLE YEAR means the corresponding tax reporting
period as prescribed for the taxpayer under the Internal Revenue Code.



      (47)   (a)   TAXPAYER means a person subject to a tax
levied on income by a municipal corporation in accordance with this chapter.
“Taxpayer” does not include a grantor trust or, except as provided in
division (C)(47)(b)1. of this section, a disregarded entity.



         (b)   1.   A single member limited liability company
that is a disregarded entity for federal tax purposes may be a separate
taxpayer from its single member in all Ohio municipal corporations in which
it either filed as a separate taxpayer or did not file for its taxable year
ending in 2003, if all of the following conditions are met:



               a.   The limited liability company’s
single member is also a limited liability company.



               b.   The limited liability company and its
single member were formed and doing business in one or more Ohio municipal
corporations for at least five years before January 1, 2004.



               c.   Not later than December 31, 2004, the
limited liability company and its single member each made an election to be
treated as a separate taxpayer under R.C. § 718.01(L) as this section
existed on December 31, 2004.



               d.   The limited liability company was not
formed for the purpose of evading or reducing Ohio municipal corporation
income tax liability of the limited liability company or its single member.



               e.   The Ohio municipal corporation that was
the primary place of business of the sole member of the limited liability
company consented to the election.



            2.   For purposes of division (C)(47)(b)1.e. of
this section, a municipal corporation was the primary place of business of a
limited liability company if, for the limited liability company’s taxable
year ending in 2003, its income tax liability was greater in that municipal
corporation than in any other municipal corporation in Ohio, and that tax
liability to that municipal corporation for its taxable year ending in 2003
was at least $400,000.



      (48)   TAXPAYERS’ RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES means the
rights provided to taxpayers in R.C. §§ 718.11, 718.12, 718.19, 718.23,
718.36, 718.37, 718.38, 5717.011, and 5717.03 and any corresponding
ordinances of the municipality, and the responsibilities of taxpayers to
file, report, withhold, remit, and pay municipal income tax and otherwise
comply with R.C. Chapter 718 and resolutions, ordinances, and rules adopted
by a municipal corporation for the imposition and administration of a
municipal income tax.



      (49)   VIDEO LOTTERY TERMINAL has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 3770.21.



      (50)   VIDEO LOTTERY TERMINAL SALES AGENT means a lottery
sales agent licensed under R.C. Chapter 3770 to conduct video lottery
terminals on behalf of the state pursuant to R.C. § 3770.21.



(Ord. 15-10-03, passed 11-17-15)



Statutory reference:



   Related definitions, see R.C. § 718.01



§ 39.04  INCOME SUBJECT TO TAX FOR INDIVIDUALS.



§ 39.041  DETERMINING MUNICIPAL TAXABLE INCOME FOR INDIVIDUALS.



   (A)   “Municipal taxable income” for a resident of the
municipality is calculated as follows:



      (1)   “Income” reduced by “exempt income” to the
extent such exempt income is otherwise included in income, reduced by
allowable employee business expense deduction as found in § 39.03(C)(20)(b)
of this chapter, further reduced by any “pre-2017 net operating loss
carryforward” equals “municipal taxable income”.



         (a)   “Income” is defined in § 39.03(C)(14) of this
chapter.



            1.   “Qualifying wages” is defined in §
39.03(C)(34).



            2.   “Net profit” is included in “income,”
and is defined in § 39.03(C)(23) of this chapter. This section also provides
that the net operating loss carryforward shall be calculated and deducted in
the same manner as provided in § 39.03(C)(1)(h).  Treatment of net profits
received by an individual taxpayer from rental real estate is provided in §
39.062(E).



            3.   Section 39.03(C)(14) provides the following:
offsetting and net operating loss carryforward treatment in §
39.03(C)(14)(a)2.a.; resident’s distributive share of net profit from pass
through entity treatment in § 39.03(C)(14)(a)2.b.; treatment of S
Corporation distributive share of net profit in the hands of the shareholder
in § 39.03(C)(14)(a)3.; restriction of amount of loss permitted to be
carried forward for use by taxpayer in a subsequent taxable year in §
39.03(C)(14)(a)4.



            4.   “Pass through entity” is defined in §
39.03(C)(27).



         (b)   “Exempt income” is defined in § 39.03(C)(11)
of this chapter.



         (c)   Allowable employee business expense deduction is
described in § 39.03(C)(20)(b) of this chapter, and is subject to the
limitations provided in that section.



         (d)   “Pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward” is
defined in § 39.03(C)(32) of this chapter.



   (B)   “Municipal taxable income” for a nonresident of the
municipality is calculated as follows:



      (1)   “Income” reduced by “exempt income” to the
extent such exempt income is otherwise included in income, as applicable,
apportioned or sitused to the municipality as provided in § 39.062 of this
chapter, reduced by allowable employee business expense deduction as found in
§ 39.03(C)(20)(b) of this chapter, further reduced by any “pre-2017 net
operating loss carryforward” equals “municipal taxable income”.



         (a)   “Income” is defined in § 39.03(C)(14) of this
chapter.



            1.   “Qualifying wages” is defined in §
39.03(C)(34).



            2.   “Net profit” is included in “income”,
and is defined in § 39.03(C)(23) of this chapter. This section also provides
that the net operating loss carryforward shall be calculated and deducted in
the same manner as provided in § 39.03(C)(1)(h). “Net profit” for a
nonresident individual includes any net profit of the nonresident, but
excludes the distributive share of net profit or loss of only pass through
entity owned directly or indirectly by the nonresident.



            3.   “Pass through entity” is defined in §
39.03(C)(27).



         (b)   “Exempt income” is defined in § 39.03(C)(11)
of this chapter. 



         (c)   “Apportioned or sitused to the municipality as
provided in § 39.062 of this chapter” includes the apportionment of net
profit income attributable to work done or services performed in the
municipality. Treatment of net profits received by an individual taxpayer
from rental real estate is provided in § 39.062(E).



         (d)   “Allowable employee business expense
deduction” as described in § 39.03(C)(20)(b) of this chapter, is subject
to the limitations provided in that section. For a nonresident of the
municipality, the deduction is limited to the extent the expenses are related
to the performance of personal services by the nonresident in the
municipality.



         (e)   “Pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward” is
defined in § 39.03(C)(32) of this chapter.



(Ord. 15-10-03, passed 11-17-15)



§ 39.042  DOMICILE.



   (A)   As used in this section:



      (1)   “Domicile” means the true, fixed and permanent home
of the taxpayer to which whenever absent, the taxpayer intends to return. 



      (2)   An individual is presumed to be domiciled in the
municipality for all or part of a taxable year if the individual was
domiciled in the municipality on the last day of the immediately preceding
taxable year or if the Tax Administrator reasonably concludes that the
individual is domiciled in the municipality for all or part of the taxable
year.



      (3)   An individual may rebut the presumption of domicile
described in division (A)(1) of this section if the individual establishes by
a preponderance of the evidence that the individual was not domiciled in the
municipality  for all or part of the taxable year.



   (B)   For the purpose of determining whether an individual is
domiciled in the municipality for all or part of a taxable year, factors that
may be considered include, but are not limited to, the following: 



      (1)   The individual’s domicile in other taxable years;



      (2)   The location at which the individual is registered to
vote;



      (3)   The address on the individual’s driver’s license;



      (4)   The location of real estate for which the individual
claimed a property tax exemption or reduction allowed on the basis of the
individual’s residence or domicile;



      (5)   The location and value of abodes owned or leased by the
individual;



      (6)   Declarations, written or oral, made by the individual
regarding the individual’s residency;



      (7)   The primary location at which the individual is employed.



      (8)   The location of educational institutions attended by the
individual’s dependents as defined in section 152 of the Internal Revenue
Code, to the extent that tuition paid to such educational institution is
based on the residency of the individual or the individual’s spouse in the
municipal corporation or state where the educational institution is located;



      (9)   The number of contact periods the individual has with
the municipality. For the purposes of this division, an individual has one
“contact period” with the municipality if the individual is away
overnight from the individual’s abode located outside of the municipality
and while away overnight from that abode spends at least some portion,
however minimal, of each of two consecutive days in the municipality.  For
purposes of this section, the state’s contact period test or bright-line
test and resulting determination have no bearing on municipal residency or
domicile.



   (C)   All applicable factors are provided in R.C. § 718.012. 



(Ord. 15-10-03, passed 11-17-15)



Statutory reference:



   Domicile, see R.C. § 718.012



§ 39.043  EXEMPTION FOR MEMBER OR EMPLOYEE OF GENERAL ASSEMBLY AND CERTAIN
JUDGES.



   (A)   Only the municipal corporation of residence shall be permitted
to levy a tax on the income of any member or employee of the Ohio General
Assembly, including the Lieutenant Governor, whose income is received as a
result of services rendered as such member or employee and is paid from
appropriated funds of this state.



   (B)   Only the municipal corporation of residence and the city of
Columbus shall levy a tax on the income of the Chief Justice or a Justice of
the Supreme Court received as a result of services rendered as the Chief
Justice or Justice. Only the municipal corporation of residence shall levy a
tax on the income of a judge sitting by assignment of the Chief Justice or on
the income of a district court of appeals judge sitting in multiple locations
within the district, received as a result of services rendered as a judge.



(Ord. 15-10-03, passed 11-17-15)



Statutory reference:



   Exclusion of General Assembly employee or member and certain judges
from tax, see R.C. § 718.50



§ 39.05  COLLECTION AT SOURCE.



§ 39.051  COLLECTION AT SOURCE; WITHHOLDING FROM QUALIFYING WAGES.



   (A)   (1)   Each employer, agent of an employer, or other payer
located or doing business in the municipality shall withhold from each
employee an amount equal to the qualifying wages of the employee earned by
the employee in the municipality multiplied by the applicable rate of the
municipality’s income tax, except for qualifying wages for which
withholding is not required under § 39.052 of this chapter or division (D)
or (F) of this section. An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer
shall deduct and withhold the tax from qualifying wages on the date that the
employer, agent, or other payer directly, indirectly, or constructively pays
the qualifying wages to, or credits the qualifying wages to the benefit of,
the employee.



      (2)   In addition to withholding the amounts required under
division (A)(1) of this section, an employer, agent of an employer, or other
payer may also deduct and withhold, on the request of an employee, taxes for
the municipal corporation in which the employee is a resident.



   (B)   (1)   An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer
shall remit to the Tax Administrator of the municipality the greater of the
income taxes deducted and withheld or the income taxes required to be
deducted and withheld by the employer, agent, or other payer, along with any
report required by the Tax Administrator to accompany such payment, according
to the following schedule:



         (a)   Any employer, agent of an employer, or other payer
not required to make payments under division (B)(1)(b) of this section of
taxes required to be deducted and withheld shall make quarterly payments to
the Tax Administrator not later than the fifteenth day of the month following
the end of each calendar quarter.



         (b)   Taxes required to be deducted and withheld shall
be remitted monthly to the Tax Administrator if the total taxes deducted and
withheld or required to be deducted and withheld by the employer, agent, or
other payer on behalf of the municipal corporation in the preceding calendar
year exceeded $2,399, or if the total amount of taxes deducted and withheld
or required to be deducted and withheld on behalf of the municipality in any
month of the preceding calendar quarter exceeded $200. Payment under division
(B)(1)(b) of this section shall be made so that the payment is received by
the Tax Administrator not later than 15 days after the last day of each month.



   (C)   An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer shall make
and file a return showing the amount of tax withheld by the employer, agent,
or other payer from the qualifying wages of each employee and remitted to the
Tax Administrator. A return filed by an employer, agent, or other payer under
this division shall be accepted by the municipality as the return required of
an employee whose sole income subject to the tax under this chapter is the
qualifying wages reported by the employee’s employer, agent of an employer,
or other payer, unless the municipality requires all resident individual
taxpayers to file a tax return under § 39.091 of this chapter.



   (D)   An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer is not
required to withhold municipal income tax with respect to an individual’s
disqualifying disposition of an incentive stock option if, at the time of the
disqualifying disposition, the individual is not an employee of either the
corporation with respect to whose stock the option has been issued or of such
corporation’s successor entity.



   (E)   (1)   An employee is not relieved from liability for a tax
by the failure of the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer to
withhold the tax as required  under this chapter or by the employer’s,
agent’s, or other payer’s exemption from the requirement to withhold the
tax.



      (2)   The failure of an employer, agent of an employer, or
other payer to remit to the municipality the tax withheld relieves the
employee from liability for that tax unless the employee colluded with the
employer, agent, or other payer in connection with the failure to remit the
tax withheld.



   (F)   Compensation deferred before June 26, 2003, is not subject to
any municipal corporation income tax or municipal income tax withholding
requirement to the extent the deferred compensation does not constitute
qualifying wages at the time the deferred compensation is paid or distributed.



   (G)   Each employer, agent of an employer, or other payer required
to withhold taxes is liable for the payment of that amount required to be
withheld, whether or not such taxes have been withheld, and such amount shall
be deemed to be held in trust for the municipality until such time as the
withheld amount is remitted to the Tax Administrator.



   (H)   On or before the last day of February of each year, an
employer shall file a withholding reconciliation return with the Tax
Administrator listing the names, addresses, and social security numbers of
all employees from whose qualifying wages tax was withheld or should have
been withheld for the municipality during the preceding calendar year, the
amount of tax withheld, if any, from each such employee’s qualifying wage,
the total amount of qualifying wages paid to such employee during the
preceding calendar year, the name of every other municipal corporation for
which tax was withheld or should have been withheld from such employee during
the preceding calendar year, any other information required for federal
income tax reporting purposes on Internal Revenue Service form W-2 or its
equivalent form with respect to such employee, and other information as may
be required by the Tax Administrator.



   (I)   The officer or the employee of the employer, agent of an
employer, or other payer with control or direct supervision of or charged
with the responsibility for withholding the tax or filing the reports and
making payments as required by this section, shall be personally liable for a
failure to file a report or pay the tax due as required by this section. The
dissolution of an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer does not
discharge the officer’s or employee’s liability for a failure of the
employer, agent of an employer, or other payer to file returns or pay any tax
due.



   (J)   An employer is required to deduct and withhold municipal
income tax on tips and gratuities received by the employer’s employees and
constituting qualifying wages only to the extent that the tips and gratuities
are under the employer’s control. For the purposes of this division, a tip
or gratuity is under the employer’s control if the tip or gratuity is paid
by the customer to the employer for subsequent remittance to the employee, or
if the customer pays the tip or gratuity by credit card, debit card, or other
electronic means.



   (K)   A Tax Administrator shall consider any tax withheld by an
employer at the request of an employee when such tax is not otherwise
required to be withheld by this chapter to be tax required to be withheld and
remitted for the purposes of this section.



(Ord. 15-10-03, passed 11-17-15)



Statutory reference:



   Withholding from qualifying wages, see R.C. § 718.03



§ 39.052  COLLECTION AT SOURCE; OCCASIONAL ENTRANT.



   (A)   The following terms as used in this section:



      (1)    EMPLOYER includes a person that is a related member to
or of an employer.



      (2)    PROFESSIONAL ATHLETE means an athlete who performs
services in a professional athletic event for wages or other remuneration.



      (3)    PROFESSIONAL ENTERTAINER means a person who performs
services in the professional performing arts for wages or other remuneration
on a per-event basis.



      (4)    PUBLIC FIGURE means a person of prominence who performs
services at discrete events, such as speeches, public appearances, or similar
events, for wages or other remuneration on a per-event basis.



      (5)    FIXED LOCATION means a permanent place of doing
business in this state, such as an office, warehouse, storefront, or similar
location owned or controlled by an employer.



      (6)    WORKSITE LOCATION means a construction site or other
temporary worksite in this state at which the employer provides services for
more than twenty days during the calendar year. “Worksite location” does
not include the home of an employee.



      (7)    PRINCIPAL PLACE OF WORK means the fixed location to
which an employee is required to report for employment duties on a regular
and ordinary basis. If the employee is not required to report for employment
duties on a regular and ordinary basis to a fixed location, “principal
place of work” means the worksite location in this state to which the
employee is required to report for employment duties on a regular and
ordinary basis. If the employee is not required to report for employment
duties on a regular and ordinary basis to a fixed location or worksite
location, “principal place of work” means the location in this state at
which the employee spends the greatest number of days in a calendar year
performing services for or on behalf of the employee’s employer.



         (a)   If there is not a single municipal corporation in
which the employee spent the “greatest number of days in a calendar year”
performing services for or on behalf of the employer, but instead there are
two or more municipal corporations in which the employee spent an identical
number of days that is greater than the number of days the employee spent in
any other municipal corporation, the employer shall allocate any of the
employee’s qualifying wages subject to division (B)(1)(a) of this section
among those two or more municipal corporations. The allocation shall be made
using any fair and reasonable method, including, but not limited to, an equal
allocation among such municipal corporations or an allocation based upon the
time spent or sales made by the employee in each such municipal corporation.
A municipal corporation to which qualifying wages are allocated under this
division shall be the employee’s “principal place of work” with respect
to those qualifying wages for the purposes of this section.



         (b)   For the purposes of this division, the location at
which an employee spends a particular day shall be deemed in accordance with
division (B)(2) of this section, except that “location” shall be
substituted for “municipal corporation” wherever “municipal
corporation” appears in that division.



   (B)   (1)   Subject to divisions (C), (E), (F), and (G) of this
section, an employer is not required to withhold municipal income tax on
qualifying wages paid to an employee for the performance of personal services
in a municipal corporation that imposes such a tax if the employee performed
such services in the municipal corporation on 20 or fewer days in a calendar
year, unless one of the following conditions applies:



         (a)   The employee’s principal place of work is
located in the municipality.



         (b)   The employee performed services at one or more
presumed worksite locations in the municipality. For the purposes of this
division, “presumed worksite location” means a construction site or other
temporary worksite in this state at which the employer provides services that
can reasonably be expected by the employer to last more than 20 days in a
calendar year. Services can “reasonably be expected by the employer to last
more than 20 days” if either of the following applies at the time the
services commence:



            1.   The nature of the services are such that it
will require more than 20 days of actual services to complete the services;



            2.   The agreement between the employer and its
customer to perform services at a location requires the employer to perform
actual services at the location for more than 20 days.



         (c)   The employee is a resident of the municipality and
has requested that the employer withhold tax from the employee’s qualifying
wages as provided in § 39.051 of this chapter.



         (d)   The employee is a professional athlete,
professional entertainer, or public figure, and the qualifying wages are paid
for the performance of services in the employee’s capacity as a
professional athlete, professional entertainer, or public figure within the
municipality.



      (2)   For the purposes of division (B)(1) of this section, an
employee shall be considered to have spent a day performing services in a
municipal corporation only if the employee spent more time performing
services for or on behalf of the employer in that municipal corporation than
in any other municipal corporation on that day. For the purposes of
determining the amount of time an employee spent in a particular location,
the time spent performing one or more of the following activities shall be
considered to have been spent at the employee’s principal place of work:



         (a)   Traveling to the location at which the employee
will first perform services for the employer for the day;



         (b)   Traveling from a location at which the employee
was performing services for the employer to any other location;



         (c)   Traveling from any location to another location in
order to pick up or load, for the purpose of transportation or delivery,
property that has been purchased, sold, assembled, fabricated, repaired,
refurbished, processed, remanufactured, or improved by the employee’s
employer;



         (d)   Transporting or delivering property described in
division (B)(2)(c) of this section, provided that, upon delivery of the
property, the employee does not temporarily or permanently affix the property
to real estate owned, used, or controlled by a person other than the
employee’s employer;



         (e)   Traveling from the location at which the employee
makes the employee’s final delivery or pick-up for the day to either the
employee’s principal place of work or a location at which the employee will
not perform services for the employer.



   (C)   If the principal place of work of an employee is located in a
municipal corporation that imposes an income tax in accordance with this
chapter, the exception from withholding requirements described in division
(B)(1) of this section shall apply only if, with respect to the employee’s
qualifying wages described in that division, the employer withholds and
remits tax on such qualifying wages to the municipal corporation in which the
employee’s principal place of work is located.



   (D)   (1)   Except as provided in division (D)(2) of this
section, if, during a calendar year, the number of days an employee spends
performing personal services in a municipal corporation exceeds the 20-day
threshold described in division (B)(1) of this section, the employer shall
withhold and remit tax to that municipal corporation for any subsequent days
in that calendar year on which the employer pays qualifying wages to the
employee for personal services performed in that municipal corporation.



      (2)   An employer required to begin withholding tax for a
municipal corporation under division (D)(1) of this section may elect to
withhold tax for that municipal corporation for the first 20 days on which
the employer paid qualifying wages to the employee for personal services
performed in that municipal corporation.



      (3)   If an employer makes the election described in division
(D)(2) of this section, the taxes withheld and paid by such an employer
during those first 20 days to the municipal corporation in which the
employee’s principal place of work is located are refundable to the
employee.



   (E)   Without regard to the number of days in a calendar year on
which an employee performs personal services in any municipal corporation, an
employer shall withhold municipal income tax on all of the employee’s
qualifying wages for a taxable year and remit that tax only to the municipal
corporation in which the employer’s fixed location is located if the
employer qualifies as a small employer as defined in § 39.03 of this
chapter. To determine whether an employer qualifies as a small employer for a
taxable year, a Tax Administrator may require the employer to provide the Tax
Administrator with the employer’s federal income tax return for the
preceding taxable year.



   (F)   Divisions (B)(1) and (D) of this section shall not apply to
the extent that a Tax Administrator and an employer enter into an agreement
regarding the manner in which the employer shall comply with the requirements
of § 39.051 of this chapter.



   (G)   (1)   In the case of a person performing personal services
at a petroleum refinery located in a municipal corporation that imposes a tax
on income, an employer is not required to withhold municipal income tax on
the qualifying wages of such a person if the person performs those services
on 12 or fewer days in a calendar year, unless the principal place of work of
the employer is located in another municipal corporation in this state that
imposes a tax applying to compensation paid to the person for services
performed on those days and the person is not liable to that other municipal
corporation for tax on the compensation paid for such services. For the
purposes of this division, a petroleum refinery is a facility with a standard
industrial classification code facility classification of 2911, petroleum
refining.



      (2)   Notwithstanding division (D) of this section, if, during
a calendar year, the number of days an individual performs personal services
at a petroleum refinery exceeds 12, the employer shall withhold tax for the
municipal corporation for the first 12 days for which the employer paid
qualifying wages to the individual and for all subsequent days in the
calendar year on which the individual performed services at the refinery.



(Ord. 15-10-03, passed 11-17-15)



Statutory reference:



   Definitions, see R.C. § 718.01



   Occasional entrant, withholding, see R.C. § 718.011



§ 39.053  COLLECTION AT SOURCE; CASINO AND VLT.



   (A)   The municipality shall require a casino facility or a casino
operator, as defined in Section 6(C)(9) of Article XV, Ohio Constitution, and
R.C. § 3772.01, respectively, or a lottery sales agent conducting video
lottery terminals sales on behalf of the state to withhold and remit
municipal income tax with respect to amounts other than qualifying wages as
provided in this section.



   (B)   If a person’s winnings at a casino facility are an amount
for which reporting to the Internal Revenue Service of the amount is required
by section 6041 of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended, the casino operator
shall deduct and withhold municipal income tax from the person’s winnings
at the rate of the tax imposed by the municipal corporation in which the
casino facility is located.



   (C)   Amounts deducted and withheld by a casino operator are held in
trust for the benefit of the municipal corporation to which the tax is owed.



      (1)   On or before the tenth day of each month, the casino
operator shall file a return electronically with the Tax Administrator of the
municipality, providing the name, address, and social security number of the
person from whose winnings amounts were deducted and withheld, the amount of
each such deduction and withholding during the preceding calendar month, the
amount of the winnings from which each such amount was withheld, the type of
casino gaming that resulted in such winnings, and any other information
required by the Tax Administrator. With this return, the casino operator
shall remit electronically to the municipality all amounts deducted and
withheld during the preceding month.



      (2)   Annually, on or before the thirty-first day of January,
a casino operator shall file an annual return electronically with the Tax
Administrator of the municipal corporation in which the casino facility is
located, indicating the total amount deducted and withheld during the
preceding calendar year. The casino operator shall remit electronically with
the annual return any amount that was deducted and withheld and that was not
previously remitted. If the name, address, or social security number of a
person or the amount deducted and withheld with respect to that person was
omitted on a monthly return for that reporting period, that information shall
be indicated on the annual return.



      (3)   Annually, on or before the thirty-first day of January,
a casino operator shall issue an information return to each person with
respect to whom an amount has been deducted and withheld during the preceding
calendar year. The information return shall show the total amount of
municipal income tax deducted from the person’s winnings during the
preceding year. The casino operator shall provide to the Tax Administrator a
copy of each information return issued under this division. The Administrator
may require that such copies be transmitted electronically.



      (4)   A casino operator that fails to file a return and remit
the amounts deducted and withheld shall be personally liable for the amount
withheld and not remitted. Such personal liability extends to any penalty and
interest imposed for the late filing of a return or the late payment of tax
deducted and withheld.



      (5)   If a casino operator sells the casino facility or
otherwise quits the casino business, the amounts deducted and withheld along
with any penalties and interest thereon are immediately due and payable. The
successor shall withhold an amount of the purchase money that is sufficient
to cover the amounts deducted and withheld along with any penalties and
interest thereon until the predecessor casino operator produces either of the
following:



         (a)   A receipt from the Tax Administrator showing that
the amounts deducted and withheld and penalties and interest thereon have
been paid;



         (b)   A certificate from the Tax Administrator
indicating that no amounts are due. If the successor fails to withhold
purchase money, the successor is personally liable for the payment of the
amounts deducted and withheld and penalties and interest thereon.



      (6)   The failure of a casino operator to deduct and withhold
the required amount from a person’s winnings does not relieve that person
from liability for the municipal income tax with respect to those winnings.



   (D)   If a person’s prize award from a video lottery terminal is
an amount for which reporting to the Internal Revenue Service is required by
section 6041 of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended, the video lottery
sales agent shall deduct and withhold municipal income tax from the
person’s prize award at the rate of the tax imposed by the municipal
corporation in which the video lottery terminal facility is located.



   (E)   Amounts deducted and withheld by a video lottery sales agent
are held in trust for the benefit of the municipal corporation to which the
tax is owed.



      (1)   The video lottery sales agent shall issue to a person
from whose prize award an amount has been deducted and withheld a receipt for
the amount deducted and withheld, and shall obtain from the person receiving
a prize award the person’s name, address, and social security number in
order to facilitate the preparation of returns required by this section.



      (2)   On or before the tenth day of each month, the video
lottery sales agent shall file a return electronically with the Tax
Administrator of the municipality providing the names, addresses, and social
security numbers of the persons from whose prize awards amounts were deducted
and withheld, the amount of each such deduction and withholding during the
preceding calendar month, the amount of the prize award from which each such
amount was withheld, and any other information required by the Tax
Administrator. With the return, the video lottery sales agent shall remit
electronically to the Tax Administrator all amounts deducted and withheld
during the preceding month.



      (3)    A video lottery sales agent shall maintain a record of
all receipts issued under division (E) of this section and shall make those
records available to the Tax Administrator upon request. Such records shall
be maintained in accordance with section 5747.17 of the Ohio Revised Code and
any rules adopted pursuant thereto.



      (4)    Annually, on or before the thirty-first day of January,
each video lottery terminal sales agent shall file an annual return
electronically with the Tax Administrator of the municipal corporation in
which the facility is located indicating the total amount deducted and
withheld during the preceding calendar year. The video lottery sales agent
shall remit electronically with the annual return any amount that was
deducted and withheld and that was not previously remitted. If the name,
address, or social security number of a person or the amount deducted and
withheld with respect to that person was omitted on a monthly return for that
reporting period that information shall be indicated on the annual return.



      (5)   Annually, on or before the thirty-first day of January,
a video lottery sales agent shall issue an information return to each person
with respect to whom an amount has been deducted and withheld during the
preceding calendar year. The information return shall show the total amount
of municipal income tax deducted and withheld from the person’s prize award
by the video lottery sales agent during the preceding year. A video lottery
sales agent shall provide to the Tax Administrator of the municipal
corporation a copy of each information return issued under this division. The
Tax Administrator may require that such copies be transmitted electronically.



      (6)   A video lottery sales agent who fails to file a return
and remit the amounts deducted and withheld is personally liable for the
amount deducted and withheld and not remitted. Such personal liability
extends to any penalty and interest imposed for the late filing of a return
or the late payment of tax deducted and withheld.



   (F)   If a video lottery sales agent ceases to operate video lottery
terminals, the amounts deducted and withheld along with any penalties and
interest thereon are immediately due and payable. The successor of the video
lottery sales agent that purchases the video lottery terminals from the agent
shall withhold an amount from the purchase money that is sufficient to cover
the amounts deducted and withheld and any penalties and interest thereon
until the predecessor video lottery sales agent operator produces either of
the following:



      (1)   A receipt from the Tax Administrator showing that the
amounts deducted and withheld and penalties and interest thereon have been
paid;



      (2)   A certificate from the Tax Administrator indicating that
no amounts are due. If the successor fails to withhold purchase money, the
successor is personally liable for the payment of the amounts deducted and
withheld and penalties and interest thereon.



   (G)   The failure of a video lottery sales agent to deduct and
withhold the required amount from a person’s prize award does not relieve
that person from liability for the municipal income tax with respect to that
prize award.



   (H)   If a casino operator or lottery sales agent files a return
late, fails to file a return, remits amounts deducted and withheld late, or
fails to remit amounts deducted and withheld as required under this section,
the Tax Administrator of a municipal corporation may impose the following
applicable penalty:



      (1)   For the late remittance of, or failure to remit, tax
deducted and withheld under this section, a penalty equal to 50% of the tax
deducted and withheld;



      (2)   For the failure to file, or the late filing of, a
monthly or annual return, a penalty of $500 for each return not filed or
filed late. Interest shall accrue on past due amounts deducted and withheld
at the rate prescribed in R.C. § 5703.47.



   (I)   Amounts deducted and withheld on behalf of a municipal
corporation shall be allowed as a credit against payment of the tax imposed
by the municipal corporation and shall be treated as taxes paid for purposes
of § 39.07 of this chapter. This division applies only to the person for
whom the amount is deducted and withheld.



   (J)   The Tax Administrator shall prescribe the forms of the
receipts and returns required under this section.



(Ord. 15-10-03, passed 11-17-15)



Statutory reference:



   Withholding by casinos and lottery sales agents, see R.C. § 718.031



§ 39.06  INCOME SUBJECT TO NET PROFIT TAX.



§ 39.061  DETERMINING MUNICIPAL TAXABLE INCOME FOR TAXPAYERS WHO ARE NOT
INDIVIDUALS.



   “Municipal taxable income” for a taxpayer who is not an individual
for the municipality is calculated as follows:



   (A)   “Income” reduced by “exempt income” to the extent
otherwise included in income, multiplied by apportionment, further reduced by
any “pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward” equals “municipal
taxable income”.



      (1)   “Income” for a taxpayer that is not an individual
means the “net profit” of the taxpayer. 



         (a)   “Net profit” for a person other than an
individual is defined in § 39.03(C)(23). 



         (b)   “Adjusted federal taxable income” is defined
in § 39.03(C)(1) of this chapter.



      (2)   “Exempt Income” is defined in § 39.03(C)(11) of
this chapter.



      (3)   “Apportionment” means the apportionment as
determined by § 39.062 of this chapter.



      (4)   “Pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward” is
defined in § 39.03(C)(32) of this chapter.



(Ord. 15-10-03, passed 11-17-15)



Statutory reference:



   Definitions, see R.C. § 718.01



§ 39.062  NET PROFIT; INCOME SUBJECT TO NET PROFIT TAX; ALTERNATIVE
APPORTIONMENT.



   (A)   Filing net profit taxes; election to be subject to provisions
of chapter.



      (1)   A taxpayer may elect to be subject to this section in
lieu of the provisions set forth in the remainder of this chapter.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, upon the taxpayer's
election, both of the following shall apply:



         (a)   The state Tax Commissioner shall serve as the sole
administrator of the municipal net profit tax for which the taxpayer as
defined in § 39.13 is liable for the term of the election;



         (b)   The Commissioner shall administer the tax pursuant
to R.C. §§ 718.80 to 718.95, this section, and any applicable provision of
R. C. Chapter 5703.



      (2)   (a)   A taxpayer shall make the initial election on
or before the first day of the third month after the beginning of the
taxpayer's taxable year by notifying the Tax Commissioner and the village, on
a form prescribed by the Tax Commissioner.



         (b)   1.   The election, once made by the taxpayer,
applies to the taxable year in which the election is made and to each
subsequent taxable year until the taxpayer notifies the Tax Commissioner and
the village of its termination of the election.



            2.   A notification of termination shall be made,
on a form prescribed by the Tax Commissioner, on or before the first day of
the third month of any taxable year.



            3.   Upon a timely and valid termination of the
election, the taxpayer is no longer subject to this section, and is instead
subject to the provisions set forth in the remainder of this chapter.



      (3)   The Tax Commissioner shall enforce and administer this
section. In addition to any other powers conferred upon the Tax Commissioner
by law, the Tax Commissioner may:



         (a)   Prescribe all forms necessary to administer those
sections;



         (b)   Adopt such rules as the Tax Commissioner finds
necessary to carry out those sections; and



         (c)   Appoint and employ such personnel as are necessary
to carry out the duties imposed upon the Tax Commissioner by those sections.



      (4)   The Tax Commissioner shall not be considered a tax
administrator, as that term is defined in R.C. § 718.01 and § 39.03(44) of
this code.



   (B)   Definitions. If a term used in this section that is not
otherwise defined in this chapter is used in a comparable context in both the
laws of the United States relating to federal income tax and in R.C. Title
LVII and the use is not consistent, then the use of the term in the laws of
the United States relating to federal income tax shall have control over the
use of the term in R.C. Title LVII, unless the term is defined in R.C.
Chapter 5703, in which case the definition in that chapter shall control. Any
reference in this chapter to the Internal Revenue Code includes other laws of
the United States related to federal income taxes. If a term is defined in
both this section and § 39.03, the definition in this section shall control
for all uses of that term in this section. As used in this section only:



      ADJUSTED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME. For a person required to file as
a C corporation, or for a person that has elected to be taxed as a C
corporation as described in R.C. § 718.01(D)(5)  and § 39.03(C)(1), means
a C corporation's federal taxable income before net operating losses and
special deductions as determined under the Internal Revenue Code, adjusted as
follows:



         (a)   Deduct intangible income to the extent included in
federal taxable income. The deduction shall be allowed regardless of whether
the intangible income relates to assets used in a trade or business or assets
held for the production of income.



         (b)   Add an amount equal to 5% of intangible income
deducted under division (a) of this definition, but excluding that portion of
intangible income directly related to the sale, exchange, or other
disposition of property described in section 1221 of the Internal Revenue
Code.



         (c)   Add any losses allowed as a deduction in the
computation of federal taxable income if the losses directly relate to the
sale, exchange, or other disposition of an asset described in section 1221 or
1231 of the Internal Revenue Code.



         (d)   1.   Except as provided in division (B)(d)2. of
this section, deduct income and gain included in federal taxable income to
the extent the income and gain directly relate to the sale, exchange, or
other disposition of an asset described in section 1221 or 1231 of the
Internal Revenue Code.



            2.   Division (B)(d)1. of this section does not
apply to the extent the income or gain is income or gain described in section
1245 or 1250 of the Internal Revenue Code.



         (e)   Add taxes on or measured by net income allowed as
a deduction in the computation of federal taxable income.



         (f)   In the case of a real estate investment trust or
regulated investment company, add all amounts with respect to dividends to,
distributions to, or amounts set aside for or credited to the benefit of
investors and allowed as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable
income.



         (g)   Deduct, to the extent not otherwise deducted or
excluded in computing federal taxable income, any income derived from a
transfer agreement or from the enterprise transferred under that agreement
under R.C. § 4313.02.



         (h)   Deduct exempt income to the extent not otherwise
deducted or excluded in computing adjusted federal taxable income.



         (i)   Deduct any net profit of a pass-through entity
owned directly or indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer's
federal taxable income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes
that net profit in the group's federal taxable income in accordance with §
39.063(A).



         (j)   1.   Add any loss incurred by a pass-through
entity owned directly or indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the
taxpayer's federal taxable income unless an affiliated group of corporations
includes that loss in the group's federal taxable income in accordance with
§ 39.03(C)(1).



            2.   If the taxpayer is not a C corporation, is
not a disregarded entity that has made the election described in §
39.03(C)(1), and is not a publicly traded partnership that has made the
election described in § 39.03(C)(1), the taxpayer shall compute adjusted
federal taxable income under this section as if the taxpayer were a C
corporation, except guaranteed payments and other similar amounts paid or
accrued to a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder,
member, or former member shall not be allowed as a deductible expense unless
such payments are in consideration for the use of capital and treated as
payment of interest under section 469 of the Internal Revenue Code or United
States Treasury regulations. Amounts paid or accrued to a qualified
self-employed retirement plan with respect to a partner, former partner,
shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member of the taxpayer,
amounts paid or accrued to or for health insurance for a partner, former
partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member, and
amounts paid or accrued to or for life insurance for a partner, former
partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member shall not
be allowed as a deduction.



            3.   Nothing in this definition shall be construed
as allowing the taxpayer to add or deduct any amount more than once or shall
be construed as allowing any taxpayer to deduct any amount paid to or accrued
for purposes of federal self-employment tax.



      ASSESSMENT.  A notice of underpayment or nonpayment of a tax
issued pursuant to Chapter 39 of this code.



      MUNICIPAL TAXABLE INCOME. Income apportioned or sitused to the
municipal corporation under this section, as applicable, reduced by any
pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward available to the person for the
municipal corporation.



      TAX RETURN or RETURN. The notifications and reports required to
be filed pursuant to Chapter 39 of this code for the purpose of reporting
municipal income taxes, and includes declarations of estimated tax.



      TAXABLE YEAR. The calendar year or the taxpayer's fiscal year
ending during the calendar year, or fractional part thereof, upon which the
calculation of the taxpayer's adjusted federal taxable income is based
pursuant to this chapter. If a taxpayer's taxable year is changed for federal
income tax purposes, the taxable year for purposes of Chapter 39 of this code
is changed accordingly but may consist of an aggregation of more than one
taxable year for federal income tax purposes. The Tax Commissioner may
prescribe by rule an appropriate period as the taxable year for a taxpayer
that has had a change of its taxable year for federal income tax purposes,
for a taxpayer that has two or more short taxable years for federal income
tax purposes as the result of a change of ownership, or for a new taxpayer
that would otherwise have no taxable year.



      TAXPAYER. Has the same meaning as in § 39.03(C)(47), except that
TAXPAYER does not include natural persons or entities subject to the tax
imposed under R.C. Chapter 5745. TAXPAYER may include receivers, assignees,
or trustees in bankruptcy when such persons are required to assume the role
of a taxpayer.



   (C)   Applicability; taxable situs; apportionment. This section
applies to any taxpayer that is engaged in a business or profession in the
village and that has made the election under Chapter 39 of this code.



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(2) of this
section, net profit from a business or profession conducted both within and
without the boundaries of the village shall be considered as having a taxable
situs in the village for purposes of municipal income taxation in the same
proportion as the average ratio of the following:



         (a)   1.   The average original cost of the real
property and tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the
business or profession in the village during the taxable period to the
average original cost of all of the real and tangible personal property owned
or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession during the same period,
wherever situated.



            2.   As used in the preceding division, tangible
personal or real property shall include property rented or leased by the
taxpayer and the value of such property shall be determined by multiplying
the annual rental thereon by eight;



         (b)   Wages, salaries, and other compensation paid
during the taxable period to individuals employed in the business or
profession for services performed in the village to wages, salaries, and
other compensation paid during the same period to individuals employed in the
business or profession, wherever the individual's services are performed,
excluding compensation from which taxes are not required to be withheld under
§ 39.03(C)(11);



         (c)   Total gross receipts of the business or profession
from sales and rentals made and services performed during the taxable period
in the village to total gross receipts of the business or profession during
the same period from sales, rentals, and services, wherever made or performed.



      (2)   (a)   If the apportionment factors described in
division (C)(1) of this section do not fairly represent the extent of a
taxpayer's business activity in the village, the taxpayer may request, or the
Tax Commissioner may require, that the taxpayer use, with respect to all or
any portion of the income of the taxpayer, an alternative apportionment
method involving one or more of the following:



            1.   Separate accounting;



            2.   The exclusion of one or more of the factors;



            3.   The inclusion of one or more additional
factors that would provide for a more fair apportionment of the income of the
taxpayer to the municipal corporation;



            4.   A modification of one or more of the factors.



         (b)   A taxpayer request to use an alternative
apportionment method shall be in writing and shall accompany a tax return,
timely filed appeal of an assessment, or timely filed amended tax return. The
taxpayer may use the requested alternative method unless the Tax Commissioner
denies the request in an assessment issued within the period prescribed by
division (A) of this section.



         (c)   The Tax Commissioner may require a taxpayer to use
an alternative apportionment method as described in division (C)(2)(a) of
this section only by issuing an assessment to the taxpayer within the period
prescribed by division (A) of this section.



      (3)   As used in division (C)(1)(b) of this section, "wages,
salaries, and other compensation" includes only wages, salaries, or other
compensation paid to an employee for services performed at any of the
following locations:



         (a)   A location that is owned, controlled, or used by,
rented to, or under the possession of one of the following:



            1.   The employer;



            2.   A vendor, customer, client, or patient of the
employer, or a related member of such a vendor, customer, client, or patient;



            3.   A vendor, customer, client, or patient of a
person described in division (C)(3)(a)2. of this section, or a related member
of such a vendor, customer, client, or patient.



         (b)   Any location at which a trial, appeal, hearing,
investigation, inquiry, review, court-martial, or similar administrative,
judicial, or legislative matter or proceeding is being conducted, provided
that the compensation is paid for services performed for, or on behalf of,
the employer or that the employee's presence at the location directly or
indirectly benefits the employer;



         (c)   Any other location, if the Tax Commissioner
determines that the employer directed the employee to perform the services at
the other location in lieu of a location described in division (C)(3)(a) or
(b) of this section solely in order to avoid or reduce the employer's
municipal income tax liability. If the Tax Commissioner makes such a
determination, the employer may dispute the determination by establishing, by
a preponderance of the evidence, that the Tax Commissioner's determination
was unreasonable.



      (4)   For the purposes of division (C)(1)(c) of this section,
receipts from sales and rentals made and services performed shall be sitused
to the village as follows:



         (a)   Gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal
property shall be sitused to the village only if, regardless of where title
passes, the property meets either of the following criteria:



            1.   The property is shipped to or delivered
within the village from a stock of goods located within the village; or



            2.   The property is delivered within the village
from a location outside the village, provided the taxpayer is regularly
engaged through its own employees in the solicitation or promotion of sales
within the village and the sales result from such solicitation or promotion.



         (b)   Gross receipts from the sale of services shall be
sitused to the village to the extent that such services are performed in the
village.



         (c)   To the extent included in income, gross receipts
from the sale of real property located in the village shall be sitused to the
village.



         (d)   To the extent included in income, gross receipts
from rents and royalties from real property located in the village shall be
sitused to the village.



         (e)   Gross receipts from rents and royalties from
tangible personal property shall be sitused to the village based upon the
extent to which the tangible personal property is used in the village.



      (5)   Commissions received by a real estate agent or broker
relating to the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate shall be sitused to
the village in which the real estate is located. Net profit reported by the
real estate agent or broker shall be allocated to the village based upon the
ratio of the commissions the agent or broker received from the sale,
purchase, or lease of real estate located in the village to the commissions
received from the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate everywhere in the
taxable year.



      (6)   (a)   If, in computing a taxpayer's adjusted federal
taxable income, the taxpayer deducted any amount with respect to a stock
option granted to an employee, and if the employee is not required to include
in the employee's income any such amount or a portion thereof because it is
exempted from taxation under applicable section of Chapter 39 of this code by
the village or substantially similar provision of the codified ordinances of
another municipal corporation, the taxpayer shall add the amount that is
exempt from taxation to the taxpayer's net profit that was apportioned to the
village. In no case shall a taxpayer be required to add to its net profit
that was apportioned to the village any amount other than the amount upon
which the employee would be required to pay tax were the amount related to
the stock option not exempted from taxation.



         (b)   This division applies solely for the purpose of
making an adjustment to the amount of a taxpayer's net profit that was
apportioned to the village under this section.



      (7)   When calculating the ratios described in division (C)(1)
of this section for the purposes of that division or division (C)(2) of this
section, the owner of a disregarded entity shall include in the owner's
ratios the property, payroll, and gross receipts of such disregarded entity.



   (D)   Information provided to tax administrators; confidentiality.



      (1)   Any information gained as a result of returns,
investigations, hearings, or verifications required or authorized by Chapter
39 of this code is confidential, and no person shall disclose such
information, except for official purposes, in accordance with a proper
judicial order, or as provided in R.C. § § 4123.271 or 5703.21. The Tax
Commissioner may furnish the internal revenue service with copies of returns
filed. This section does not prohibit the publication of statistics in a form
which does not disclose information with respect to particular taxpayers.



      (2)   In May and November of each year, the Tax Commissioner
shall provide the village Tax Administrator with the following information
for every taxpayer that filed tax returns with the Commissioner under Chapter
39 of this code and that had municipal taxable income apportionable to the
village under this chapter for any prior year:



         (a)   The taxpayer's name, address, and federal employer
identification number;



         (b)   The taxpayer's apportionment ratio for, and amount
of municipal taxable income apportionable to, the village pursuant to this
section;



         (c)   The amount of any pre-2017 net operating loss
carryforward utilized by the taxpayer;



         (d)   Whether the taxpayer requested that any
overpayment be carried forward to a future taxable year;



         (e)   The amount of any credit claimed under R.C. §
718.94.



      (3)   Not later than 30 days after each distribution made to
municipal corporations under R.C. § 718.83, the Tax Commissioner shall
provide to the village a report stating the name and federal identification
number of every taxpayer that made estimated payments that are attributable
to the village and the amount of each such taxpayer's estimated payment.



      (4)   The information described under divisions (D)(2) and (3)
of this section shall be provided to the individual or individuals designated
by the village Tax Administrator under R.C. § 718.83(D).



      (5)   (a)   The village expects that the Tax Commissioner
will, pursuant to R.C. § 718.84(E), provide tax returns and other
information it receives in the performance of its administration of the
municipal net profits tax for taxpayers making the election provided in this
section. The Tax Administrator shall review these returns and information, as
well as the information received pursuant to divisions (D)(2) and (3) of this
section, and has discretion to refer any taxpayer for audit by the Tax
Commissioner. Such referral shall be made on a form prescribed by the
Commissioner and shall include any information that forms the basis for the
referral.



         (b)   If the Tax Commissioner declines to audit a
taxpayer referred by the Tax Administrator under this section, the village
reserves its right to pursue any and all remedies, whether at law or in
equity, to ensure that the correct tax liability has been calculated and paid
by the taxpayer.



   (E)   Filing of annual return: remittance; disposition of funds.



      (1)   (a)   For each taxable year, every taxpayer shall
file an annual return. Such return, along with the amount of tax shown to be
due on the return less the amount paid for the taxable year under Chapter 39
of this code, shall be submitted to the Tax Commissioner, on a form and in
the manner prescribed by the Commissioner, on or before the 15th day of the
fourth month following the end of the taxpayer's taxable year.



         (b)   If a taxpayer has multiple taxable years ending
within one calendar year, the taxpayer shall aggregate the facts and figures
necessary to compute the tax due under this chapter, in accordance with this
section onto its annual return.



         (c)   The remittance shall be made payable to the
Treasurer of State and in the form prescribed by the Tax Commissioner. If the
amount payable with the tax return is $10 or less, no remittance is required.



      (2)   (a)   Each return required to be filed under this
section shall contain the signature of the taxpayer or the taxpayer's duly
authorized agent and of the person who prepared the return for the taxpayer,
and shall include the taxpayer's identification number. Each return shall be
verified by a declaration under penalty of perjury.



         (b)   1.   The Tax Commissioner may require a
taxpayer to include, with each annual tax return, amended return, or request
for refund filed with the Commissioner under this section, copies of any
relevant documents or other information.



            2.   A taxpayer that files an annual tax return
electronically through the Ohio business gateway or in another manner as
prescribed by the Tax Commissioner shall either submit the documents required
under this division electronically as prescribed at the time of filing or, if
electronic submission is not available, mail the documents to the Tax
Commissioner. The Department of Taxation shall publish a method of
electronically submitting the documents required under this division on or
before January 1, 2019.



            3.   After a taxpayer files a tax return, the Tax
Commissioner may request, and the taxpayer shall provide, any information,
statements, or documents required to determine and verify the taxpayer's
municipal income tax.



      (3)   (a)   1.   Any taxpayer that has duly requested an
automatic extension for filing the taxpayer's federal income tax return shall
automatically receive an extension for the filing of a tax return with the
Commissioner under this section. The extended due date of the return shall be
the 15th day of the tenth month after the last day of the taxable year to
which the return relates.



            2.   A taxpayer that has not requested or received
a six-month extension for filing the taxpayer's federal income tax return may
request that the Commissioner grant the taxpayer a six-month extension of the
date for filing the taxpayer's municipal income tax return. If the
Commissioner receives the request on or before the date the municipal income
tax return is due, the Commissioner shall grant the taxpayer's extension
request.



            3.   An extension of time to file under division
(E)(4)(a) of this section is not an extension of the time to pay any tax due
unless the Tax Commissioner grants an extension of that date.



         (b)   If the Commissioner considers it necessary in
order to ensure payment of a tax imposed in accordance with this section, the
Commissioner may require taxpayers to file returns and make payments
otherwise than as provided in this section, including taxpayers not otherwise
required to file annual returns.



      (4)   Each return required to be filed in accordance with this
section shall include a box that the taxpayer may check to authorize another
person, including a tax return preparer who prepared the return, to
communicate with the Tax Commissioner about matters pertaining to the return.
The return or instructions accompanying the return shall indicate that by
checking the box the taxpayer authorizes the Commissioner to contact the
preparer or other person concerning questions that arise during the
examination or other review of the return and authorizes the preparer or
other person only to provide the Commissioner with information that is
missing from the return, to contact the Commissioner for information about
the examination or other review of the return or the status of the taxpayer's
refund or payments, and to respond to notices about mathematical errors,
offsets, or return preparation that the taxpayer has received from the
Commissioner and has shown to the preparer or other person.



      (5)   When income tax returns or other documents require the
signature of a tax return preparer, the Tax Commissioner shall accept a
facsimile or electronic version of such a signature in lieu of a manual
signature.



   (F)   Electronic filing.



      (1)   All taxpayers that have made the election allowed under
this section shall file any tax return or extension for filing a tax return,
and shall make payment of amounts shown to be due on such returns,
electronically, either through the Ohio business gateway or in another manner
as prescribed by the Tax Commissioner.



      (2)   A taxpayer may apply to the Commissioner, on a form
prescribed by the Commissioner, to be excused from the requirement to file
returns and make payments electronically. For good cause shown, the
Commissioner may excuse the applicant from the requirement and permit the
applicant to file the returns or make the payments by nonelectronic means.



      (3)   The Tax Commissioner may adopt rules establishing the
following:



         (a)   The format of documents to be used by taxpayers to
file returns and make payments by electronic means;



         (b)   The information taxpayers must submit when filing
tax returns by electronic means.



   (G)   Consolidated returns.



      (1)   As used in this section:



         AFFILIATED GROUP OF CORPORATIONS. An affiliated group as
defined in section 1504 of the Internal Revenue Code, except that, if such a
group includes at least one incumbent local exchange carrier that is
primarily engaged in the business of providing local exchange telephone
service in this state, the affiliated group shall not include any incumbent
local exchange carrier that would otherwise be included in the group.



         CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL INCOME TAX RETURN. A consolidated
return filed for federal income tax purposes pursuant to section 1501 of the
Internal Revenue Code.



         CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME. The consolidated
taxable income of an affiliated group of corporations, as computed for the
purposes of filing a consolidated federal income tax return, before
consideration of net operating losses or special deductions. CONSOLIDATED
FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME does not include income or loss of an incumbent local
exchange carrier that is excluded from the affiliated group under division
(G)(1).



         INCUMBENT LOCAL EXCHANGE CARRIER. Has the same meaning as
in section R.C. § 4927.01.



         LOCAL EXCHANGE TELEPHONE SERVICE.Has the same meaning as in
section R.C. § 5727.01.



      (2)   (a)   A taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated
group of corporations may elect to file a consolidated tax return for a
taxable year if at least one member of the affiliated group of corporations
is subject to municipal income tax in that taxable year and if the affiliated
group of corporations filed a consolidated federal income tax return with
respect to that taxable year. The election is binding for a five-year period
beginning with the first taxable year of the initial election unless a change
in the reporting method is required under federal law. The election continues
to be binding for each subsequent five-year period unless the taxpayer elects
to discontinue filing consolidated tax returns under division (G)(2)(a) of
this section or a taxpayer receives permission from the Tax Commissioner. The
Tax Commissioner shall approve such a request for good cause shown.



         (b)   An election to discontinue filing consolidated tax
returns under this section must be made on or before the 15th day of the
fourth month of the year following the last year of a five-year consolidated
tax return election period in effect under division (G)(2)(a) of this
section. The election to discontinue filing a consolidated tax return is
binding for a five-year period beginning with the first taxable year of the
election.



         (c)   An election made under division (G)(2)(a) or (b)
of this section is binding on all members of the affiliated group of
corporations subject to a municipal income tax.



         (d)   When a taxpayer makes the election allowed under
this section, a valid election made by the taxpayer under division (G)(2)(a)
or (b) is binding upon the Tax Commissioner for the remainder of the
five-year period.



         (e)   When an election made under this section is
terminated, a valid election made under this section is binding upon the Tax
Administrator for the remainder of the five-year period.



      (3)   A taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of
corporations that filed a consolidated federal income tax return for a
taxable year shall file a consolidated tax return for that taxable year if
the Tax Commissioner determines, by a preponderance of the evidence, that
intercompany transactions have not been conducted at arm's length and that
there has been a distortive shifting of income or expenses with regard to
allocation of net profits to a municipal corporation. A taxpayer that is
required to file a consolidated tax return for a taxable year shall file a
consolidated tax return for all subsequent taxable years unless the taxpayer
requests and receives written permission from the Commissioner to file a
separate return or a taxpayer has experienced a change in circumstances.



      (4)   A taxpayer shall prepare a consolidated tax return in
the same manner as is required under the United States Department of Treasury
regulations that prescribe procedures for the preparation of the consolidated
federal income tax return required to be filed by the common parent of the
affiliated group of which the taxpayer is a member.



      (5)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions
(G)(5)(b), (c), and (d) of this section, corporations that file a
consolidated tax return shall compute adjusted federal taxable income, as
defined in this section, by substituting "consolidated federal taxable
income" for "federal taxable income" wherever "federal taxable income"
appears in that division and by substituting "an affiliated group of
corporation's" for "a C corporation's" wherever "a C corporation's" appears
in that division.



         (b)   No corporation filing a consolidated tax return
shall make any adjustment otherwise required under division (G)(2) of this
section to the extent that the item of income or deduction otherwise subject
to the adjustment has been eliminated or consolidated in the computation of
consolidated federal taxable income.



         (c)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity
having at least 80% of the value of its ownership interest owned or
controlled, directly or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is
included in that affiliated group's consolidated federal taxable income for a
taxable year, the corporation filing a consolidated tax return shall do one
of the following with respect to that pass-through entity's net profit or
loss for that taxable year:



            1.   Exclude the pass-through entity's net profit
or loss from the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group
and, for the purpose of making the computations required in this section,
exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-through entity
in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit sitused to a
municipal corporation. If the entity's net profit or loss is so excluded, the
entity shall be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of
the entity's net profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated
federal taxable income of the affiliated group.



            2.   Include the pass-through entity's net profit
or loss in the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group
and, for the purpose of making the computations required in this section,
include the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-through entity
in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit sitused to a
municipal corporation. If the entity's net profit or loss is so included, the
entity shall not be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis
of the entity's net profits that are included in the consolidated federal
taxable income of the affiliated group.



         (d)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity
having less than 80% of the value of its ownership interest owned or
controlled, directly or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is
included in that affiliated group's consolidated federal taxable income for a
taxable year, all of the following shall apply:



            1.   The corporation filing the consolidated tax
return shall exclude the pass-through entity's net profit or loss from the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purposes of making the computations required in this section, exclude the
property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-through entity in the
computation of the affiliated group's net profit sitused to a municipal
corporation;



            2.   The pass-through entity shall be subject to
municipal income taxation as a separate taxpayer in accordance with Chapter
39 of this code, and this section on the basis of the entity's net profits
that would otherwise be included in the consolidated federal taxable income
of the affiliated group.



      (6)   Corporations filing a consolidated tax return shall make
the computations required under this section by substituting "consolidated
federal taxable income attributable to" for "net profit from" wherever "net
profit from" appears in that section and by substituting "affiliated group of
corporations" for "taxpayer" wherever "taxpayer" appears in that section.



      (7)   Each corporation filing a consolidated tax return is
jointly and severally liable for any tax, interest, penalties, fines,
charges, or other amounts applicable under this chapter or R. C. Chapter 5703
to the corporation, an affiliated group of which the corporation is a member
for any portion of the taxable year, or any one or more members of such an
affiliated group.



   (H)   Failure to pay tax. If a taxpayer that has made the election
allowed under this section fails to pay any tax as required under Chapter 39
of this code, or any portion of that tax, on or before the date prescribed
for its payment, interest shall be assessed, collected, and paid, in the same
manner as the tax, upon such unpaid amount at the rate per annum prescribed
by R.C. § 5703.47 from the date prescribed for its payment until it is paid
or until the date an assessment is issued under § 39.17, whichever occurs
first.



   (I)   Declaration of estimated taxes.



      (1)   As used in this section:



         COMBINED TAX LIABILITY. The total amount of a taxpayer's
income tax liabilities to all municipal corporations in this state for a
taxable year.



         ESTIMATED TAXES. The amount that the taxpayer reasonably
estimates to be the taxpayer's combined tax liability for the current taxable
year.



      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (I)(2)(d) of
this section, every taxpayer shall make a declaration of estimated taxes for
the current taxable year, on the form prescribed by the Tax Commissioner, if
the amount payable as estimated taxes is at least $200.



         (b)   Except as provided in division (I)(2)(d) of this
section, a taxpayer having a taxable year of less than 12 months shall make a
declaration under rules prescribed by the Commissioner.



         (c)   The declaration of estimated taxes shall be filed
on or before the 15th day of the fourth month after the beginning of the
taxable year or on or before the 15th day of the fourth month after the
taxpayer becomes subject to tax for the first time.



         (d)   The Tax Commissioner may waive the requirement for
filing a declaration of estimated taxes for any class of taxpayers after
finding that the waiver is reasonable and proper in view of administrative
costs and other factors.



      (3)   Each taxpayer shall file the declaration of estimated
taxes with, and remit estimated taxes to, the Tax Commissioner at the times
and in the amounts prescribed in division (I)(3)(1) of this section. Remitted
taxes shall be made payable to the Treasurer of State.



         (a)   The required portion of the combined tax liability
for the taxable year that shall be paid through estimated taxes shall be as
follows:



            1.   On or before the 15th day of the fourth month
after the beginning of the taxable year, 22.5% of the combined tax liability
for the taxable year;



            2.   On or before the 15th day of the sixth month
after the beginning of the taxable year, 45% of the combined tax liability
for the taxable year;



            3.   On or before the 15th day of the ninth month
after the beginning of the taxable year, 67.5% of the combined tax liability
for the taxable year;



            4.   On or before the 15th day of the 12th month
of the taxable year, 90% of the combined tax liability for the taxable year.



         (b)   If the taxpayer determines that its declaration of
estimated taxes will not accurately reflect the taxpayer's tax liability for
the taxable year, the taxpayer shall increase or decrease, as appropriate,
its subsequent payments in equal installments to result in a more accurate
payment of estimated taxes.



         (c)   1.   Each taxpayer shall report on the
declaration of estimated taxes the portion of the remittance that the
taxpayer estimates that it owes to each municipal corporation for the taxable
year.



            2.   Upon receiving a payment of estimated taxes
under this section, the Commissioner shall immediately forward the payment to
the Treasurer of State. The Treasurer shall credit the payment in the same
manner as in R.C. § 718.85(B).



      (4)   (a)   In the case of any underpayment of estimated
taxes, there shall be added to the taxes an amount determined at the rate per
annum prescribed by R.C. § 5703.47 upon the amount of underpayment for the
period of underpayment, unless the underpayment is due to reasonable cause as
described in division (I)(5) of this section. The amount of the underpayment
shall be determined as follows:



            1.   For the first payment of estimated taxes each
year, 22.5% of the combined tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by
the date prescribed for that payment;



            2.   For the second payment of estimated taxes
each year, 45% of the combined tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid
by the date prescribed for that payment;



            3.   For the third payment of estimated taxes each
year, 67.5% per cent of the combined tax liability, less the amount of taxes
paid by the date prescribed for that payment;



            4.   For the fourth payment of estimated taxes
each year, 90% of the combined tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid
by the date prescribed for that payment.



         (b)   The period of the underpayment shall run from the
day the estimated payment was required to be made to the date on which the
payment is made. For purposes of this section, a payment of estimated taxes
on or before any payment date shall be considered a payment of any previous
underpayment only to the extent the payment of estimated taxes exceeds the
amount of the payment presently due.



         (c)   All amounts collected under this section shall be
considered as taxes collected under Chapter 39 of this code and shall be
credited and distributed to municipal corporations in accordance with R.C. §
718.83.



      (5)   An underpayment of any portion of a combined tax
liability shall be due to reasonable cause and the penalty imposed by this
section shall not be added to the taxes for the taxable year if any of the
following apply:



         (a)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid
equals at least 90% of the combined tax liability for the current taxable
year, determined by annualizing the income received during the year up to the
end of the month immediately preceding the month in which the payment is due.



         (b)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid
equals at least 100% of the tax liability shown on the return of the taxpayer
for the preceding taxable year, provided that the immediately preceding
taxable year reflected a period of 12 months and the taxpayer filed a
municipal income tax return for that year.



   (J)   Additional penalties.



      (1)   In addition to any other penalty imposed by Chapter 39
of this code or R.C. Chapter 5703, the following penalties shall apply:



         (a)   If a taxpayer required to file a tax return under
Chapter 39 of this code fails to make and file the return within the time
prescribed, including any extensions of time granted by the Tax Commissioner,
the Commissioner may impose a penalty not exceeding $25 per month or fraction
of a month, for each month or fraction of a month elapsing between the due
date, including extensions of the due date, and the date on which the return
is filed. The aggregate penalty, per instance, under this division shall not
exceed $150.



         (b)   If a person required to file a tax return
electronically under Chapter 39 of this code fails to do so, the Commissioner
may impose a penalty not to exceed the following:



            1.   For each of the first two failures, 5% of the
amount required to be reported on the return;



            2.   For the third and any subsequent failure, 10%
of the amount required to be reported on the return.



         (c)   If a taxpayer that has made the election allowed
under this section fails to timely pay an amount of tax required to be paid
under this chapter, the Commissioner may impose a penalty equal to 15% of the
amount not timely paid.



         (d)   If a taxpayer files what purports to be a tax
return required by Chapter 39 of this code that does not contain information
upon which the substantial correctness of the return may be judged or
contains information that on its face indicates that the return is
substantially incorrect, and the filing of the return in that manner is due
to a position that is frivolous or a desire that is apparent from the return
to delay or impede the administration of Chapter 39 of this code, a penalty
of up to $500 may be imposed.



         (e)   If a taxpayer makes a fraudulent attempt to evade
the reporting or payment of the tax required to be shown on any return
required under Chapter 39 of this code, a penalty may be imposed not
exceeding the greater of $1,000 or 100% of the tax required to be shown on
the return.



         (f)   If any person makes a false or fraudulent claim
for a refund under this section, a penalty may be imposed not exceeding the
greater of $1,000 or 100% of the claim. Any penalty imposed under this
division, any refund issued on the claim, and interest on any refund from the
date of the refund, may be assessed under this section without regard to any
time limitation for the assessment imposed by division (J)(1) of that section.



      (2)   For purposes of this section, the tax required to be
shown on a tax return shall be reduced by the amount of any part of the tax
paid on or before the date, including any extensions of the date, prescribed
for filing the return.



      (3)   Each penalty imposed under this section shall be in
addition to any other penalty imposed under this section. All or part of any
penalty imposed under this section may be abated by the Tax Commissioner. The
Commissioner may adopt rules governing the imposition and abatement of such
penalties.



      (4)   All amounts collected under this section shall be
considered as taxes collected under Chapter 39 of this code and shall be
credited and distributed to municipal corporations in the same proportion as
the underlying tax liability is required to be distributed to such municipal
corporations under R.C. § 718.83.



   (K)   Assessments against taxpayer.



      (1)   (a)   If any taxpayer required to file a return under
Chapter 39 of this code fails to file the return within the time prescribed,
files an incorrect return, or fails to remit the full amount of the tax due
for the period covered by the return, the Tax Commissioner may make an
assessment against the taxpayer for any deficiency for the period for which
the return or tax is due, based upon any information in the Commissioner's
possession.



         (b)   The Tax Commissioner shall not make or issue an
assessment against a taxpayer more than three years after the later of the
date the return subject to assessment was required to be filed or the date
the return was filed. Such time limit may be extended if both the taxpayer
and the Commissioner consent in writing to the extension. Any such extension
shall extend the three-year time limit in this section for the same period of
time. There shall be no bar or limit to an assessment against a taxpayer that
fails to file a return subject to assessment as required by Chapter 39 of
this code, or that files a fraudulent return. The Commissioner shall give the
taxpayer assessed written notice of the assessment as provided in R.C. §
5703.37. With the notice, the Commissioner shall provide instructions on how
to petition for reassessment and request a hearing on the petition.



      (2)   Unless the taxpayer assessed files with the Tax
Commissioner within 60 days after service of the notice of assessment, either
personally or by certified mail, a written petition for reassessment signed
by the authorized agent of the taxpayer assessed having knowledge of the
facts, the assessment becomes final, and the amount of the assessment is due
and payable from the taxpayer to the Treasurer of State. The petition shall
indicate the taxpayer's objections, but additional objections may be raised
in writing if received by the Commissioner prior to the date shown on the
final determination. If the petition has been properly filed, the
Commissioner shall proceed under R.C. § 5703.60.



      (3)   (a)   After an assessment becomes final, if any
portion of the assessment remains unpaid, including accrued interest, a
certified copy of the Tax Commissioner's entry making the assessment final
may be filed in the office of the Clerk of the Court of Common Pleas in the
county in which the taxpayer has an office or place of business in this
state, the county in which the taxpayer's statutory agent is located, or
Franklin county.



         (b)   Immediately upon the filing of the entry, the
Clerk shall enter a judgment against the taxpayer assessed in the amount
shown on the entry. The judgment may be filed by the Clerk in a loose-leaf
book entitled "special judgments for municipal income taxes," and shall have
the same effect as other judgments. Execution shall issue upon the judgment
upon the request of the Tax  Commissioner, and all laws applicable to sales
on execution shall apply to sales made under the judgment.



         (c)   If the assessment is not paid in its entirety
within 60 days after the day the assessment was issued, the portion of the
assessment consisting of tax due shall bear interest at the rate per annum
prescribed by R.C. § 5703.47 from the day the Commissioner issues the
assessment until the assessment is paid or until it is certified to the
Attorney General for collection under R.C. § 131.02, whichever comes first.
If the unpaid portion of the assessment is certified to the Attorney General
for collection, the entire unpaid portion of the assessment shall bear
interest at the rate per annum prescribed by R.C. § 5703.47 from the date of
certification until the date it is paid in its entirety. Interest shall be
paid in the same manner as the tax and may be collected by issuing an
assessment under this section.



      (4)   All money collected under this section shall be credited
to the municipal income tax fund and distributed to the municipal corporation
to which the money is owed based on the assessment issued under this section.



      (5)   If the Tax Commissioner believes that collection of the
tax will be jeopardized unless proceedings to collect or secure collection of
the tax are instituted without delay, the Commissioner may issue a jeopardy
assessment against the taxpayer liable for the tax. Immediately upon the
issuance of the jeopardy assessment, the Commissioner shall file an entry
with the Clerk of the Court of Common Pleas in the manner prescribed by
division (K)(3) of this section. Notice of the jeopardy assessment shall be
served on the taxpayer assessed or the taxpayer's legal representative in the
manner provided in R.C. § 5703.37 within five days of the filing of the
entry with the Clerk. The total amount assessed is immediately due and
payable, unless the taxpayer assessed files a petition for reassessment in
accordance with division (K)(2) of this section and provides security in a
form satisfactory to the Commissioner and in an amount sufficient to satisfy
the unpaid balance of the assessment. Full or partial payment of the
assessment does not prejudice the Commissioner's consideration of the
petition for reassessment.



      (6)   (a)   Notwithstanding the fact that a petition for
reassessment is pending, the taxpayer may pay all or a portion of the
assessment that is the subject of the petition. The acceptance of a payment
by the Treasurer of State does not prejudice any claim for refund upon final
determination of the petition.



         (b)   If upon final determination of the petition an
error in the assessment is corrected by the Tax Commissioner, upon petition
so filed or pursuant to a decision of the Board of Tax Appeals or any court
to which the determination or decision has been appealed, so that the amount
due from the taxpayer under the corrected assessment is less than the portion
paid, there shall be issued to the taxpayer, its assigns, or legal
representative a refund in the amount of the overpayment as provided by R.C.
§ 37.096, with interest on that amount as provided by that section.



    (L)   Refund applications.



      (1)   An application to refund to a taxpayer the amount of
taxes paid on any illegal, erroneous, or excessive payment of tax under
Chapter 39 of this code, including assessments, shall be filed with the Tax
Commissioner within three years after the date of the illegal, erroneous, or
excessive payment of the tax, or within any additional period allowed by §
39.096(A). The application shall be filed in the form prescribed by the Tax
Commissioner.



      (2)   (a)   On the filing of a refund application, the Tax
Commissioner shall determine the amount of refund to which the applicant is
entitled. The amount determined shall be based on the amount overpaid per
return or assessment. If the amount is greater than $10 and not less than
that claimed, the Commissioner shall certify that amount to the Director of
Budget and Management and the Treasurer of State for payment from the Tax
Refund Fund created in R.C. § 5703.052. If the amount is greater than $10
but less than that claimed, the Commissioner shall proceed in accordance with
R.C. § 5703.70.



         (b)   Upon issuance of a refund under this section, the
Commissioner shall notify each municipal corporation of the amount refunded
to the taxpayer attributable to that municipal corporation, which shall be
deducted from the municipal corporation's next distribution under R.C. §
718.83.



      (3)   Any portion of a refund determined under division (L)(3)
of this section that is not issued within 90 days after such determination
shall bear interest at the rate per annum prescribed by R.C. § 5703.47 from
the 91st day after such determination until the day the refund is paid or
credited. On an illegal or erroneous assessment, interest shall be paid at
that rate from the date of payment on the illegal or erroneous assessment
until the day the refund is paid or credited.



   (M)   Amended returns.



      (1)   If any of the facts, figures, computations, or
attachments required in an annual return filed by a taxpayer that has made
the election allowed under § 39.095 and used to determine the tax due under
Chapter 39 of this code must be altered as the result of an adjustment to the
taxpayer's federal income tax return, whether initiated by the taxpayer or
the internal revenue service, and such alteration affects the taxpayer's tax
liability under those sections, the taxpayer shall file an amended return
with the Tax Commissioner in such form as the Commissioner requires. The
amended return shall be filed not later than 60 days after the adjustment is
agreed upon or finally determined for federal income tax purposes or after
any federal income tax deficiency or refund, or the abatement or credit
resulting therefrom, has been assessed or paid, whichever occurs first. If a
taxpayer intends to file an amended consolidated municipal income tax return,
or to amend its type of return from a separate return to a consolidated
return, based on the taxpayer's consolidated federal income tax return, the
taxpayer shall notify the Commissioner before filing the amended return.



      (2)   In the case of an underpayment, the amended return shall
be accompanied by payment of any combined additional tax due together with
any penalty and interest thereon. An amended return required by this section
is a return subject to assessment under § 39.062 for the purpose of
assessing any additional tax due under this section, together with any
applicable penalty and interest. The amended return shall not reopen those
facts, figures, computations, or attachments from a previously filed return
no longer subject to assessment that are not affected, either directly or
indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer's federal tax return.



      (3)   In the case of an overpayment, an application for refund
may be filed under this division within the 60-day period prescribed for
filing the amended return, even if that period extends beyond the period
prescribed in § 39.096, if the application otherwise conforms to the
requirements of that section. An application filed under this division shall
claim refund of overpayments resulting from alterations to only those facts,
figures, computations, or attachments required in the taxpayer's annual
return that are affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to
the taxpayer's federal income tax return unless it is also filed within the
time prescribed in § 39.091. The application shall not reopen those facts,
figures, computations, or attachments that are not affected, either directly
or indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer's federal income tax return.



   (N)   Examination of records and other documents and persons.



      (1)   The Tax Commissioner, or any authorized agent or
employee thereof, may examine the books, papers, records, and federal and
state income tax returns of any taxpayer or other person that is subject to
Chapter 39 of this code for the purpose of verifying the accuracy of any
return made or, if no return was filed, to ascertain the tax due as required
under those sections. Upon written request by the Commissioner or a duly
authorized agent or employee thereof, every taxpayer or other person subject
to this section is required to furnish the opportunity for the Commissioner,
authorized agent, or employee to investigate and examine such books, papers,
records, and federal and state income tax returns at a reasonable time and
place designated in the request.



      (2)   The records and other documents of any taxpayer or other
person that is subject to Chapter 39 of this code shall be open to the Tax
Commissioner's inspection during business hours and shall be preserved for a
period of six years following the end of the taxable year to which the
records or documents relate, unless the Commissioner, in writing, consents to
their destruction within that period, or by order requires that they be kept
longer. The Commissioner may require any person, by notice served on that
person, to keep such records as the Commissioner determines necessary to show
whether or not that person is liable, and the extent of such liability, for
the income tax levied by a municipal corporation.



      (3)   The Tax Commissioner may examine under oath any person
that the Commissioner reasonably believes has knowledge concerning any income
that was or would have been returned for taxation or any transaction tending
to affect such income. The Commissioner may, for this purpose, compel any
such person to attend a hearing or examination and to produce any books,
papers, records, and federal income tax returns in such person's possession
or control. The person may be assisted or represented by an attorney,
accountant, bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner at any such hearing or
examination. This division does not authorize the practice of law by a person
who is not an attorney.



      (4)   No person issued written notice by the Tax Commissioner
compelling attendance at a hearing or examination or the production of books,
papers, records, or federal income tax returns under this section shall fail
to comply.



   (O)   Credits.



      (1)   A credit, granted by resolution or ordinance of the
village pursuant to Chapter 39 of this code, shall be available to a taxpayer
that has made the election allowed under § 39.08, against the municipal
corporation's tax on income. A municipal corporation shall submit the
following information to the Tax Commissioner on or before the later of
January 31, 2018, or the 31st day of January of the first year in which the
taxpayer is eligible to receive the credit:



         (a)   A copy of the agreement entered into by the
village and taxpayer under Chapter 39 of this code;



         (b)   A copy of the ordinance or resolution authorizing
the agreement entered into between the village and the taxpayer.



      (2)   (a)   Each taxpayer that claims a credit shall
submit, with the taxpayer's tax return, documentation issued by the village
granting the credit that confirms the eligibility of the taxpayer for the
credit, the amount of the credit for which the taxpayer is eligible, and the
tax year to which the credit is to be applied.



         (b)   Such documentation shall be provided in the form
prescribed by the Tax Commissioner.



         (c)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to
authorize the Tax Commissioner to enter into an agreement with a taxpayer to
grant a credit, to determine if a taxpayer meets the conditions of a tax
credit agreement entered into by the village and taxpayer under Chapter 39 of
this code, or to modify the terms or conditions of any such existing
agreement.



   (P)   Reckless violations; penalties.



      (1)   Except as provided in division (P)(2) of this section,
whoever recklessly violates division § 39.10(A) shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be subject to a fine of not more
than $1,000 or imprisonment for a term of up to six months, or both.



      (2)   Each instance of access or disclosure in violation of §
39.10(A) constitutes a separate offense.



      (3)   These specific penalties shall not be construed to
prevent the village from prosecuting any and all other offenses that may
apply.



(Ord. 15-10-03, passed 11-17-15; Am. Ord. 18-02-03, passed 2-22-18)



Statutory reference:



   Income subject to tax, see R.C. § 718.02



§ 39.063  CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL INCOME TAX RETURN.



   (A)   As used in this section:



      (1)   AFFILIATED GROUP OF CORPORATIONS means an affiliated
group as defined in section 1504 of the Internal Revenue Code, except that,
if such a group includes at least one incumbent local exchange carrier that
is primarily engaged in the business of providing local exchange telephone
service in this state, the affiliated group shall not include any incumbent
local exchange carrier that would otherwise be included in the group.



      (2)   CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL INCOME TAX RETURN means a
consolidated return filed for federal income tax purposes pursuant to section
1501 of the Internal Revenue Code.



      (3)   CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME means the
consolidated taxable income of an affiliated group of corporations, as
computed for the purposes of filing a consolidated federal income tax return,
before consideration of net operating losses or special deductions.
“Consolidated federal taxable income” does not include income or loss of
an incumbent local exchange carrier that is excluded from the affiliated
group under division (A)(1) of this section.



      (4)   INCUMBENT LOCAL EXCHANGE CARRIER has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 4927.01.



      (5)   LOCAL EXCHANGE TELEPHONE SERVICE has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 5727.01.



   (B)   (1)   For taxable years beginning on or after January 1,
2016, a taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations may
elect to file a consolidated municipal income tax return for a taxable year
if at least one member of the affiliated group of corporations is subject to
the municipal income tax in that taxable year and if the affiliated group of
corporations filed a consolidated federal income tax return with respect to
that taxable year.



         (a)   The election is binding for a five-year period
beginning with the first taxable year of the initial election unless a change
in the reporting method is required under federal law.



         (b)   The election continues to be binding for each
subsequent five-year period unless the taxpayer elects to discontinue filing
consolidated municipal income tax returns under division (B)(2) of this
section; or



         (c)   A taxpayer receives permission from the Tax
Administrator. The Tax Administrator shall approve such a request for good
cause shown.



      (2)   An election to discontinue filing consolidated municipal
income tax returns under this section must be made in the first year
following the last year of a five-year consolidated municipal income tax
return election period in effect under division (B)(1) of this section. The
election to discontinue filing a consolidated municipal income tax return is
binding for a five-year period beginning with the first taxable year of the
election.



      (3)   An election made under division (B)(1) or (2) of this
section is binding on all members of the affiliated group of corporations
subject to a municipal income tax.



   (C)   A taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of
corporations that filed a consolidated federal income tax return for a
taxable year shall file a consolidated municipal income tax return for that
taxable year if the Tax Administrator determines, by a preponderance of the
evidence, that intercompany transactions have not been conducted at arm’s
length and that there has been a distortive shifting of income or expenses
with regard to allocation of net profits to the municipal corporation. A
taxpayer that is required to file a consolidated municipal income tax return
for a taxable year shall file a consolidated municipal income tax return for
all subsequent taxable years unless the taxpayer requests and receives
written permission from the Tax Administrator to file a separate return or a
taxpayer has experienced a change in circumstances.



   (D)   A taxpayer shall prepare a consolidated municipal income tax
return in the same manner as is required under the United States Department
of Treasury regulations that prescribe procedures for the preparation of the
consolidated federal income tax return required to be filed by the common
parent of the affiliated group of which the taxpayer is a member.



   (E)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (E)(2),
(3), and (4) of this section, corporations that file a consolidated municipal
income tax return shall compute adjusted federal taxable income, as defined
in § 39.03(1) of this chapter, by substituting “consolidated federal
taxable income” for “federal taxable income” wherever “federal
taxable income” appears in that division and by substituting “an
affiliated group of corporation’s” for “a C corporation’s” wherever
“a C corporation’s” appears in that division.



      (2)   No corporation filing a consolidated municipal income
tax return shall make any adjustment otherwise required under § 39.03(C)(1)
of this chapter to the extent that the item of income or deduction otherwise
subject to the adjustment has been eliminated or consolidated in the
computation of consolidated federal taxable income.



      (3)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity
having at least 80% of the value of its ownership interest owned or
controlled, directly or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is
included in that affiliated group’s consolidated federal taxable income for
a taxable year, the corporation filing a consolidated municipal income tax
return shall do one of the following with respect to that pass-through
entity’s net profit or loss for that taxable year:



         (a)   Exclude the pass-through entity’s net profit or
loss from the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group
and, for the purpose of making the computations required in § 39.062 of this
chapter, exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the
pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated group’s net profit
sitused to a municipal corporation. If the entity’s net profit or loss is
so excluded, the entity shall be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer
on the basis of the entity’s net profits that would otherwise be included
in the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group.



         (b)   Include the pass-through entity’s net profit or
loss in the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and,
for the purpose of making the computations required in § 39.062 of this
chapter, include the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the
pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated group’s net profit
sitused to a municipal corporation. If the entity’s net profit or loss is
so included, the entity shall not be subject to taxation as a separate
taxpayer on the basis of the entity’s net profits that are included in the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group.



      (4)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity
having less than 80% of the value of its ownership interest owned or
controlled, directly or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is
included in that affiliated group’s consolidated federal taxable income for
a taxable year, all of the following shall apply:



         (a)   The corporation filing the consolidated municipal
income tax return shall exclude the pass-through entity’s net profit or
loss from the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group
and, for the purposes of making the computations required in § 39.062 of
this chapter, exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the
pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated group’s net profit
sitused to a municipal corporation;



         (b)   The pass-through entity shall be subject to
municipal income taxation as a separate taxpayer in accordance with this
chapter on the basis of the entity’s net profits that would otherwise be
included in the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group.



   (F)   Corporations filing a consolidated municipal income tax return
shall make the computations required under § 39.062 of this chapter by
substituting “consolidated federal taxable income attributable to” for
“net profit from” wherever “net profit from” appears in that section
and by substituting “affiliated group of corporations” for “taxpayer”
wherever “taxpayer” appears in that section.



   (G)   Each corporation filing a consolidated municipal income tax
return is jointly and severally liable for any tax, interest, penalties,
fines, charges, or other amounts imposed by a municipal corporation in
accordance with this chapter on the corporation, an affiliated group of which
the corporation is a member for any portion of the taxable year, or any one
or more members of such an affiliated group.



   (H)   Corporations and their affiliates that made an election or
entered into an agreement with a municipal corporation before January 1,
2016, to file a consolidated or combined tax return with such municipal
corporation may continue to file consolidated or combined tax returns in
accordance with such election or agreement for taxable years beginning on and
after January 1, 2016.



(Ord. 15-10-03, passed 11-17-15)



Statutory reference:



   Consolidated municipal tax return, see R.C. § 718.06



§ 39.064  TAX CREDIT FOR BUSINESSES THAT FOSTER NEW JOBS IN OHIO.



   The municipality, by ordinance, may grant a refundable or nonrefundable
credit against its tax on income to a taxpayer to foster job creation in the
municipality. If a credit is granted under this section, it shall be measured
as a percentage of the new income tax revenue the municipality derives from
new employees of the taxpayer and shall be for a term not exceeding 15 years.
Before the municipality passes an ordinance granting a credit, the
municipality and the taxpayer shall enter into an agreement specifying all
the conditions of the credit.



(Ord. 15-10-03, passed 11-17-15)



Statutory reference:



   Fostering new jobs; tax credits, see R.C. § 718.15



§ 39.065  TAX CREDITS TO FOSTER JOB RETENTION.



   The municipality, by ordinance, may grant a refundable or nonrefundable
credit against its tax on income to a taxpayer for the purpose of fostering
job retention in the municipality.  If a credit is granted under this
section, it shall be measured as a percentage of the income tax revenue the
municipality derives from the retained employees of the taxpayer, and shall
be for a term not exceeding 15 years. Before the municipality passes an
ordinance allowing such a credit, the municipality and the taxpayer shall
enter into an agreement specifying all the conditions of the credit.



(Ord. 15-10-03, passed 11-17-15)



Statutory reference:



   Fostering job retention; tax credits, see R.C. § 718.151



§ 39.07  DECLARATION OF ESTIMATED TAX.



   (A)   As used in this section:



      (1)   ESTIMATED TAXES means the amount that the taxpayer
reasonably estimates to be the taxpayer’s tax liability for a municipal
corporation’s income tax for the current taxable year.



      (2)   TAX LIABILITY means the total taxes due to a municipal
corporation for the taxable year, after allowing any credit to which the
taxpayer is entitled, and after applying any estimated tax payment,
withholding payment, or credit from another taxable year.



   (B)   (1)   Every taxpayer shall make a declaration of estimated
taxes for the current taxable year, on the form prescribed by the Tax
Administrator, if the amount payable as estimated taxes is at least $200. For
the purposes of this section:



         (a)   Taxes withheld from qualifying wages shall be
considered as paid to the municipal corporation for which the taxes were
withheld in equal amounts on each payment date. If the taxpayer establishes
the dates on which all amounts were actually withheld, the amounts withheld
shall be considered as paid on the dates on which the amounts were actually
withheld.



         (b)   An overpayment of tax applied as a credit to a
subsequent taxable year is deemed to be paid on the date of the postmark
stamped on the cover in which the payment is mailed or, if the payment is
made by electronic funds transfer, the date the payment is submitted. As used
in this division, “date of the postmark” means, in the event there is
more than one date on the cover, the earliest date imprinted on the cover by
the postal service.



         (c)   A taxpayer having a taxable year of less than 12
months shall make a declaration under rules prescribed by the Tax
Administrator.



         (d)   Taxes withheld by a casino operator or by a
lottery sales agent under R.C. § 718.031 are deemed to be paid to the
municipal corporation for which the taxes were withheld on the date the taxes
are withheld from the taxpayer’s winnings.



      (2)   Taxpayers filing joint returns shall file joint
declarations of estimated taxes.



      (3)   The declaration of estimated taxes shall be filed on or
before the date prescribed for the filing of municipal income tax returns
under § 39.091(G) of this chapter or on or before the fifteenth day of the
fourth month of the first taxable year after the taxpayer becomes subject to
tax for the first time.



      (4)   Taxpayers reporting on a fiscal year basis shall file a
declaration on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the
beginning of each fiscal year or period.



      (5)   The original declaration or any subsequent amendment may
be increased or decreased on or before any subsequent quarterly payment day
as provided in this section.



   (C)   (1)   The required portion of the tax liability for the
taxable year that shall be paid through estimated taxes made payable to the
municipality or Tax Administrator, including the application of tax refunds
to estimated taxes and withholding on or before the applicable payment date,
shall be as follows:



         (a)   On or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month
after the beginning of the taxable year, 22-1/2% of the tax liability for the
taxable year;



         (b)   On or before the fifteenth day of the sixth month
after the beginning of the taxable year, 45% of the tax liability for the
taxable year;



         (c)   On or before the fifteenth day of the ninth month
after the beginning of the taxable year, 67-1/2% of the tax liability for the
taxable year;



         (d)   On or before the fifteenth day of the twelfth
month of the taxable year, 90% of the tax liability for the taxable year.



      (2)   A taxpayer may amend a declaration under rules
prescribed by the Tax Administrator.  When an amended declaration has been
filed, the unpaid balance shown due on the amended declaration shall be paid
in equal installments on or before the remaining payment dates. The amended
declaration must be filed on the next applicable due date as outlined in
(C)(1)(a) through (d) of this section.



      (3)   On or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month of
the year following that for which the declaration or amended declaration was
filed, an annual return shall be filed and any balance which may be due shall
be paid with the return in accordance with § 39.091 of this chapter.



         (a)   For taxpayers who are individuals, or who are not
individuals and are reporting and filing on a calendar year basis, the annual
tax return is due on the same date as the filing of the federal tax return,
unless extended pursuant to R.C. § 5747.08(G).



         (b)   For taxpayers who are not individuals, and are
reporting and filing on a fiscal year basis or any period other than a
calendar year, the annual return is due on the fifteenth day of the fourth
month following the end of the taxable year or period.



      (4)   An amended declaration is required whenever the
taxpayer’s estimated tax liability changes during the taxable year. A
change in estimated tax liability may either increase or decrease the
estimated tax liability for the taxable year.



   (D)   (1)   In the case of any underpayment of any portion of a
tax liability, penalty and interest may be imposed pursuant to § 39.10 of
this chapter  upon  the  amount  of  underpayment  for  the  period
of underpayment, unless the underpayment is due to reasonable cause as
described in division (E) of this section. The amount of the underpayment
shall be determined as follows:



         (a)   For the first payment of estimated taxes each
year, 22-1/2% of the tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date
prescribed for that payment;



         (b)   For the second payment of estimated taxes each
year, 45% of the tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date
prescribed for that payment;



         (c)   For the third payment of estimated taxes each
year, 67-1/2% of the tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date
prescribed for that payment;



         (d)   For the fourth payment of estimated taxes each
year, 90% of the tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date
prescribed for that payment.



      (2)   The period of the underpayment shall run from the day
the estimated payment was required to be made to the date on which the
payment is made. For purposes of this section, a payment of estimated taxes
on or before any payment date shall be considered a payment of any previous
underpayment only to the extent the payment of estimated taxes exceeds the
amount of the payment presently required to be paid to avoid any penalty.



   (E)   An underpayment of any portion of tax liability determined
under division (D) of this section shall be due to reasonable cause and the
penalty imposed by this section shall not be added to the taxes for the
taxable year if any of the following apply:



      (1)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at
least 90% of the tax liability for the current taxable year, determined by
annualizing the income received during the year up to the end of the month
immediately preceding the month in which the payment is due.



      (2)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at
least 100% of the tax liability shown on the return of the taxpayer for the
preceding taxable year, provided that the immediately preceding taxable year
reflected a period of 12 months and the taxpayer filed a return with the
municipal corporation under § 39.091 of this chapter for that year.



      (3)   The  taxpayer  is  an  individual  who  resides 
in  the municipality  but was not domiciled there on the first day of
January of the calendar year that includes the first day of the taxable year.



   (F)   A Tax Administrator may waive the requirement for filing a
declaration of estimated taxes for any class of taxpayers after finding that
the waiver is reasonable and proper in view of administrative costs and other
factors.



(Ord. 15-10-03, passed 11-17-15)



Statutory reference:



   Estimated taxes, see R.C. § 718.08



§ 39.08  CREDIT FOR TAX PAID.



§ 39.081  CREDIT FOR TAX PAID TO OTHER MUNICIPALITIES.



   Resident individuals of the village, who are required to pay and do pay
tax to a municipality other than Minster on qualifying wages, commissions,
and other compensation for work done or services performed outside the
village or net profits from businesses, professions, or other activities
conducted outside the village, may claim a credit of the amount of tax paid
by them or on their behalf to such other municipality but only to the extent
of the tax imposed by this chapter on such income, such credit being limited
to 1-1/2% of the amount of income tax by both the village and such other
municipality. A return must be filed for the purpose of claiming such credit
or allowance, together with such evidence of the payment of similar tax to
the municipality in which such resident has a source of income as the Tax
Commissioner may require.



(Ord. 15-10-03, passed 11-17-15)



§ 39.082  REFUNDABLE CREDIT FOR QUALIFYING LOSS.



   (A)   As used in this section:



      (1)   NONQUALIFIED DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN means a
compensation plan described in section 3121(v)(2)(C) of the Internal Revenue
Code.



      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (A)(2)(b) of
this section, QUALIFYING LOSS means the excess, if any, of the total amount
of compensation the payment of which is deferred pursuant to a nonqualified
deferred compensation plan over the total amount of income the taxpayer has
recognized for federal income tax purposes for all taxable years on a
cumulative basis as compensation with respect to the taxpayer’s receipt of
money and property attributable to distributions in connection with the
nonqualified deferred compensation plan.



         (b)   If, for one or more taxable years, the taxpayer
has not paid to one or more municipal corporations income tax imposed on the
entire amount of compensation the payment of which is deferred pursuant to a
nonqualified deferred compensation plan, then the “qualifying loss” is
the product of the amount resulting from the calculation described in
division (A)(2)(a) of this section computed without regard to division
(A)(2)(b) of this section and a fraction the numerator of which is the
portion of such compensation on which the taxpayer has paid income tax to one
or more municipal corporations and the denominator of which is the total
amount of compensation the payment of which is deferred pursuant to a
nonqualified deferred compensation plan.



         (c)   With respect to a nonqualified deferred
compensation plan, the taxpayer sustains a qualifying loss only in the
taxable year in which the taxpayer receives the final distribution of money
and property pursuant to that nonqualified deferred compensation plan.



      (3)   QUALIFYING TAX RATE means the applicable tax rate for
the taxable year for the which the taxpayer paid income tax to a municipal
corporation with respect to any portion of the total amount of compensation
the payment of which is deferred pursuant to a nonqualified deferred
compensation plan. If different tax rates applied for different taxable
years, then the “qualifying tax rate” is a weighted average of those
different tax rates. The weighted average shall be based upon the tax paid to
the municipal corporation each year with respect to the nonqualified deferred
compensation plan.



   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (D) of this section, a
refundable credit shall be allowed against the income tax imposed by a
municipal corporation for each qualifying loss sustained by a taxpayer during
the taxable year. The amount of the credit shall be equal to the product of
the qualifying loss and the qualifying tax rate.



      (2)   A taxpayer shall claim the credit allowed under this
section from each municipal corporation to which the taxpayer paid municipal
income tax with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan in one
or more taxable years.



      (3)   If a taxpayer has paid tax to more than one municipal
corporation with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan, the
amount of the credit that a taxpayer may claim from each municipal
corporation shall be calculated on the basis of each municipal
corporation’s proportionate share of the total municipal corporation income
tax paid by the taxpayer to all municipal corporations with respect to the
nonqualified deferred compensation plan.



      (4)   In no case shall the amount of the credit allowed under
this section exceed the cumulative income tax that a taxpayer has paid to a
municipal corporation for all taxable years with respect to the nonqualified
deferred compensation plan.



   (C)   (1)   For purposes of this section, municipal corporation
income tax that has been withheld with respect to a nonqualified deferred
compensation plan shall be considered to have been paid by the taxpayer with
respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan.



      (2)   Any municipal income tax that has been refunded or
otherwise credited for the benefit of the taxpayer with respect to a
nonqualified deferred compensation plan shall not be considered to have been
paid to the municipal corporation by the taxpayer.



   (D)   The credit allowed under this section is allowed only to the
extent the taxpayer’s qualifying loss is attributable to:



      (1)   The insolvency or bankruptcy of the employer who had
established the nonqualified deferred compensation plan; or



      (2)   The employee’s failure or inability to satisfy all of
the employer’s terms and conditions necessary to receive the nonqualified
deferred compensation.



(Ord. 15-10-03, passed 11-17-15)



Statutory reference:



   Qualifying loss; refundable credit, see R.C. § 718.021



§ 39.083  CREDIT FOR PERSON WORKING IN JOINT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
OR ZONE.



   A municipality shall grant a credit against its tax on income to a
resident of the municipality who works in a joint economic development zone
created under R.C. § 715.691 or a joint economic development district
created under R.C. §§ 715.70, 715.71, or 715.72 to the same extent that it
grants a credit against its tax on income to its residents who are employed
in another municipal corporation, pursuant to § 39.081 of this chapter.



(Ord. 15-10-03, passed 11-17-15)



Statutory reference:



   Worker in joint economic development zone or district, see R.C. §
718.16



§ 39.084  CREDIT FOR TAX BEYOND STATUTE FOR OBTAINING REFUND.



   (A)   Income tax that has been deposited or paid to the
municipality, but should have been deposited or paid to another municipal
corporation, is allowable by the municipality as a refund, but is subject to
the three-year limitation on refunds as provided in § 39.096 of this
chapter. 



   (B)   Income tax that should have been deposited or paid to the
municipality, but was deposited or paid to another municipal corporation,
shall be subject to collection and recovery by the municipality.  To the
extent a refund of such tax or withholding is barred by the limitation on
refunds as provided in § 39.096, the municipality will allow a
non-refundable credit equal to the tax or withholding paid to the other
municipality against the income tax the municipality claims is due. If the
municipality’s tax rate is higher, the tax representing the net difference
of the tax rates is also subject to collection by the municipality, along
with any penalty and interest accruing during the period of nonpayment.



   (C)   No carryforward of credit will be permitted when the
overpayment is beyond the three-year limitation for refunding of same as
provided in § 39.096 of this chapter.



   (D)   Nothing in this section requires a municipality to allow
credit for tax paid to another municipal corporation if the municipality has
reduced credit for tax paid to another municipal corporation.  § 39.081 of
this chapter regarding any limitation on credit shall prevail.



(Ord. 15-10-03, passed 11-17-15)



Statutory reference:



   Second municipality imposing tax after time period allowed for refund,
see R.C. § 718.121



§ 39.09  ANNUAL RETURN.



§ 39.091  RETURN AND PAYMENT OF TAX.



   (A)   (1)   An annual return with respect to the income tax
levied on municipal taxable income by the municipality shall be completed and
filed by every taxpayer for any taxable year for which the taxpayer is
subject to the tax, regardless of whether or not income tax is due.



      (2)   The Tax Administrator shall accept on behalf of all
nonresident individual taxpayers a return filed by an employer, agent of an
employer, or other payer located in the municipality under § 39.051(C) of
this chapter when the nonresident individual taxpayer’s sole income subject
to the tax is the qualifying wages reported by the employer, agent of an
employer, or other payer, and no additional tax is due to the municipality.



      (3)   All resident individual taxpayers, 18 years of age and
older, shall file an annual municipal income tax return with the
municipality, regardless of income or liability.



   (B)   If an individual is deceased, any return or notice required of
that individual shall be completed and filed by that decedent’s executor,
administrator, or other person charged with the property of that decedent.



   (C)   If an individual is unable to complete and file a return or
notice required by the municipality in accordance with this chapter, the
return or notice required of that individual shall be completed and filed by
the individual’s duly authorized agent, guardian, conservator, fiduciary,
or other person charged with the care of the person or property of that
individual. Such duly authorized agent, guardian, conservator, fiduciary, or
other person charged with the care of the person or property of that
individual shall provide, with the filing of the return, appropriate
documentation to support that they are authorized to file a return or notice
on behalf of the taxpayer. This notice shall include any legally binding
authorizations, and contact information including name, address, and phone
number of the duly authorized agent, guardian, conservator, fiduciary, or
other person.



   (D)   Returns or notices required of an estate or a trust shall be
completed and filed by the fiduciary of the estate or trust. Such fiduciary
shall provide, with the filing of the return, appropriate documentation to
support that they are authorized to file a return or notice on behalf of the
taxpayer. This notice shall include any legally binding authorizations, and
contact information including name, address, and phone number of the
fiduciary.



   (E)   No municipal corporation shall deny spouses the ability to
file a joint return.



   (F)   (1)   Each return required to be filed under this section
shall contain the signature of the taxpayer or the taxpayer’s duly
authorized agent and of the person who prepared the return for the taxpayer,
and shall include the taxpayer’s social security number or taxpayer
identification number. Each return shall be verified by a declaration under
penalty of perjury.



      (2)   A taxpayer who is an individual is required to include,
with each annual return, amended return, or request for refund required under
this section, copies of only the following documents: all of the taxpayer’s
Internal Revenue Service form W-2, “wage and tax statements,” including
all information reported on the taxpayer’s federal W-2, as well as taxable
wages reported or withheld for any municipal corporation; the taxpayer’s
Internal Revenue Service form 1040; and, with respect to an amended tax
return or refund request, any other documentation necessary to support the
refund request or the adjustments made in the amended return. An individual
taxpayer who files the annual return required by this section electronically
is not required to provide paper copies of any of the foregoing to the Tax
Administrator unless the Tax Administrator requests such copies after the
return has been filed.   



      (3)   A taxpayer that is not an individual is required to
include, with each annual net profit return, amended net profit return, or
request for refund required under this section, copies of only the following
documents: the taxpayer’s Internal Revenue Service form 1041, form 1065,
form 1120, form 1120-REIT, form 1120F, or form 1120S, and, with respect to an
amended tax return or refund request, any other documentation necessary to
support the refund request or the adjustments made in the amended return.



      (4)   A taxpayer that is not an individual and that files an
annual net profit return electronically through the Ohio Business Gateway or
in some other manner shall either mail the documents required under this
division to the Tax Administrator at the time of filing or, if electronic
submission is available, submit the documents electronically through the Ohio
Business Gateway or a portal provided by municipality. The Department of
Taxation shall publish a method of electronically submitting the documents
required under this division through the Ohio Business Gateway on or before
January 1, 2016. The Department shall transmit all documents submitted
electronically under this division to the appropriate Tax Administrator. 



      (5)   After a taxpayer files a tax return, the Tax
Administrator shall request, and the taxpayer shall provide, any information,
statements, or documents required by the municipality to determine and verify
the taxpayer’s municipal income tax liability. The requirements imposed
under division (F) of this section apply regardless of whether the taxpayer
files on a generic form or on a form prescribed by the Tax Administrator.



      (6)   Any other documentation, including schedules, other
municipal income tax returns, or other supporting documentation necessary to
verify credits, income, losses, or other pertinent factors on the return
shall also be included to avoid delay in processing, or disallowance by the
Tax Administrator of undocumented credits or losses.



   (G)   (1)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this
chapter, each individual income tax return required to be filed under this
section shall be completed and filed as required by the Tax Administrator on
or before the date prescribed for the filing of state individual income tax
returns under R.C. § 5747.08(G). The taxpayer shall complete and file the
return or notice on forms prescribed by the Tax Administrator or on generic
forms, together with remittance made payable to the municipality or Tax
Administrator.



         (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each
annual net profit income tax return required to be filed under this section
by a taxpayer that is not an individual shall be completed and filed as
required by the tax administrator on or before the fifteenth day of the
fourth month following the end of the taxpayer’s taxable year or period.
The taxpayer shall complete and file the return or notice on forms prescribed
by the tax administrator or on generic forms, together with remittance made
payable to the municipality or Tax Administrator.



         (c)   In the case of individual income tax return
required to be filed by an individual, and net profit income tax return
required to be filed by a taxpayer who is not an individual,  no remittance
is required if the amount shown to be due is $10 or less.



      (2)   If the Tax Administrator considers it necessary in order
to ensure the payment of the tax imposed by the municipality in accordance
with this chapter, the Tax Administrator may require taxpayers to file
returns and make payments otherwise than as provided in this section,
including taxpayers not otherwise required to file annual returns.



      (3)   With respect to taxpayers to whom § 39.092 of this
chapter applies, to the extent that any provision in this division conflicts
with any provision in § 39.092 of this chapter, the provision in § 39.092
of this chapter prevails. 



   (H)   (1)   For taxable years beginning after 2015, the
municipality shall not require a taxpayer to remit tax with respect to net
profits if the amount due is $10 or less.



      (2)   Any taxpayer not required to remit tax to the
municipality for a taxable year pursuant to division (H)(1) of this section
shall file with the municipality an annual net profit return under division
(F)(3) and (4) of this section.



   (I)   This division shall not apply to payments required to be made
under § 39.051 (B)(1)(b) of this chapter.



      (1)   If any report, claim, statement, or other document
required to be filed, or any payment required to be made, within a prescribed
period or on or before a prescribed date under this chapter is delivered
after that period or that to the Tax Administrator or other municipal
official with which the report, claim, statement, or other document is
required to be filed, or to which the payment is required to be made, the
date of the postmark stamped on the cover in which the report, claim,
statement, or other document, or payment is mailed shall be deemed to be the
date of delivery or the date of payment. “The date of postmark” means, in
the event there is more than one date on the cover, the earliest date
imprinted on the cover by the postal service.



      (2)   If a payment is required to be made by electronic funds
transfer, the payment is considered to be made when the payment is credited
to an account designated by the Tax Administrator for the receipt of tax
payments, except that, when a payment made by electronic funds transfer is
delayed due to circumstances not under the control of the taxpayer, the
payment is considered to be made when the taxpayer submitted the payment. 
For purposes of this section, “submitted the payment” means the date
which the taxpayer has designated for the delivery of payment, which may or
may  not  be the same date as the date the payment was initiated by the
taxpayer.



   (J)   The amounts withheld for the municipality by an employer, the
agent of an employer, or other payer as described in § 39.051 of this
chapter shall be allowed to the recipient of the compensation as credits
against payment of the tax imposed on the recipient unless the amounts
withheld were not remitted to the municipality and the recipient colluded
with the employer, agent, or other payer in connection with the failure to
remit the amounts withheld.



   (K)   Each return required by the municipality to be filed in
accordance with this section shall include a box that the taxpayer may check
to authorize another person, including a tax return preparer who prepared the
return, to communicate with the Tax Administrator about matters pertaining to
the return. The return or instructions accompanying the return shall indicate
that by checking the box the taxpayer authorizes the Tax Administrator to
contact the preparer or other person concerning questions that arise during
the examination or other review of the return and authorizes the preparer or
other person only to provide the Tax Administrator with information that is
missing from the return, to contact the Tax Administrator for information
about the examination or other review of the return or the status of the
taxpayer’s refund or payments, and to respond to notices about mathematical
errors, offsets, or return preparation that the taxpayer has received from
the Tax Administrator and has shown to the preparer or other person.
Authorization by the taxpayer of another person to communicate with the Tax
Administrator about matters pertaining to the return does not preclude the
Tax Administrator from contacting the taxpayer regarding such matters.



   (L)   The Tax Administrator of the municipality shall accept for
filing a generic form of any income tax return, report, or document required
by the municipality in accordance with this chapter, provided that the
generic form, once completed and filed, contains all of the information
required by ordinances, resolutions, or rules adopted by the municipality or
Tax Administrator, and provided that the taxpayer or tax return preparer
filing the generic form otherwise complies with the provisions of this
chapter and of the municipality’s ordinance or resolution governing the
filing of returns, reports, or documents.



   (M)   When income tax returns, reports, or other documents require
the signature of a tax return preparer, the Tax Administrator shall accept a
facsimile of such a signature in lieu of a manual signature.



   (N)   (1)   As used in this division, WORKSITE LOCATION has the
same meaning as in § 39.052 of this chapter.



      (2)   A person may notify a Tax Administrator that the person
does not expect to be a taxpayer with respect to the municipal corporation
for a taxable year if both of the following conditions apply:



         (a)   The person was required to file a tax return with
the municipal corporation for the immediately preceding taxable year because
the person performed services at a worksite location within the municipal
corporation, and the person has filed all appropriate and required returns
and remitted all applicable income tax and withholding payments as provided
by this chapter. The Tax Administrator is not required to accept an affidavit
from a taxpayer who has not complied with the provisions of this chapter.



         (b)   The person no longer provides services in the
municipal corporation, and does not expect to be subject to the municipal
corporation’s income tax for the taxable year. The person shall provide the
notice in a signed affidavit that briefly explains the person’s
circumstances, including the location of the previous worksite location and
the last date on which the person performed services or made any sales within
the municipal corporation. The affidavit also shall include the following
statement:  “The affiant has no plans to perform any services within the
municipal corporation, make any sales in the municipal corporation, or
otherwise become subject to the tax levied by the municipal corporation
during the taxable year.  If the affiant does become subject to the tax
levied by the municipal corporation for the taxable year, the affiant agrees
to be considered a taxpayer and to properly register as a taxpayer with the
municipal corporation, if such a registration is required by the municipal
corporation’s resolutions, ordinances, or rules.”  The person shall sign
the affidavit under penalty of perjury.



         (c)   If a person submits an affidavit described in
division (N)(2) of this section, the Tax Administrator shall not require the
person to file any tax return for the taxable year unless the Tax
Administrator possesses information that conflicts with the affidavit or if
the circumstances described in the affidavit change, or the taxpayer has
engaged in activity which results in work being performed, services provided,
sales made, or other activity that results in municipal taxable income
reportable to the municipality in the taxable year. It shall be the
responsibility of the taxpayer to comply with the provisions of this chapter
relating to the reporting and filing of municipal taxable income on an annual
municipal income tax return, even if an affidavit has been filed with the Tax
Administrator for the taxable year.  Nothing in division (N) of this section
prohibits the Tax Administrator from performing an audit of the person.



(Ord. 15-10-03, passed 11-17-15)



Statutory reference:



   Annual return; filing; extensions, see R.C. § 718.05



§ 39.092  RETURN AND PAYMENT OF TAX; INDIVIDUALS SERVING IN COMBAT ZONE.



   (A)   Each member of the national guard of any state and each member
of a reserve component of the armed forces of the United States called to
active duty pursuant to an executive order issued by the President of the
United States or an act of the Congress of the United States, and each
civilian serving as support personnel in a combat zone or contingency
operation in support of the armed forces, may apply to the Tax Administrator
of the municipality for both an extension of time for filing of the return
and an extension of time for payment of taxes required by the municipality in
accordance with this chapter during the period of the member’s or
civilian’s duty service and for 180 days thereafter. The application shall
be filed on or before the one hundred eightieth day after the member’s or
civilian’s duty terminates. An applicant shall provide such evidence as the
Tax Administrator considers necessary to demonstrate eligibility for the
extension.



   (B)   (1)   If the Tax Administrator ascertains that an applicant
is qualified for an extension under this section, the Tax Administrator shall
enter into a contract with the applicant for the payment of the tax in
installments that begin on the one hundred eighty-first day after the
applicant’s active duty or service terminates. Except as provided in
division (B)(3) of this section, the Tax Administrator may prescribe such
contract terms as the Tax Administrator considers appropriate.



      (2)   If the Tax Administrator ascertains that an applicant is
qualified for an extension under this section, the applicant shall neither be
required to file any return, report, or other tax document nor be required to
pay any tax otherwise due to the municipality before the one hundred
eighty-first day after the applicant’s active duty or service terminates.



      (3)   Taxes paid pursuant to a contract entered into under
division (B)(1) of this section are not delinquent. The Tax Administrator
shall not require any payments of penalties or interest in connection with
those taxes for the extension period.



   (C)   (1)   Nothing in this division denies to any person
described in this division the application of divisions (A) and (B) of this
section.



      (2)   (a)   A qualifying taxpayer who is eligible for an
extension under the Internal Revenue Code shall receive both an extension of
time in which to file any return, report, or other tax document and an
extension of time in which to make any payment of taxes required by the
municipality in accordance with this chapter. The length of any extension
granted under division (C)(2)(a) of this section shall be equal to the length
of the corresponding extension that the taxpayer receives under the Internal
Revenue Code. As used in this section, “qualifying taxpayer” means a
member of the national guard or a member of a reserve component of the armed
forces of the United States called to active duty pursuant to either an
executive order issued by the President of the United States or an act of the
Congress of the United States, or a civilian serving as support personnel in
a combat zone or contingency operation in support of the armed forces.



         (b)   Taxes the payment of which is extended in
accordance with division (C)(2)(a) of this section are not delinquent during
the extension period. Such taxes become delinquent on the first day after the
expiration of the extension period if the taxes are not paid prior to that
date. The Tax Administrator shall not require any payment of penalties or
interest in connection with those taxes for the extension period. The Tax
Administrator shall not include any period of extension granted under
division (C)(2)(a) of this section in calculating the penalty or interest due
on any unpaid tax.



   (D)   For each taxable year to which division (A), (B), or (C) of
this section applies to a taxpayer, the provisions of divisions (B)(2) and
(3) or (C) of this section, as applicable, apply to the spouse of that
taxpayer if the filing status of the spouse and the taxpayer is married
filing jointly for that year.



(Ord. 15-10-03, passed 11-17-15)



Statutory reference:



   Filing extension for certain armed forces service, see R.C. § 718.052



§ 39.093  USE OF OHIO BUSINESS GATEWAY; TYPES OF FILINGS AUTHORIZED.



   (A)   Any taxpayer subject to municipal income taxation with respect
to the taxpayer’s net profit from a business or profession may file any
municipal income tax return or, estimated municipal income tax return, or
extension for filing a municipal income tax return, and may make payment of
amounts shown to be due on such returns, by using the Ohio Business Gateway.



   (B)   Any employer, agent of an employer, or other payer may report
the amount of municipal income tax withheld from qualifying wages, and may
make remittance of such amounts, by using the Ohio Business Gateway.



   (C)   Nothing in this section affects the due dates for filing
employer withholding tax returns or deposit of any required tax.



   (D)   The use of the Ohio Business Gateway by municipal
corporations, taxpayers, or other persons does not affect the legal rights of
municipalities or taxpayers as otherwise permitted by law. The State of Ohio
shall not be a party to the administration of municipal income taxes or to an
appeal of a municipal income tax matter, except as otherwise specifically
provided by law.



   (E)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting or
removing the authority of any municipal corporation to administer, audit, and
enforce the provisions of its municipal income tax.



(Ord. 15-10-03, passed 11-17-15)



Statutory reference:



   Use of Ohio Business Gateway, see R.S. § 718.051



§ 39.094  EXTENSION OF TIME TO FILE.



   (A)   Any taxpayer that has duly requested an automatic six-month
extension for filing the taxpayer’s federal income tax return shall
automatically receive an extension for the filing of a municipal income tax
return. The extended due date of the municipal income tax return shall be the
fifteenth day of the tenth month after the last day of the taxable year to
which the return relates.



   (B)   Any taxpayer that qualifies for an automatic federal extension
for a period other than six months for filing the taxpayer’s federal income
tax return shall automatically receive an extension for the filing of a
municipal income tax return. The extended due date of the municipal income
tax return shall be the same as that of the extended federal income tax
return.



   (C)   A taxpayer that has not requested or received a six-month
extension for filing the taxpayer’s federal income tax return may request
that the Tax Administrator grant the taxpayer a six-month extension of the
date for filing the taxpayer’s municipal income tax return. If the request
is received by the Tax Administrator on or before the date the municipal
income tax return is due, the Tax Administrator shall grant the taxpayer’s
requested extension.



   (D)   An extension of time to file under this chapter is not an
extension of the time to pay any tax due unless the Tax Administrator grants
an extension of that date.



   (E)   If the State Tax Commissioner extends for all taxpayers the
date for filing state income tax returns under R.C. § 5747.08(G), a taxpayer
shall automatically receive an extension for the filing of a municipal income
tax return. The extended due date of the municipal income tax return shall be
the same as the extended due date of the state income tax return.



(Ord. 15-10-03, passed 11-17-15)



Statutory reference:



   Annual return; filing; extensions, see R.C. § 718.05



§ 39.095  AMENDED RETURNS.



   (A)   (1)   A taxpayer shall file an amended return with the Tax
Administrator in such form as the Tax Administrator requires if any of the
facts, figures, computations, or attachments required in the taxpayer’s
annual return to determine the tax due levied by the municipality in
accordance with this chapter must be altered.



      (2)   Within 60 days after the final determination of any
federal or state tax liability affecting the taxpayer’s municipal tax
liability, that taxpayer shall make and file an amended municipal return
showing income subject to the municipal income tax based upon such final
determination of federal or state tax liability, and pay any additional
municipal income tax shown due thereon or make a claim for refund of any
overpayment, unless the tax or overpayment is $10 or less.



      (3)   If a taxpayer intends to file an amended consolidated
municipal income tax return, or to amend its type of return from a separate
return to a consolidated return, based on the taxpayer’s consolidated
federal income tax return, the taxpayer shall notify the Tax Administrator
before filing the amended return.



   (B)   (1)   In the case of an underpayment, the amended return
shall be accompanied by payment of any combined additional tax due together
with any penalty and interest thereon. If the combined tax shown to be due is
$10 or less, such amount need not accompany the amended return. Except as
provided under division (B)(2) of this section, the amended return shall not
reopen those facts, figures, computations, or attachments from a previously
filed return that are not affected, either directly or indirectly, by the
adjustment to the taxpayer’s federal or state income tax return unless the
applicable statute of limitations for civil actions or prosecutions under §
39.19 of this chapter  has not expired for a previously filed return.



      (2)   The additional tax to be paid shall not exceed the
amount of tax that would be due if all facts, figures, computations, and
attachments were reopened.



   (C)   (1)   In the case of an overpayment, a request for refund
may be filed under this division within the period prescribed by § 39.19(E)
of this chapter for filing the amended return even if it is filed beyond the
period prescribed in that division if it otherwise conforms to the
requirements of that division. If the amount of the refund is $10 or less, no
refund need be paid by the municipality to the taxpayer. Except as set forth
in division (C)(2) of this section, a request filed under this division shall
claim refund of overpayments resulting from alterations to only those facts,
figures, computations, or attachments required in the taxpayer’s annual
return that are affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to
the taxpayer’s federal or state income tax return unless it is also filed
within the time prescribed in § 39.096 of this chapter. Except as set forth
in division (C)(2) of this section, the request shall not reopen those facts,
figures, computations, or attachments that are not affected, either directly
or indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer’s federal or state income
tax return.



      (2)   The amount to be refunded shall not exceed the amount of
refund that would be due if all facts, figures, computations, and attachments
were reopened.



(Ord. 15-10-03, passed 11-17-15)



Statutory reference:



   Amended returns, see R.C. § 718.41



   Limitations, see R.C. § 718.12



§ 39.096  REFUNDS.



   (A)   Upon receipt of a request for a refund, the Tax Administrator
of the municipality, in accordance with this section, shall refund to
employers, agents of employers, other payers, or taxpayers, with respect to
any income or withholding tax levied by the municipality:



      (1)   Overpayments of more than $10;



      (2)   Amounts paid erroneously if the refund requested exceeds
$10.



   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, returns
setting forth a request for refund shall be filed with the Tax Administrator,
within three years after the tax was due or paid, whichever is later. Any
documentation that substantiates the taxpayer’s claim for a refund must be
included with the return filing.  Failure to remit all documentation,
including schedules, other municipal income tax returns, or other supporting
documentation necessary to verify credits, income, losses or other pertinent
factors on the return will cause delay in processing, and/or disallowance of
undocumented credits or losses. 



      (2)   On filing of the refund request, the Tax Administrator
shall determine the amount of refund due and certify such amount to the
appropriate municipal corporation official for payment. Except as provided in
division (B)(3) of this section, the Administrator shall issue an assessment
to any taxpayer whose request for refund is fully or partially denied. The
assessment shall state the amount of the refund that was denied, the reasons
for the denial, and instructions for appealing the assessment.



      (3)   If a Tax Administrator denies in whole or in part a
refund request included within the taxpayer’s originally filed annual
income tax return, the Tax Administrator shall notify the taxpayer, in
writing, of the amount of the refund that was denied, the reasons for the
denial, and instructions for requesting an assessment that may be appealed
under § 39.18 of this chapter.



   (C)   A request for a refund that is received after the last day for
filing specified in division (B) of this section shall be considered to have
been filed in a timely manner if any of the following situations exist:



      (1)   The request is delivered by the postal service, and the
earliest postal service postmark on the cover in which the request is
enclosed is not later than the last day for filing the request.



      (2)   The request is delivered by the postal service, the only
postmark on the cover in which the request is enclosed was affixed by a
private postal meter, the date of that postmark is not later than the last
day for filing the request, and the request is received within seven days of
such last day.



      (3)   The request is delivered by the postal service, no
postmark date was affixed to the cover in which the request is enclosed or
the date of the postmark so affixed is not legible, and the request is
received within seven days of the last day for making the request.



   (D)   Interest shall be allowed and paid on any overpayment by a
taxpayer of any municipal income tax obligation from the date of the
overpayment until the date of the refund of the overpayment, except that if
any overpayment is refunded within 90 days after the final filing date of the
annual return or 90 days after the completed return is filed, whichever is
later, no interest shall be allowed on the refund. For the purpose of
computing the payment of interest on amounts overpaid, no amount of tax for
any taxable year shall be considered to have been paid before the date on
which the return on which the tax is reported is due, without regard to any
extension of time for filing that return. Interest shall be paid at the
interest rate described in division (A)(4) of § 39.10 of this chapter.



   (E)   As used in this section, “withholding tax” has the same
meaning as in § 39.10 of this chapter.



(Ord. 15-10-03, passed 11-17-15)



Statutory reference:



   Requests for refunds, see R.C. § 718.19



§ 39.10  PENALTY, INTEREST, FEES, AND CHARGES.



   (A)   As used in this section:



      (1)   APPLICABLE LAW means this chapter, the resolutions,
ordinances, codes, directives, instructions, and rules adopted by the
municipality provided such resolutions, ordinances, codes, directives,
instructions, and rules impose or directly or indirectly address the levy,
payment, remittance, or filing requirements of a municipal income tax. 



      (2)   FEDERAL SHORT-TERM RATE means the rate of the average
market yield on outstanding marketable obligations of the United States with
remaining periods to maturity of three years or less, as determined under
section 1274 of the Internal Revenue Code, for July of the current year.



      (3)   INCOME TAX, ESTIMATED INCOME TAX, and WITHHOLDING TAX
mean any income tax, estimated income tax, and withholding tax imposed by a
municipal corporation pursuant to applicable law, including at any time
before January 1, 2016. 



      (4)   INTEREST RATE AS DESCRIBED IN DIVISION (A) OF THIS
SECTION means the federal short-term rate, rounded to the nearest whole
number per cent, plus 5%. The rate shall apply for the calendar year next
following the July of the year in which the federal short-term rate is
determined in accordance with division (A)(2) of this section.



      (5)   RETURN includes any tax return, report, reconciliation,
schedule, and other document required to be filed with a Tax Administrator or
municipal corporation by a taxpayer, employer, any agent of the employer, or
any other payer pursuant to applicable law, including at any time before
January 1, 2016.



      (6)   UNPAID ESTIMATED INCOME TAX means estimated income tax
due but not paid by the date the tax is required to be paid under applicable
law.



      (7)   UNPAID INCOME TAX means income tax due but not paid by
the date the income tax is required to be paid under applicable law.



      (8)   UNPAID WITHHOLDING TAX means withholding tax due but not
paid by the date the withholding tax is required to be paid under applicable
law.



      (9)   WITHHOLDING TAX includes amounts an employer, any agent
of an employer, or any other payer did not withhold in whole or in part from
an employee’s qualifying wages, but that, under applicable law, the
employer, agent, or other payer is required to withhold from an employee’s
qualifying wages.



   (B)   (1)   This section shall apply to the following:



         (a)   Any return required to be filed under applicable
law for taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2016;



         (b)   Income tax, estimated income tax, and withholding
tax required to be paid or remitted to the municipality on or after January
1, 2016 for taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2016



      (2)   This section does not apply to returns required to be
filed or payments required to be made before January 1, 2016, regardless of
the filing or payment date. Returns required to be filed or payments required
to be made before January 1, 2016, but filed or paid after that date shall be
subject to the ordinances or rules, as adopted from time to time  before
January 1, 2016 of this municipality.



   (C)   The municipality shall impose on a taxpayer, employer, any
agent of the employer, and any other payer, and will attempt to collect, the
interest amounts and penalties prescribed in this section when the taxpayer,
employer, any agent of the employer, or any other payer for any reason fails,
in whole or in part, to make to the municipality timely and full payment or
remittance of income tax, estimated income tax, or withholding tax or to file
timely with the municipality any return required to be filed.



      (1)   Interest shall be imposed at the rate defined as
“interest rate as described in division (A) of this section,” per annum,
on all unpaid income tax, unpaid estimated income tax, and unpaid withholding
tax. This imposition of interest shall be assessed per month, or fraction of
a month.



      (2)   With respect to unpaid income tax and unpaid estimated
income tax, a penalty equal to 15% of the amount not timely paid shall be
imposed.



      (3)   With respect to any unpaid withholding tax, a penalty
equal to 50% of the amount not timely paid shall be imposed.



      (4)   With respect to returns other than estimated income tax
returns, the municipality shall impose a monthly penalty of $25 for each
failure to timely file each return, regardless of the liability shown thereon
for each month, or any fraction thereof, during which the return remains
unfiled regardless of the liability shown thereon. The penalty shall not
exceed a total of $150 in assessed penalty for each failure to timely file a
return.



   (D)   With respect to income taxes, estimated income taxes,
withholding taxes, and returns, the municipality shall not impose, seek to
collect, or collect any penalty, amount of interest, charges or additional
fees not described in this section.



   (E)   With respect to income taxes, estimated income taxes,
withholding taxes, and returns, the municipality shall not refund or credit
any penalty, amount of interest, charges, or additional fees that were
properly imposed or collected before January 1, 2016.



   (F)   The Tax Administrator may, in the Tax Administrator’s sole
discretion, abate or partially abate penalties or interest imposed under this
section when the Tax Administrator deems such abatement or partial abatement
to be appropriate. Such abatement or partial abatement shall be properly
documented and maintained on the record of the taxpayer who received benefit
of such abatement or partial abatement.



   (G)   The municipality  may impose on the taxpayer, employer, any
agent of the employer, or any other payer the municipality’s post-judgment
collection costs and fees, including attorney’s fees.



(Ord. 15-10-03, passed 11-17-15)



Statutory reference:



   Interest and penalties, see R.C. § 718.27



§ 39.11  AUDIT.



   (A)   At or before the commencement of an audit, as defined in §
39.03(C)(3) of this chapter, the Tax Administrator shall provide to the
taxpayer a written description of the roles of the Tax Administrator and of
the taxpayer during an audit and a statement of the taxpayer’s rights,
including any right to obtain a refund of an overpayment of tax. At or before
the commencement of an audit, the Tax Administrator shall inform the taxpayer
when the audit is considered to have commenced.



   (B)   Except in cases involving suspected criminal activity, the Tax
Administrator shall conduct an audit of a taxpayer during regular business
hours and after providing reasonable notice to the taxpayer. A taxpayer who
is unable to comply with a proposed time for an audit on the grounds that the
proposed time would cause inconvenience or hardship must offer reasonable
alternative dates for the audit.



   (C)   At all stages of an audit by the Tax Administrator, a taxpayer
is entitled to be assisted or represented by an attorney, accountant,
bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner. The Tax Administrator shall prescribe
a form by which a taxpayer may designate such a person to assist or represent
the taxpayer in the conduct of any proceedings resulting from actions by the
Tax Administrator. If a taxpayer has not submitted such a form, the Tax
Administrator may accept other evidence, as the Tax Administrator considers
appropriate, that a person is the authorized representative of a taxpayer. A
taxpayer may refuse to answer any questions asked by the person conducting an
audit until the taxpayer has an opportunity to consult with the taxpayer’s
attorney, accountant, bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner. This division
does not authorize the practice of law by a person who is not an attorney.



   (D)   A taxpayer may record, electronically or otherwise, the audit
examination.



   (E)   The failure of the Tax Administrator to comply with a
provision of this section shall neither excuse a taxpayer from payment of any
taxes owed by the taxpayer nor cure any procedural defect in a taxpayer’s
case.



   (F)   If the Tax Administrator fails to substantially comply with
the provisions of this section, the Tax Administrator, upon application by
the taxpayer, shall excuse the taxpayer from penalties and interest arising
from the audit.



(Ord. 15-10-03, passed 11-17-15)



Statutory reference:



   Audits, see R.C. § 718.36



§ 39.12  ROUNDING.



   A person may round to the nearest whole dollar all amounts the person
is required to enter on any return, report, voucher, or other document
required under this chapter. Any fractional part of a dollar that equals or
exceeds $0.50 shall be rounded to the next whole dollar, and any fractional
part of a dollar that is less than $0.50 shall be dropped, rounding down to
the nearest whole dollar. If a person chooses to round amounts entered on a
document, the person shall round all amounts entered on the document. 



(Ord. 15-10-03, passed 11-17-15)



Statutory reference:



   Rounding of amounts, see R.C. § 718.25



§ 39.13  AUTHORITY AND POWERS OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR.



§ 39.131  AUTHORITY OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR; ADMINISTRATIVE POWERS OF THE TAX
ADMINISTRATOR.



   The Tax Administrator has the authority to perform all duties and
functions necessary and appropriate to implement the provisions of this
chapter, including without limitation:



   (A)   Exercise all powers whatsoever of an inquisitorial nature as
provided by law, including, the right to inspect books, accounts, records,
memorandums, and federal and state income tax returns, to examine persons
under oath, to issue orders or subpoenas for the production of books,
accounts, papers, records, documents, and testimony, to take depositions, to
apply to a court for attachment proceedings as for contempt, to approve
vouchers for the fees of officers and witnesses, and to administer oaths;
provided that the powers referred to in this division of this section shall
be exercised by the Tax Administrator only in connection with the performance
of the duties respectively assigned to the Tax Administrator under a
municipal corporation income tax ordinance or resolution adopted in
accordance with this chapter;



   (B)   Appoint agents and prescribe their powers and duties;



   (C)   Confer and meet with officers of other municipal corporations
and states and officers of the United States on any matters pertaining to
their respective official duties as provided by law;



   (D)   Exercise the authority provided by law, including orders from
bankruptcy courts, relative to remitting or refunding taxes, including
penalties and interest thereon, illegally or erroneously imposed or
collected, or for any other reason overpaid, and, in addition, the Tax
Administrator may investigate any claim of overpayment and make a written
statement of the Tax Administrator’s findings, and, if the Tax
Administrator finds that there has been an overpayment, approve and issue a
refund payable to the taxpayer, the taxpayer’s assigns, or legal
representative as provided in this chapter;



   (E)   Exercise the authority provided by law relative to consenting
to the compromise and settlement of tax claims;



   (F)   Exercise the authority provided by law relative to the use of
alternative apportionment methods by taxpayers in accordance with § 39.062
of this chapter; 



   (G)   Make all tax findings, determinations, computations,
assessments and orders the Tax Administrator is by law authorized and
required to make and, pursuant to time limitations provided by law, on the
Tax Administrator’s own motion, review, redetermine, or correct any tax
findings, determinations, computations, assessments or orders the Tax
Administrator has made, but the Tax Administrator shall not review,
redetermine, or correct any tax finding, determination, computation,
assessment or order which the Tax Administrator has made for which an appeal
has been filed with the Local Board of Tax Review or other appropriate
tribunal, unless such appeal or application is withdrawn by the appellant or
applicant, is dismissed, or is otherwise final;



   (H)   Destroy any or all returns or other tax documents in the
manner authorized by law;



   (I)   Enter into an agreement with a taxpayer to simplify the
withholding obligations described in § 39.051 of this chapter.



(Ord. 15-10-03, passed 11-17-15)



Statutory reference:



   Authority of Tax Administrator, see R.C. § 718.24



§ 39.132  AUTHORITY OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR; COMPROMISE OF CLAIM AND PAYMENT
OVER TIME.



   (A)    As used in this section, “claim” means a claim for an
amount payable to the municipality that arises pursuant to the municipal
income tax imposed in accordance with this chapter.



   (B)   The Tax Administrator may do either of the following if such
action is in the best interests of the municipality:



      (1)   Compromise a claim;



      (2)   Extend for a reasonable period the time for payment of a
claim by agreeing to accept monthly or other periodic payments, upon such
terms and conditions as the Tax Administrator may require.



   (C)   The Tax Administrator’s rejection of a compromise or
payment-over-time agreement proposed by a person with respect to a claim
shall not be appealable.



   (D)   A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with respect to a
claim shall be binding upon and shall inure to the benefit of only the
parties to the compromise or agreement, and shall not extinguish or otherwise
affect the liability of any other person.



   (E)   (1)   A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with
respect to a claim shall be void if the taxpayer defaults under the
compromise or agreement or if the compromise or agreement was obtained by
fraud or by misrepresentation of a material fact. Any amount that was due
before the compromise or agreement and that is unpaid shall remain due, and
any penalties or interest that would have accrued in the absence of the
compromise or agreement shall continue to accrue and be due. 



      (2)   The Tax Administrator shall have sole discretion to
determine whether or not penalty, interest, charges or applicable fees will
be assessed through the duration of any compromise or payment-over-time
agreement.



   (F)   The Tax Administrator may require that the taxpayer provide
detailed financial documentation and information, in order to determine
whether or not a payment-over-time agreement will be authorized.  The
taxpayer’s failure to provide the necessary and required information by the
Tax Administrator shall preclude consideration of a payment-over-time
agreement.



(Ord. 15-10-03, passed 11-17-15)



Statutory reference:



   Administration of claims, see R.C. § 718.28



§ 39.133  AUTHORITY OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR; RIGHT TO EXAMINE.



   (A)   The Tax Administrator, or any authorized agent or employee
thereof may examine the books, papers, records, and federal and state income
tax returns of any employer, taxpayer, or other person that is subject to, or
that the Tax Administrator believes is subject to, the provisions of this
chapter for the purpose of verifying the accuracy of any return made or, if
no return was filed, to ascertain the tax due under this chapter. Upon
written request by the Tax Administrator or a duly authorized agent or
employee thereof, every employer, taxpayer, or other person subject to this
section is required to furnish the opportunity for the Tax Administrator,
authorized agent, or employee to investigate and examine such books, papers,
records, and federal and state income tax returns at a reasonable time and
place designated in the request.



   (B)   The records and other documents of any taxpayer, employer, or
other person that is subject to, or that a Tax Administrator believes is
subject to, the provisions of this chapter shall be open to the Tax
Administrator’s inspection during business hours and shall be preserved for
a period of six years following the end of the taxable year to which the
records or documents relate, unless the Tax Administrator, in writing,
consents to their destruction within that period, or by order requires that
they be kept longer. The Tax Administrator of a municipal corporation may
require any person, by notice served on that person, to keep such records as
the Tax Administrator determines necessary to show whether or not that person
is liable, and the extent of such liability, for the income tax levied by the
municipality or for the withholding of such tax.



   (C)   The Tax Administrator may examine under oath any person that
the Tax Administrator reasonably believes has knowledge concerning any income
that was or would have been returned for taxation or any transaction tending
to affect such income. The Tax Administrator may, for this purpose, compel
any such person to attend a hearing or examination and to produce any books,
papers, records, and federal and state income tax returns in such person’s
possession or control. The person may be assisted or represented by an
attorney, accountant, bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner at any such
hearing or examination. This division does not authorize the practice of law
by a person who is not an attorney.



   (D)   No person issued written notice by the Tax Administrator
compelling attendance at a hearing or examination or the production of books,
papers, records, or federal and state income tax returns under this section
shall fail to comply.



(Ord. 15-10-03, passed 11-17-15)



Statutory reference:



   Accuracy of returns; verification, see R.C. § 718.23



§ 39.134  AUTHORITY OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR; REQUIRING IDENTIFYING INFORMATION.



   (A)   The Tax Administrator may require any person filing a tax
document with the Tax Administrator to provide identifying information, which
may include the person’s social security number, federal employer
identification number, or other identification number requested by the Tax
Administrator. A person required by the Tax Administrator to provide
identifying information that has experienced any change with respect to that
information shall notify the Tax Administrator of the change before, or upon,
filing the next tax document requiring the identifying information. 



   (B)   (1)   If the Tax Administrator makes a request for
identifying information and the Tax Administrator does not receive valid
identifying information within 30 days of making the request, nothing in this
chapter prohibits the Tax Administrator from imposing a penalty upon the
person to whom the request was directed pursuant to § 39.10 of this chapter,
in addition to any applicable penalty described in § 39.99 of this chapter.



      (2)   If a person required by the Tax Administrator to provide
identifying information does not notify the Tax Administrator of a change
with respect to that information as required under division (A) of this
section within 30 days after filing the next tax document requiring such
identifying information, nothing in this chapter prohibits the Tax
Administrator from imposing a penalty pursuant to § 39.10 of this chapter.



      (3)   The penalties provided for under divisions (B)(1) and
(2) of this section may be billed and imposed in the same manner as the tax
or fee with respect to which the identifying information is sought and are in
addition to any applicable criminal penalties described in § 39.99 of this
chapter for a violation of § 39.15 of this chapter, and any other penalties
that may be imposed by the Tax Administrator by law.



(Ord. 15-10-03, passed 11-17-15)



Statutory reference:



   Identification information, see R.C. § 718.26



§ 39.14  CONFIDENTIALITY.



   (A)   Any information gained as a result of returns, investigations,
hearings, or verifications required or authorized by R.C. Chapter 718 or by
the charter or ordinance of the municipality is confidential, and no person
shall access or disclose such information except in accordance with a proper
judicial order or in connection with the performance of that person’s
official duties or the official business of the municipality as authorized by
R.C. Chapter 718 or the charter or ordinance authorizing the levy. The Tax
Administrator of the municipality or a designee thereof may furnish copies of
returns filed or otherwise received under this chapter and other related tax
information to the Internal Revenue Service, the State Tax Commissioner, and
Tax Administrators of other municipal corporations.



   (B)   This section does not prohibit the municipality from
publishing or disclosing statistics in a form that does not disclose
information with respect to particular taxpayers.



(Ord. 15-10-03, passed 11-17-15)



Statutory reference:



   Tax information confidential, see R.C. § 718.13



§ 39.15  FRAUD.



   No person shall knowingly make, present, aid, or assist in the
preparation or presentation of a false or fraudulent report, return,
schedule, statement, claim, or document authorized or required by municipal
corporation ordinance or state law to be filed with  the Tax Administrator,
or knowingly procure, counsel, or advise the preparation or presentation of
such report, return, schedule, statement, claim, or document, or knowingly
change, alter, or amend, or knowingly procure, counsel or advise such change,
alteration, or amendment of the records upon which such report, return,
schedule, statement, claim, or document is based with intent to defraud the
municipality or  the Tax Administrator.



(Ord. 15-10-03, passed 11-17-15)



Statutory reference:



   Fraud, see R.C. § 718.35



§ 39.16  OPINION OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   An “opinion of the Tax Administrator” means an opinion
issued under this section with respect to prospective municipal income tax
liability. It does not include ordinary correspondence of the Tax
Administrator.



   (B)   A taxpayer may submit a written request for an opinion of the
Tax Administrator as to whether or how certain income, source of income, or a
certain activity or transaction will be taxed. The written response of the
Tax Administrator shall be an “opinion of the Tax Administrator” and
shall bind the Tax Administrator, in accordance with divisions (C), (G), and
(H) of this section, provided all of the following conditions are satisfied:



      (1)   The taxpayer’s request fully and accurately describes
the specific facts or circumstances relevant to a determination of the
taxability of the income, source of income, activity, or transaction, and, if
an activity or transaction, all parties involved in the activity or
transaction are clearly identified by name, location, or other pertinent
facts.



      (2)   The request relates to a tax imposed by the municipality
in accordance with this chapter.



      (3)   The Tax Administrator’s response is signed by the Tax
Administrator and designated as an “opinion of the Tax Administrator.”



   (C)   An opinion of the Tax Administrator shall remain in effect and
shall protect the taxpayer for whom the opinion was prepared and who
reasonably relies on it from liability for any taxes, penalty, or interest
otherwise chargeable on the activity or transaction specifically held by the
Tax Administrator’s opinion to be taxable in a particular manner or not to
be subject to taxation for any taxable years that may be specified in the
opinion, or until the earliest of the following dates:



      (1)   The effective date of a written revocation by the Tax
Administrator sent to the taxpayer by certified mail, return receipt
requested. The effective date of the revocation shall be the taxpayer’s
date of receipt or one year after the issuance of the opinion, whichever is
later;



      (2)   The effective date of any amendment or enactment of a
relevant section of the Ohio Revised Code, uncodified state law, or the
municipality’s income tax ordinance that would substantially change the
analysis and conclusion of the opinion of the Tax Administrator;



      (3)   The date on which a court issues an opinion establishing
or changing relevant case law with respect to the Ohio Revised Code,
uncodified state law, or the municipality’s income tax ordinance;



      (4)   If the opinion of the Tax Administrator was based on the
interpretation of federal law, the effective date of any change in the
relevant federal statutes or regulations, or the date on which a court issues
an opinion establishing or changing relevant case law with respect to federal
statutes or regulations;



      (5)   The effective date of any change in the taxpayer’s
material facts or circumstances;



      (6)   The effective date of the expiration of the opinion, if
specified in the opinion.



   (D)   (1)   A taxpayer is not relieved of tax liability for any
activity or transaction related to a request for an opinion that contained
any misrepresentation or omission of one or more material facts.



      (2)   If the taxpayer knowingly has misrepresented the
pertinent facts or omitted material facts with intent to defraud the
municipality in order to obtain a more favorable opinion, the taxpayer may be
in violation of § 39.15 of this chapter.



   (E)   If a Tax Administrator provides written advice under this
section, the opinion shall include a statement that:



      (1)   The tax consequences stated in the opinion may be
subject to change for any of the reasons stated in division (C) of this
section;



      (2)   It is the duty of the taxpayer to be aware of such
changes.



   (F)   A Tax Administrator may refuse to offer an opinion on any
request received under this section.



   (G)   This section binds a Tax Administrator only with respect to
opinions of the Tax Administrator issued on or after January 1, 2016.



   (H)   An opinion of a Tax Administrator binds that Tax Administrator
only with respect to the taxpayer for whom the opinion was prepared and does
not bind the Tax Administrator of any other municipal corporation.



   (I)   A Tax Administrator shall make available the text of all
opinions issued under this section, except those opinions prepared for a
taxpayer who has requested that the text of the opinion remain confidential.
In no event shall the text of an opinion be made available until the Tax
Administrator has removed all information that identifies the taxpayer and
any other parties involved in the activity or transaction.



   (J)   An opinion of the Tax Administrator issued under this section
or a refusal to offer an opinion under division (F) may not be appealed.



(Ord. 15-10-03, passed 11-17-15)



Statutory reference:



   Opinion of Tax Commissioner; request, see R.C. § 718.38



§ 39.17  ASSESSMENT; APPEAL BASED ON PRESUMPTION OF DELIVERY.



   (A)   (1)   The Tax Administrator shall serve an assessment
either by personal service, by certified mail, or by a delivery service
authorized under R.C. § 5703.056.



      (2)   The Tax Administrator may deliver the assessment through
alternative means as provided in this section, including, but not limited to,
delivery by secure electronic mail. Such alternative delivery method must be
authorized by the person subject to the assessment.



      (3)   Once service of the assessment has been made by the Tax
Administrator or other municipal official, or the designee of either, the
person to whom the assessment is directed may protest the ruling of that
assessment by filing an appeal with the Local Board of Tax Review within 60
days after the receipt of service. The delivery of an assessment of the Tax
Administrator as prescribed in R.C. § 718.18 is prima facie evidence that
delivery is complete and that the assessment is served.



   (B)   (1)   A person may challenge the presumption of delivery
and service as set forth in this division.  A person disputing the
presumption of delivery and service under this section bears the burden of
proving by a preponderance of the evidence that the address to which the
assessment was sent was not an address with which the person was associated
at the time the Tax Administrator originally mailed the assessment by
certified mail. For the purposes of this section, a person is associated with
an address at the time the Tax Administrator originally mailed the assessment
if, at that time, the person was residing, receiving legal documents, or
conducting business at the address; or if, before that time, the person had
conducted business at the address and, when the assessment was mailed, the
person’s agent or the person’s affiliate was conducting business at the
address. For the purposes of this section, a person’s affiliate is any
other person that, at the time the assessment was mailed, owned or controlled
at least 20%, as determined by voting rights, of the addressee’s business.



      (2)   If a person elects to appeal an assessment on the basis
described in division (B)(1) of this section, and if that assessment is
subject to collection and is not otherwise appealable, the person must do so
within 60 days after the initial contact by the Tax Administrator or other
municipal official, or the designee of either, with the person. Nothing in
this division prevents the Tax Administrator or other official from entering
into a compromise with the person if the person does not actually file such
an appeal with the Local Board of Tax Review.



(Ord. 15-10-03, passed 11-17-15)



Statutory reference:



   Service of assessment; presumption, see R.C. § 718.18



§ 39.18  LOCAL BOARD OF TAX REVIEW; APPEAL TO LOCAL BOARD OF TAX REVIEW.



   (A)   (1)   The legislative authority of the municipality shall
maintain a Local Board of Tax Review to hear appeals as provided in R.C.
Chapter 718.



      (2)   The Local Board of Tax Review shall consist of three
members. Two members shall be appointed by the legislative authority of the
municipality, and  may not be employees, elected officials, or contractors
with the municipality at any time during their term or in the five years
immediately preceding the date of appointment. One member shall be appointed
by the top administrative official of the municipality. This member may be an
employee of the municipality, but may not be the director of finance or
equivalent officer, or the Tax Administrator or other similar official or an
employee directly involved in municipal tax matters, or any direct
subordinate thereof.



      (3)   The term for members of the Local Board of Tax Review
appointed by the legislative authority of the municipality shall be two
years. There is no limit on the number of terms that a member may serve
should the member be reappointed by the legislative authority. The Board
member appointed by the top administrative official of the municipality shall
serve at the discretion of the administrative official.



      (4)   Members of the Board of Tax Review appointed by the
legislative authority may be removed by the legislative authority as set
forth in R.C. § 718.11(A)(4).



      (5)   A member of the Board who, for any reason, ceases to
meet the qualifications for the position prescribed by this section shall
resign immediately by operation of law.



      (6)   A vacancy in an unexpired term shall be filled in the
same manner as the original appointment within 60 days of when the vacancy
was created. Any member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior to the
expiration of the term for which the member’s predecessor was appointed
shall hold office for the remainder of such term. No vacancy on the Board
shall impair the power and authority of the remaining members to exercise all
the powers of the Board.



      (7)   If a member is temporarily unable to serve on the Board
due to a conflict of interest, illness, absence, or similar reason, the
legislative authority or top administrative official that appointed the
member shall appoint another individual to temporarily serve on the Board in
the member’s place. This appointment shall be subject to the same
requirements and limitations as are applicable to the appointment of the
member temporarily unable to serve.



      (8)   No member of the Local Board of Tax Review shall receive
compensation, fee, or reimbursement of expenses for service on the Board.



      (9)   A member of a Local Board of Tax Review shall not be
appointed to or serve on another such board simultaneously.



   (B)   Whenever a Tax Administrator issues an assessment, the Tax
Administrator shall notify the taxpayer in writing at the same time of the
taxpayer’s right to appeal the assessment,  the manner in which the
taxpayer may appeal the assessment, and the address to which the appeal
should be directed, and to whom the appeal should be directed.



   (C)   Any person who has been issued an assessment may appeal the
assessment to the Board by filing a request with the Board. The request shall
be in writing, shall specify the reason or reasons why the assessment should
be deemed incorrect or unlawful, and shall be filed within 60 days after the
taxpayer receives the assessment.



   (D)   The Local Board of Tax Review shall schedule a hearing to be
held within 60 days after receiving an appeal of an assessment under division
(C) of this section, unless the taxpayer requests additional time to prepare
or waives a hearing. If the taxpayer does not waive the hearing, the taxpayer
may appear before the Board and/or may be represented by an attorney at law,
certified public accountant, or other representative. The Board may allow a
hearing to be continued as jointly agreed to by the parties. In such a case,
the hearing must be completed within 120 days after the first day of the
hearing unless the parties agree otherwise.



   (E)   The Board may affirm, reverse, or modify the Tax
Administrator’s assessment or any part of that assessment. The Board shall
issue a final determination on the appeal within 90 days after the Board’s
final hearing on the appeal, and send a copy of its final determination by
ordinary mail to all of the parties to the appeal within 15 days after
issuing the final determination.  The taxpayer or the Tax Administrator may
appeal the Board’s final determination as provided in R.C. § 5717.011.



   (F)   The Local Board of Tax Review created pursuant to this section
shall adopt rules governing its procedures, including a schedule of related
costs, and shall keep a record of its transactions. The rules governing the
Local Board of Tax Review procedures shall be in writing, and may be amended
as needed by the Local Board of Tax Review.  Such records are not public
records available for inspection under R.C. § 149.43. For this reason, any
documentation, copies of returns or reports, final determinations, or working
papers for each case must be maintained in a secure location under the
control of the Tax Administrator. No member of the Local Board of Tax Review
may remove such documentation, copies of returns or reports, final
determinations, or working papers from the hearing.  Hearings requested by a
taxpayer before a Local Board of Tax Review created pursuant to this section
are not meetings of a public body subject to R.C. § 121.22. For this reason,
such hearings shall not be open to the public, and only those parties to the
case may be present during the hearing.



(Ord. 15-10-03, passed 11-17-15)



Statutory reference:



   Local Board of Tax Review, see R.C. § 718.11



§ 39.19  ACTIONS TO RECOVER; STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.



   (A)   (1)   (a)   Civil actions to recover municipal income
taxes and penalties and interest on municipal income taxes shall be brought
within the latter of:



            1.   Three years after the tax was due or the
return was filed, whichever is later; or



            2.   One year after the conclusion of the
qualifying deferral period, if any.



         (b)   The time limit described in division (A)(1)(a) of
this section may be extended at any time if both the Tax Administrator and
the employer, agent of the employer, other payer, or taxpayer consent in
writing to the extension. Any extension shall also extend for the same period
of time the time limit described in division (C) of this section.



      (2)   As used in this section, “qualifying deferral
period” means a period of time beginning and ending as follows:



         (a)   Beginning on the date a person who is aggrieved by
an assessment files with a Local Board of Tax Review the request described in
§ 39.18 of this chapter. That date shall not be affected by any subsequent
decision, finding, or holding by any administrative body or court that the
Local Board of Tax Review with which the aggrieved person filed the request
did not have jurisdiction to affirm, reverse, or modify the assessment or any
part of that assessment.



         (b)   Ending the later of the sixtieth day after the
date on which the final determination of the Local Board of Tax Review
becomes final or, if any party appeals from the determination of the Local
Board of Tax Review, the sixtieth day after the date on which the final
determination of the Local Board of Tax Review is either ultimately affirmed
in whole or in part or ultimately reversed and no further appeal of either
that affirmation, in whole or in part, or that reversal is available or taken.



   (B)   Prosecutions for an offense made punishable under a resolution
or ordinance imposing an income tax shall be commenced within three years
after the commission of the offense, provided that in the case of fraud,
failure to file a return, or the omission of 25% or more of income required
to be reported, prosecutions may be commenced within six years after the
commission of the offense.



   (C)   A claim for a refund of municipal income taxes shall be
brought within the time limitation provided in § 39.096 of this chapter.



   (D)   (1)   Notwithstanding the fact that an appeal is pending,
the petitioner may pay all or a portion of the assessment that is the subject
of the appeal.  The acceptance of a payment by the municipality does not
prejudice any claim for refund upon final determination of the appeal.



      (2)   If upon final determination of the appeal an error in
the assessment is corrected by the Tax Administrator, upon an appeal so filed
or pursuant to a final determination of the Local Board of Tax Review created
under § 39.18 of this chapter, of the Ohio Board of Tax Appeals, or any
court to which the decision of the Ohio Board of Tax Appeals has been
appealed, so that the amount due from the party assessed under the corrected
assessment is less than the amount paid, there shall be issued to the
appellant or to the appellant’s assigns or legal representative a refund in
the amount of the overpayment as provided by § 39.096 of this chapter, with
interest on that amount as provided by division (D) of this section.



   (E)   No civil action to recover municipal income tax or related
penalties or interest shall be brought during either of the following time
periods:



      (1)   The period during which a taxpayer has a right to appeal
the imposition of that tax or interest or those penalties;



      (2)   The period during which an appeal related to the
imposition of that tax or interest or those penalties is pending.



(Ord. 15-10-03, passed 11-17-15)



Statutory reference:



   Statute of limitations, see R.C. § 718.12



§ 39.20  ADOPTION OF RULES.



   (A)   Pursuant to R.C. § 718.30, the municipality, pursuant to this
chapter, grants authority to the Tax Administrator, to adopt rules to
administer the income tax imposed by the municipality.



   (B)   All rules adopted under this section shall be published and
posted on the internet.



(Ord. 15-10-03, passed 11-17-15)



Statutory reference:



   Adoption of rules, see R.C. § 718.30



§ 39.97  COLLECTION AFTER TERMINATION OF CHAPTER.



   (A)   This chapter shall continue in full force and effect insofar
as the levy of taxes is concerned until repealed, and insofar as the
collection of taxes levied hereunder and actions and proceedings for
collecting any tax so levied or enforcing any provisions of this chapter are
concerned, it shall continue in full force and effect until all of the taxes
levied in the aforesaid period are fully paid and any and all suits and
prosecutions for the collection of taxes or for the punishment of violations
of this chapter have been fully terminated, subject to the limitations
contained in § 39.19.



   (B)   Annual returns due for all or any part of the last effective
year of this chapter shall be due on the date provided in § 39.091 as though
the same were continuing.



(Ord. 15-10-03, passed 11-17-15)



§ 39.98  SAVINGS CLAUSE.



   If any sentence, clause, section or part of this chapter, or any tax
imposed against, or exemption from tax granted to, any taxpayer or forms of
income specified herein is found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid,
such unconstitutionality, illegality, or invalidity shall affect only such
clause, sentence, section or part of this chapter so found and shall not
affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses,
sections or other parts of this chapter.  It is hereby declared to be the
intention of the legislative authority of the municipality that this chapter
would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid
sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been included in this chapter.



(Ord. 15-10-03, passed 11-17-15)



§ 39.99  VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, whoever
violates § 39.15 of this chapter,  § 39.14(A) of this chapter, or §
39.051 of this chapter by failing to remit municipal income taxes deducted
and withheld from an employee, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree and shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment
for a term of up to six months, or both.  In addition, the violation is
punishable by dismissal from office or discharge from employment, or both.



   (B)   Any person who discloses information received from the
Internal Revenue Service in violation of Internal Revenue Code sections
7213(a), 7213A, or 7431 shall be guilty of a felony of the fifth degree and
shall be subject to a fine of not more than $5,000 plus the costs of
prosecution, or imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years, or both. 
In addition, the violation is punishable by dismissal from office or
discharge from employment, or both.



   (C)   Each instance of access or disclosure in violation of §
39.14(A) of this chapter constitutes a separate offense.



   (D)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which
violation no penalty is otherwise provided, is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the_____ degree on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after
the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the _____ degree;
on each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the
person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the _____ degree.  By way of an
illustrative enumeration, violations of this chapter shall include but not be
limited to the following acts, conduct, and/or omissions:



      (1)   Fail, neglect or refuse to make any return or
declaration required by this chapter; or



      (2)   Knowingly make any incomplete return; or



      (3)   Willfully fail, neglect, or refuse to pay the tax,
penalties, and interest, or any combination thereof, imposed by this chapter;
or



      (4)   Cause to not be remitted the city income tax withheld
from  qualifying wages of employees to the municipality municipal
corporation as required by § 39.051; or



      (5)   Neglect or refuse to withhold or remit municipal income
tax from employees; or



      (6)   Refuse to permit the Tax Administrator or any duly
authorized agent or employee to examine his or her books, records, papers,
federal and state income tax returns, or any documentation relating to the
income or net profits of a taxpayer; or



      (7)    Fail to appear before the Tax Administrator and to
produce his or her books, records, papers, federal and state income tax
returns, or any documentation relating to the income or net profits of a
taxpayer upon order or subpoena of the Tax Administrator; or



      (8)   Refuse to disclose to the Tax Administrator any
information with respect to such person’s income  or net profits, or in
the case of a person responsible for maintaining information relating to his
or her employers’ income or net profits, such person’s employer’s
income or net profits; or



      (9)   Fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter or
any order or subpoena of the Tax Administrator; or



      (10)   To avoid imposition or collection of municipal income
tax, willfully give to an employer or prospective employer false information
as to his or her true name, correct social security number and residence
address, or willfully fail to promptly notify an employer or a prospective
employer of any change in residence address and date thereof; or



      (11)   Fail, as an employer, agent of an employer, or other
payer, to maintain proper records of employees residence addresses, total
qualifying wages paid and municipal tax withheld, or to knowingly give the
Tax Administrator false information; or



      (12)   Willfully fail, neglect, or refuse to make any payment
of estimated municipal income tax for any taxable year or any part of any
taxable year in accordance with this chapter; or



      (13)   Attempt to do anything whatsoever to avoid the payment
of the whole or any part of the tax, penalties or interest imposed by this
chapter.



      (14)   For purposes of this section, any violation that does
not specify a culpable mental state or intent, shall be one of strict
liability and no culpable mental state or intent shall be required for a
person to be guilty of that violation.



      (15)   For purposes of this section, the term “person”
shall, in addition to the meaning prescribed in § 39.03, include in the case
of a corporation, association, pass-through entity or unincorporated business
entity not having any resident owner or officer within the city, any employee
or agent of such corporation, association, pass-through entity or
unincorporated business entity who has control or supervision over or is
charged with the responsibility of filing the municipal income tax returns
and making the payments of the municipal income tax as required by this
chapter.



(Ord. 15-10-03, passed 11-17-15)



Statutory reference:



   Violations; penalties, see R.C. § 718.99



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



      Chapter




         50.   GENERAL PROVISIONS





         51.   REFUSE COLLECTION





         52.   SEWERS





         53.   WATER





         54.   ELECTRIC SERVICE RATES




CHAPTER 50:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section




General Provisions




   50.01   Tap fees



   50.02   Installation of utility meters



   50.03   Village utilities limited to residents; exceptions




General Service Rules and Regulations




   50.15   Title and purpose



   50.16   Application for service



   50.17   Credit requirements of consumer



   50.18   Landlord and renter policy



   50.19   Deposits and refunds



   50.20   Service may be refused to persons in debt to village



   50.21   Billing procedure and collections



   50.22   Distribution of partial payments



   50.23   Billing adjustments




Termination of Utility Services




   50.35   General purpose



   50.36   Delinquency requirements



   50.37   Notice; contents



   50.38   Termination procedures



   50.39   Hearing procedures



   50.40   Reconnection fees



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 50.01  TAP FEES.



   (A)   The following fees apply to tap-in of property located within
the village:



      (1)   Water tap-in fees shall be $250.



      (2)   Sanitary sewer tap-in fees shall be $150.



   (B)   The storm sewer tap-in deposit fee is $25.  No deposit on
storm sewer tap-in will be returned.



(Ord. 93-4-4, passed - -93)



§ 50.02  INSTALLATION OF UTILITY METERS.



   (A)   All remote water meters, remote cistern meters, and electric
meters, either installed or relocated from and after February 1, 1989 shall
be installed in close proximity to one another (24" shall be presumed
acceptable) and at a height of not less than 44 nor more than 64 inches,
unless another height is approved, in advance by the Village Administrator.



   (B)   Any premises upon which any utility meter has been installed
in violation in the terms of this section shall be denied access to village
utility services.



(Ord. 88-12-9, passed  - -88)



§ 50.03  VILLAGE UTILITIES LIMITED TO RESIDENTS; EXCEPTIONS.



   The use of village controlled utilities shall be limited to residents
of the village except:



   (A)   In those cases where services are already being provided to
nonresidents;



   (B)   In those cases where exceptions are made by the Village
Administrator.



(Ord. 1963-7, passed 4-2-63; Am. Ord. 1983-6-1, passed 6-27-83)



GENERAL SERVICE RULES AND REGULATIONS



§ 50.15  TITLE AND PURPOSE.



   This subchapter is enacted to create a policy concerning use and
payment for services, and be hereafter referred to as General Service Rules
and Regulations.



(Ord. 82-2-1, passed 3-2-82)



§ 50.16  APPLICATION FOR SERVICE.



   (A)   Before the village will supply any utility service, the person
desiring the same must make application in writing to the village (on printed
forms supplied by the village), specifying the place or location where
service is desired and agreeing to comply with all the terms, rules, and
regulations of the village covering such service and agreeing to pay for the
same conformably with the rates of the village applicable to the class of
service desired.



   (B)   Consumers desiring service must make a separate application
for each location or premises where service is desired. The village will not
serve more than one location, residence, place of business, or premises under
a single application for service.



   (C)   If the applicant is not the owner of the premises to be
served, then before the application is accepted by the village, the owner of
the real estate in which the utilities are to serve must first sign and file,
as part of the application, a written Utility Account Guarantee guaranteeing
payment of all bills for utility services and granting a lien upon the served
real estate securing payment. The result is that both the applicant and owner
are equally responsible to the village for payment of utilities provided and
the owner’s obligation is secured by a lien upon the premises served.



   (D)   The Utility Account Guarantee statement will be in such form
as is approved by the Village Solicitor and Village Administrator.



   (E)   Where utility service is being provided to a property where a
Utility Account Guarantee is required under this section, and the owner of
the real estate refuses to sign a Utility Account Guarantee, utility services
will be terminated following those procedures in effect for non-payment.
Example: An owner occupied premises is sold and becomes a rental.



   (F)   The application for service will provide for a lien upon the
premises securing the payment of all services provided to the premises. The
utility services lien will be collected by either certifying the unpaid
amount to the Auglaize County Treasurer for payment upon the real property
tax duplicate or may be foreclosed upon by civil action.



   (G)   The application for utility services must be accepted on
behalf of the village by its officers or duly authorized agent during regular
business hours as established by the village, and upon acceptance such
application becomes a contract between the applicant and the village and
binding upon both. The village will not serve, and may refuse to continue to
serve, any consumer who is receiving service but refuses to make a proper
application to the village, or who refuses to accept services or to continue
conformably with the schedules of the village, which schedules include not
only the rates of the village, but the rules and regulations governing its
service.



(Ord. 82-2-1, passed 3-2-82; Am. Ord. 05-12-05, passed 2-21-06)



§ 50.17  CREDIT REQUIREMENTS OF CONSUMER.



   (A)   The village shall have the right at any time to require a
consumer to make a reasonable deposit to secure payment of its bills for
utility services, conformably within the laws of the State of Ohio.



   (B)   Any consumer applying for village utility service shall
provide the following deposit:



 


(1)

 
Residential utility service
 
$300



(2)

 
Commercial/Industrial utility service
 
$500



 



   (C)   Any consumer applying for village utility services who owns
property within the village and has established credit with the village will
not be required to provide a deposit.



   (D)   Any consumer who owns a property and has resided in or
operated a business out of that property for more than five years and has
established satisfactory credit with the village shall be eligible to have
their deposit returned after five years.



(Ord. 82-2-1, passed 3-2-82; Am. Ord. 00-1-4, passed 2-15-00; Am. Ord.
06-02-01, passed 2-21-06; Am. Ord. 16-08-01, passed 9-20-16)



§ 50.18  LANDLORD AND RENTER POLICY.



   (A)   When a renter gives notice to the utility office for a final
reading upon leaving the premises, utility service will be discontinued as
requested, and the renter will be billed for services through the date
specified. Service to a rental property will not be terminated if the owner
of the premises has previously made a written request with the village that
terminations not occur when a tenant leaves. Pursuant to that request and
village policy, the owner continues to be responsible for all utilities
provided to the premises, including trash and garbage pickup.



   (B)   If the landlord allows a renter to occupy premises without an
application for utility services made by the renter, the landlord shall be
responsible for all charges and fees associated with the supply of utilities
by the village.  If an application is not timely made and accepted, then
service is subject to termination as provided in § 50.16(E) and the owner
shall be subject to § 50.20.



(Ord. 82-2-1, passed 3-2-82; Am. Ord. 04-11-02, passed 12-7-04; Am. Ord.
05-12-05, passed 2-21-06)



§ 50.19  DEPOSITS AND REFUNDS.



   (A)   As stated in § 50.17, deposits having been made will be
refunded when the renter moves out of the rental unit, and having paid for
all services, and the Clerk-Treasurer's office having received proper
notification.



   (B)   Utility deposits are put into a special trust fund and are not
used for payment of village expenditures. No interest is paid to anyone who
has a utility deposit. Interest earned on deposits is credited to the general
fund of the village.



(Ord. 82-2-1, passed 3-2-82)



§ 50.20  SERVICE MAY BE REFUSED TO PERSON IN DEBT TO VILLAGE.



   (A)   No new utility account will be opened for an applicant until
the applicant pays, in full, for all utility services previously provided to
that applicant.



   (B)   No new utility account will be opened for a location unless
all utility bills for services previously provided to that location are paid
in full.



   (C)   No utility account will be opened for service to a real estate
location where the landlord or renter has a previously unpaid account for
utility services.



(Ord. 82-2-1, passed 3-2-82; Am. Ord. 05-12-05, passed 2-21-06)



§ 50.21  BILLING PROCEDURE AND COLLECTIONS.



   (A)   Meters will be read on the earliest date possible after the
first of the month.



   (B)   Payment is expected by the first of the month.



   (C)   Delinquency and termination procedures shall be in accordance
with §§ 50.35 through 50.39 below of this chapter.



   (D)   R.C. § 4933.12.1 shall be followed during the winter heating
season.



(Ord. 82-2-1, passed 3-2-82; Am. Ord. 85-5-6, passed 5-21-85)



Cross-reference:



   For utility termination policy and procedures, see §§ 50.35 through
50.39



§ 50.22  DISTRIBUTION OF PARTIAL PAYMENTS.



   The monies collected shall first be applied to the payment of garbage
collection, second to the payment of water and sewer bills and thirdly, for
the payment of electric bills.



(Ord. 82-2-1, passed 3-2-82)



§ 50.23  BILLING ADJUSTMENTS.



   Billing adjustments shall be made as follows:



   (A)   If a customer has been overcharged for a utility service
because of a malfunction in the metering system or a billing error,
overcharges will be refunded to the customer for the entire period of
inaccurate billing, if that period is discernible by the municipality. If the
period of inaccurate billing is not discernable, overcharges will be
calculated based on a time period that is the shortest of the time elapsed
since the customer’s service began, that date of installation of the faulty
meter or implementation of the error resulting in the overcharge (if
applicable) for 365 days for residential customers and 36 months for
commercial and industrial customers.



   (B)   If a customer has been undercharged for a utility service
because of a malfunction in the metering system or a billing error,
undercharges will be billed to the customer, and the customer shall pay the
charges for the entire period of inaccurate billing, if that period is
discernable by the municipality. If the period of inaccurate billing is not
discernable, undercharges will be calculated based on a time period that is
the shortest of the time elapsed since the customer’s service began, the
date of installation of the faulty meter or implementation of the error
resulting in the undercharge (if applicable), or 365 days for residential
customers and 36 months for commercial and industrial customers. Undercharges
billed to residential customer shall in no event exceed a period of 365 days
for residential customers and 36 months for commercial and industrial
customers. Customers shall have the option to pay the amount undercharged in
equal payments spread over the same number of months as the charges were
accumulated.



   (C)   This section does not serve as a limitation to billing for
undercharges which are the result of tampering with utility equipment or
theft of utility service, or where a physical act of a customer or its agent
causes inaccurate or no recording of the meter reading, or inaccurate or no
measurements of the electricity rendered.



(Ord. 17-05-01, passed 7-11-17)



TERMINATION OF UTILITY SERVICES



§ 50.35  GENERAL PURPOSE.



   (A)   The general purpose of this policy for termination of utility
services is to ensure utility consumers sufficient advance notice of proposed
utility service termination so as to avoid erroneous or arbitrary service
disconnection



   (B)   This policy applies to the termination or disconnection of all
utilities and/or services provided by, under contract to provide or billed by
the village.



   (C)   This policy shall not apply to terminations for safety
reasons, due to request of consumer, or where tampering with utility
equipment or theft of utilities has occurred.



   (D)   Terminations for safety reasons may be made without notice,
but the village shall immediately provide notice to the consumer of
termination and reason therefor. Service shall be restored as soon as it can
safely be done.



   (E)   Terminations for tampering with utility equipment or theft of
utilities may be made without notice, but the village shall immediately
provide notice to the consumer of termination and reason therefor. The notice
shall advise the consumer of the name, title, address, telephone number and
hours during which the consumer may request a hearing in regard to the
termination.



(Ord. 91-5-4, passed 7-23-91; Am. Ord. 04-11-02, passed 12-7-04)



§ 50.36  DELINQUENCY REQUIREMENTS.



   Service is subject to termination for nonpayment when the account is in
arrears 30 days or more.



(Ord. 91-5-4, passed 7-23-91; Am. Ord. 04-11-02, passed 12-7-04)



§ 50.37  NOTICE; CONTENTS.



   (A)   A delinquent customer will receive notice of pending
termination not less than five days prior to the proposed termination date.
If the occupant does not pay the delinquent amount then termination may occur.



   (B)   Written notice of a proposed termination for nonpayment shall
be provided to the consumer containing all of the following:



      (1)   Stating the intent of the village to terminate utility
services on a specific date;



      (2)   Stating the reason for termination of service, i.e.
delinquent account;



      (3)   Stating the consumer may dispute the reason for
termination by notice to the village given prior to the termination date;



      (4)   Stating that if the consumer wishes to dispute the
reason for termination, that the consumer must provide evidence in support of
his or her dispute prior to the termination date;



      (5)   Stating that if the consumer believes he or she has a
valid dispute but insufficient time to provide his or her evidence in support
thereof, that he or she may request an extension of time to provide the
evidence;



      (6)   Stating where the occupant of the premises may obtain
state and federal aid for payment of utility bills and home weatherization
and information on any local government aid for payment of utility bills and
for home weatherization;



      (7)   Stating the amount due and the location and hours where
payment in person can be made;



      (8)   Stating the business address and telephone number of a
village representative to be contacted in the event the customer desires to
dispute the reasons for termination.



(Ord. 91-5-4, passed 7-23-91)



§ 50.38  TERMINATION PROCEDURES.



   Disconnection may only occur during normal business hours and subject
to the following conditions:



   (A)   Disconnection may not occur after 12:30 p.m. on a day
preceding a day during which reconnection is not available;



   (B)   On the day of termination, personal notice to the customer
must be provided, and if no one is at home, then written notice must be
securely attached in a conspicuous place prior to termination;



   (C)   The employee who terminates the service will be authorized to
be able to make available to the customer a means to avoid disconnection, but
shall not be authorized to accept payment from the customer or to make
extended payment arrangements.



(Ord. 91-5-4, passed 7-23-91; Am. Ord. 04-11-02, passed 12-7-04)



§ 50.39  HEARING PROCEDURES.



   (A)   The village representative shall be the Village Administrator
or persons designated by him or her.



   (B)   A village representative shall be empowered, in his or her
sole discretion to:



      (1)   Compromise and adjust billings;



      (2)   Negotiate, defer and compromise disputes as to service
department requirements or payment demands;



      (3)   Cancel disconnection orders and/or order reconnection;



      (4)   Enter into deferred payment plans.



   (C)   Termination of service for nonpayment is prohibited if the
termination of service would be especially dangerous to health as certified
pursuant to the certification provisions of this rule.



   (D)   Termination of service is prohibited when the termination of
service would make operation of necessary medical or life-supporting
equipment impossible or impractical, if the customer establishes an inability
to pay the amount due in full and enters into and makes payments in
accordance with an extended payment plan.



   (E)   Certification procedures.



      (1)   The village shall provide application forms for licensed
physicians or local board of health physicians for certification upon request
of any residential consumer. The village shall give notice of availability of
medical certification to its residential customers by means of inserts or
special notices during June and August of each year. If termination is to
occur as a result of nonpayment, written notice shall be given to the
customer prior to termination that a medical certification program and forms
are available from the village.



      (2)   Any consumer who is a permanent resident of the premises
where the service is rendered may qualify for certification.



      (3)   The condition must be certified to the village by a
licensed physician or local board of health physician.



      (4)   The certificate of special danger to health shall be in
writing and shall include the name of the person to be certified, a statement
that the person is a permanent resident of the premises in question, the
name, business address, and telephone number of the certifying party, the
nature of the condition, and the period of time during which termination will
be especially dangerous to health.



      (5)   Initial certification by the certifying party may be by
telephone if written certification is forwarded to the village within seven
days.



      (6)   In the event service has been disconnected within 21
days prior to certification of special danger to health for a qualifying
resident, service shall be restored to that residence if proper certification
is made in accordance with the foregoing provisions and the customer agrees
to an extended payment plan.



      (7)   Certification shall prohibit disconnection of service
for 30 days. Certification may be renewed two additional times (30 days each)
by a licensed physician or local board of health physician by providing an
additional certificate to the village. The total certification period is not
to exceed 90 days.



      (8)   Upon renewal of certification, the village shall assure
personal contact with the customer that advises the customer of the
governmental assistance programs that may be available. In the event that the
best efforts of the village fail to result in personal contact, assistance
information shall be provided by mail.



   (F)   The village representative shall strive to secure reasonable
alternative methods of payment or reasonable security for payment in order to
preserve utility service, and shall maintain residential utility service
without discrimination.



   (G)   The village representative shall, if unable to resolve the
dispute to the mutual satisfaction of the village and consumer shall schedule
a hearing following the hereinafter stated guidelines.



      (1)   The hearing officer shall be the Village Administrator
or a person designated by him or her.



      (2)   The hearing officer shall have all of the powers and
duties of the village representative stated above.



      (3)   The hearing shall be scheduled within a reasonable time
after a verbal or written request has been made, but will not be held so
quickly as to deny the consumer an adequate opportunity to seek assistance or
to prepare for the hearing. Five business days shall be presumed reasonable
time.



      (4)   The consumer may have the assistance of others in the
hearing process and may present documentary and/or oral information for
consideration. The consumer shall be entitled to reasonable access to village
business records concerning the service address in order to prepare for the
hearing, including the right to obtain copies of documents upon payment of
the actual cost of copying.



      (5)   If the matter is not resolved to the mutual satisfaction
of the customer and hearing officer, then the hearing officer shall make a
written decision following the hearing, including reasons for the decision. A
copy of the decision shall be delivered to the consumer, the decision shall
contain a specific date on which disconnection will occur, which date must be
at least 72 hours after the decision has been delivered to the consumer.



(Ord. 91-5-4, passed 7-23-91)



§ 50.40  RECONNECTION FEES.



   Utility service reconnection is subject to the following fees:



   (A)   Thirty dollars for a reconnection during posted business
hours; and



   (B)   Seventy-five dollars for reconnection after posted business
hours.



(Ord. 04-11-02, passed 12-7-04)



CHAPTER 51:  REFUSE COLLECTION



Section



   51.01   Definitions



   51.02   Collection and disposal



   51.03   Container requirements



   51.04   Collection frequency; fee



   51.05   Placing garbage in public places; nuisance conditions



 



   51.99   Penalty



§ 51.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GARBAGE.  Animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.



   OPERATOR.  Business firm performing the collection and disposal
service.



   PERSON.  Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.



   REFUSE.  Both combustible and noncombustible waste, such as paper,
cardboard, tin cans, wood, glass, and household appliances. Specifically
excluded are all grass, yard clippings, and trimmings, automobiles, rubber
tires, and construction materials.



   VILLAGE.  The Village of Minster.



   VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR.  The Village Administrator of the Village of
Minster.



(Ord. 92-3-2, passed 3-17-92)



§ 51.02  COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL.



   (A)   All residential garbage and refuse accumulated in the village
shall be collected, conveyed, and disposed of by the village, either directly
or through an operator pursuant to contract with the village. No person shall
collect, convey over any of the streets or alleys of the village, or dispose
of any refuse accumulated in the village except pursuant to contract with the
village.



   (B)   This section and this chapter shall not prohibit the actual
producer of garbage or refuse, or the owners of premises upon which the
garbage and refuse has accumulated from personally conveying or collecting
such refuse, provided such producers or owners comply with the provisions of
this chapter.



   (C)   Collection shall be supervised by the Village Administrator.
The Village Administrator shall have the authority to make regulations
concerning the days of collection, type and location of waste containers and
such other matters pertaining to the collection, conveyance and disposal, as
he shall find necessary; and to change and modify the same after notice,
provided that such regulations are not contrary to the provisions hereof.



   (D)   Any person aggrieved by the aforesaid regulations shall have
the right to appeal to the Council, who shall either confirm, modify or
revoke any such regulation.



(Ord. 92-3-2, passed 3-17-92)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.03  CONTAINER REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All garbage and refuse for collection by the village shall be
placed in metal or plastic containers equipped with a cover and equipped with
handles so that they can be lifted and carried by one person. The size of the
container shall be in either 20-gallon cans or 30-gallon cans with a maximum
weight of 50 pounds. The customer can, at his option, utilize plastic bags of
similar weight, made of adequate strength and closed with a secure fastener.



   (B)   The village and the operator shall have the right to refuse to
collect any garbage placed for collection not in compliance with this section.



(Ord. 92-3-2, passed 3-17-92)



§ 51.04  COLLECTION FREQUENCY; FEE.



   (A)   Collection from each residence shall be at least once per
week, provided that the material is properly stored for collection in a
container complying with the provisions of this chapter. The fee for such
collection will be $14.88 per residence/household per month, to be collected
on the monthly utility bill.



   (B)   All residents of the village shall be assessed a monthly fee,
whether they use the collection service or not.



   (C)   No deduction from a bill shall be made in the event that a
contractor fails to pick up garbage or provide the contracted service.



   (D)   Any person aggrieved by these regulations shall have the right
to appeal to the Council, who shall either confirm, modify, or revoke any
such regulation or fee.



   (E)   Any customer that is approved each year by the Ohio Energy
Credit Program to be eligible under the guidelines of that program shall be
eligible for Garbage Credit.  The Ohio Energy Credit program shall submit to
the village, per the Ohio Revised Code, a listing of eligible individuals. 
The village shall submit to the garbage hauler the number of accounts
eligible for the garbage fee reduction.  The village shall apply the same
credit percentage as determined by the Ohio Energy Credit program to
residential garbage rates for qualified individuals (30% and 25%).



(Ord. 77-4-1, passed 4-19-77; Am. Ord. 92-3-2, passed 3-17-92; Am. Ord.
99-10-1, passed 11-1-99; Am. Ord. 00-12-6, passed  - -00; Am. Ord. 04-05-05,
passed 5-18-04; Am. Ord. 05-08-01, passed 8-2-05; Am. Ord. 07-03-01, passed
3-20-07; Am. Ord. 09-08-02, passed 8-4-09; Am. Ord. 11-03-04, passed 3-15-11;
Am. Ord. 14-03-01, passed 3-4-14; Am. Ord. 17-02-04, passed 2-21-17)



§ 51.05  PLACING GARBAGE IN PUBLIC PLACES; NUISANCE CONDITIONS.



   (A)   No person shall place any garbage or refuse in any street or
alley or other public place, upon a private property, whether owned by such
person or not, except in proper containers for collection.



   (B)   No person shall place any garbage or refuse in any stream or
other body of water.



   (C)   Any excessive accumulation of garbage or refuse on any
premises is hereby declared a nuisance and is prohibited. Failure to remove
the accumulation within 30 days after notice by the Village Administrator
shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.



   (D)   No person shall cast, place, leave or deposit, anywhere within
the village any garbage or refuse in such a manner that it may be carried or
deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway or
other public place, or onto any private premises within the village.



   (E)   No person shall knowingly place for collection any garbage or
refuse created or originating outside the corporate limits of the village.



(Ord. 92-3-2, passed 3-17-92)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates § 51.05 of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree punishable by a maximum of 30 days in jail
and a fine of $250.



(Ord. 92-3-2, passed 3-17-92)



CHAPTER 52:  SEWERS



Section




General Provisions




   52.001   Definitions



   52.002   Non-sewered water meter policy



   52.003   Rate schedule



   52.004   Surcharge rate schedule




Use of Public Sewers Required




   52.015   Declaration of necessity



   52.016   Application for sewer service required



   52.017   Permit for connection; tapping charges




Connections to Public Sanitary Sewers




   52.025   Tapping or opening sanitary sewer without a permit



   52.026   Sewer taps by authorized personnel only



   52.027   Sewer tap construction



   52.028   Approval of connections



   52.029   Unauthorized connections prohibited




Discharge into Public Sewers




   52.040   Industrial use of sewers



   52.041   Data on discharge



   52.042   Unpolluted discharge



   52.043   Flammable, explosive, or hazardous substances and foreign
matter



   52.044   Toxic substances



   52.045   Metals



   52.046   Conditional service




Liability




   52.055   Utility's liability



   52.056   Consumer's liability




Control of Wastes




   52.060   User's responsibility to keep sanitary sewer clean



   52.061   User's responsibility to repair or reimburse for illicit or
illegal connections



   52.062   Grease, oil and sand interceptors



   52.063   Pretreatment



   52.064   Metering and sampling devices



   52.065   Measurements, tests and analyses



   52.066   Accidental spills notification



   52.067   Control of production




Powers and Authority of Inspectors




   52.075   Right of entry for purpose of discharge inspection



   52.076   Collection of information



   52.077   Required safety procedures



   52.078   Right of entry to and from all negotiated easements




Amendments and Precedence




   52.085   Amendments to the sanitary sewer use and rate regulations



   52.086   Precedence of past and present ordinances



   52.087   Other revisions and conditions



   52.998   Legal action



 



   52.999   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Termination procedures, see §§ 50.35 through 50.39



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 52.001  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of
terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:



   APPLICANT, CONSUMER, CUSTOMER, DEVELOPER, OWNER, PERSON, or PROPERTY
OWNER.  Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation,
group or organization using or applying to use any of the village utilities,
including sanitary.



   APPROVED LABORATORY PROCEDURES.  The measurements, tests and analyses
of the characteristics of water and wastes in accordance with analytical
federal guidelines as established in 40 C.F.R. Part 136, or as required or
approved by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or the Ohio
Environmental Protection Agency.



   ASTM.  The most recent standards published, updated, or amended by the
American Society for Testing and Materials.



   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD).  The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter as determined by standard
laboratory procedures in five days at 20°C expressed in milligrams per liter
(mg/l).



   BUILDING DRAIN.  That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
building drainage system which receives the discharge from waste drainage
pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall.



   BUILDING SEWER.  The sanitary sewer line extending from the building
drain to the public sewer main or other place of disposal into the main sewer
line owned by the village; also called the “house connection” or
“lateral”.



   BYPASS.  The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion
of an industrial user's pretreatment/treatment facility or of the
publicly-owned sewer to the treatment plans to which that sewer discharges.



   CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.  National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards specifying quantities or concentrations of pollutants or pollutant
properties which may be discharged or introduced into a publicly-owned
treatment works (POTW) by specific industrial dischargers.



   CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD). The amount of oxygen consumed from a
chemical oxidant as determined by approved laboratory procedures and
expressed in milligrams per liter.



   COMBINED SEWER.  A sewer intended to receive both sanitary sewage and
storm or surface water runoff.



   COMPOSITE SAMPLE.  A sample that is collected over time, formed either
by continuous sampling or by mixing discrete samples.



   COOLING WATERS.  Water discharging from any system of condensation,
air conditioning, cooling, refrigeration or other similar use and which shall
be free from odor or oil. It shall not contain polluting materials or
substances which produce BOD or suspended solids in excess of 10 mg/l of each.



   COUNCIL.  Shall mean the Council of the Village of Minster, Ohio.



   DAILY MAXIMUM.  The maximum allowable discharge of a pollutant during
a calendar day. Where daily maximum limitations are expressed in units of
mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the course of a
24-hour period. Where daily maximum limitations are expressed in terms of
concentration, the daily discharge is the average measurement of the
pollutant concentration, derived from all measurements taken during a 24-hour
period or from a composite sample collected during a 24-hour period, provided
that the individual aliquots were collected during average or above average
production and discharge.



   DEBT SERVICE CHARGE.  The amount of the principal and interest due on
money borrowed for the construction of improvements to the existing
wastewater treatment facility. Debt service is usually expressed in annual
amounts.



   DELETERIOUS SUBSTANCES.  Any material which may be harmful to the
sewage system, treatment process, personnel or a residual product.



   DISCHARGE.  The addition of any pollutant to the POTW or its
collection system.



   DISCHARGER or INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGER or INDUSTRIAL USER.  Any
nonresidential user who discharges an effluent into the POTW by means of
pipes, conduits, pumping stations, force mains, and all constructed devices
and appliances appurtenant thereto.



   EASEMENT.  An acquired legal right for a specific use of land by
others.



   FLOATABLE OIL.  Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it
will separate by gravity from the wastewater after treatment in an approved
pretreatment facility. Wastewater shall be considered free of floatable oil
if it is properly pretreated and does not interfere with the collection or
treatment process.



   GARBAGE.  Any solid animal and/or vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking, and serving of foods and from the handling,
storage and sale of produce.



   GRAB SAMPLE.  An individual sample collected in less than 15 minutes,
without specific regard to flow or time, but collected during periods of
average or above production and discharge.



   ILLICIT OR ILLEGAL CONNECTIONS.  Intentional and physical connections
of storm drain tiles, roof downspouts, footer drains, or sump pump discharges
of footer drainage or other uncontaminated water to the sanitary sewer system.



   INCOMPATIBLE.  Any wastewater that is:



      (1)   Deleterious to or which degrades the quantity of the
POTW effluent or its sludges and residual products; or



      (2)   Not susceptible to treatment by biologically based
treatment processes of the wastewater treatment facility; or



      (3)   Not removed to a substantial degree and thereby remains
in the effluent discharged by the wastewater treatment facility.



   INFLOW AND ILLEGAL CONNECTIONS or I AND I.  Uncontaminated water that
enters the sanitary sewer system from broken joints, connections, or means
other than illicit or illegal connections.



   INTERFERENCE.  A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, both inhibits or disrupts the
POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or
disposal; and therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the
POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in
compliance with the following statutory provision and regulations or permits
issued there or under (or more stringent state or local regulations): Section
405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including
Title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act (RCRA)) and including state regulations contained in any state sludge
management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA, the Clean Air
Act, the Toxic Substance Control Act and the Marine Protection, Research and
Sanitation Act.



   MAJOR CONTRIBUTOR.  Any wastewater contributor that meets one or more
of the following criteria:



      (1)   A discharge flow of 25,000 gallons or more per average
work day; or



      (2)   A flow or pollutant loading greater than 5% of the
design capacity of the treatment works; or



      (3)   In its waste stream has toxic pollutants in toxic
amounts as defined in the standards issued under Section 307(a) of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, as subsequently
amended; or



      (4)   Is found by the village to have significant impact,
either singly or in combination with other contributing industries on the
treatment facility, sludge process or upon the quality of the effluent
discharged from the treatment facility.



   MAY.  Is permissive.  See also “shall” as defined in this section.



   METER.  An approved device for measuring water or wastewater for
billing purposes, provided at the expense of the customer, which may be owned
by the village or the customer.



   MICROGRAMS PER LITER or UG/L.  The micrograms of substance per liter
of solution, and is one thousandth of a milligram per liter or part per
billion.



   MILLIGRAMS PER LITTER or MG/L.  The milligrams of substance per liter
of solution, and is equivalent to 10-6 kilograms per liter or parts per
million, assuming unit density.



   MONTHLY AVERAGE.  The arithmetic mean of the values for effluent
samples collected during a calendar month.



   NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD.  Any and all regulations
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the United State
Environmental Protection Agency or the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency
in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act, and
amendments thereto, which apply to specific categories of industrial users.



   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT.  A
legally binding document issued by the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency
to the owner or operator of a wastewater treatment facility. The document
contains a schedule of compliance, which requires the permit holder to
achieve specific effluent limitations by a specified date. Also, it specifies
monitoring and reporting requirements.



   NATURAL OUTLET.  Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or
other body of surface water or groundwater.



   NON-SEWERED METER.  A meter installation for measuring water for
billing purpose and providing water for non-sewered purposes such as cooling
water, lawn sprinkling, and the like. A meter or deduct meter designated as a
non-sewered meter by the Utility will be charged according to the applicable
water rate schedule but will not be charged for wastewater service.



   OILS AND GREASES.  Any of a wide variety of organic substances which
are poorly soluble in water and tend to separate from the aqueous phase.



   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE.  Those activities and expenditures required
to assure that a wastewater treatment facility operates safely, effectively
and efficiently in meeting the effluent limitations and other conditions of
its NPDES permit.



   ORDER or COMPLIANCE ORDER.  A written document issued by the Director
to any discharger who fails to comply with numerical values or administrative
orders issued by the village or other regulatory agencies.



   ORGANIC.  Any compound containing carbon.



   OUTSIDE USER.  Any user of the village's wastewater treatment
facilities, including but not limited to the public sewers and wastewater
treatment works, whose place of residence, business, industry, institution,
government facility, or similar facility lies outside of the corporation
limits of the village.



   PASS-THROUGH.  The discharge of pollutants through the POTW to the
receiving waters in quantities or concentrations that, alone or in
conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, cause the POTW
to violate any requirement of its NPDES permit (including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation).



   PENALTY or ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY.  A charge which may be assessed by
the village on dischargers who fail to comply with numerical values or
administrative orders issued by the village or other regulatory agencies.



   PERSON.  Any individual, firm company, association, society,
corporation or group.



   pH.  The logarithm (base 100 of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion
concentration). The concentration is the weight of hydrogen-ion in grams per
liter of solution. Neutral water for example, has a pH value of 7.



   POLLUTANT.  Sewage, industrial waste or other waste as defined by R.C.
§ 6111.01(B) through (D).



   POTW.  A Publicly-Owned Treatment Works; is synonymous with wastewater
treatment facilities, wastewater treatment plant or pollution control plant.



   PRETREATMENT.  The reduction of the amount of pollutants, elimination
of pollutants, or alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in the
wastewater to a less harmful state prior to discharging such pollutants into
a POTW.



   PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.  The standards for incompatible pollutants
introduced into the POTW as set forth in regulations issued by the United
States Environmental Protection Agency or the Ohio Environmental Protection
Agency, and the village pursuant to the Clean Water Act and all amendments
thereto.



   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE.  The wastes from the preparation, cooking,
and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in sanitary sewers, with no particles greater than three-eighths
of an inch in any dimension.



   PUBLIC SEWER.  A common sewer including storm, sanitary or a combined
sewer that is owned and maintained by the village.



   SANITARY SEWER.  A sewer that is designed to carry wastewater and to
which storm, surface and groundwater are not intentionally admitted.



   SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE.  Substantial physical damage to property,
damage to the pretreatment facilities which causes them to be inoperable, or
substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be
expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE does not
mean economic loss caused by delays in production.



   SEWAGE.  Also known as wastewater. It is a combination of any and all
water-carried waste from residence, business, industrial plants and
institutions.



   SEWERAGE SYSTEM.  All of the facilities which carry sanitary sewage
and/or industrial waste or other polluted wastewaters to the wastewater
treatment facility. A sewerage system includes the collection systems, mains,
trunk lines, force mains and pumping facilities as well as the treatment
facility



   SHALL.  Is mandatory. See also “may” as defined in this section.



   SLUG.  Is characterized as any pollutant released, including
oxygen-demanding pollutants, (BOD, and the like) or suspended solids, as a
single extraordinary discharge episode of such volume or concentration as to
cause interference to, or pass-through, and/or reduce the treatment
efficiency of the POTW.



   STANDARD METHODS.  The examination and analytical procedures set forth
in the most recent edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water,
Sewage and Industrial Wastes, published jointly by the American Public Health
Association, the American Water Works Association and the Federation of
Sewage and Industrial Wastes Association.



   STORM SEWER.  A sewer for conveying water or groundwater, subsurface
water or unpolluted water from any source, and is not intended to carry
sanitary sewage, or polluted industrial or other wastewaters.



   SURCHARGE.  An additional charge or fee which may be imposed upon the
dischargers which is intended to recover the additional costs to the POTW
associated with treating “extra strength” discharges, and are not
penalties.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS.  The total suspended matter that either (a) floats
on the surface of; or (b) is in suspension in water, wastewater, or other
liquid and that is removable by laboratory filtering using approved
laboratory procedures.



   TREATMENT PARAMETER.  A fundamental characteristic of sewage around
which treatment is designed, such as, but not limited to, flow, BOD and
suspended solids.



   TOXIC.  Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in
regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the United State
Environmental Protection Agency or under the provisions of the Clean Water
Act or other federal statutes as revised, amended, or updated.



   UNPOLLUTED WATERS.  Any water of quality equal to or better than the
effluent criteria specified in the village's NPDES permit or water that would
not cause a violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be
benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment
facilities.



   UPSET.  An exceptional incident in which a discharger unintentionally
and temporarily is in a state of noncompliance with the standards set forth
in this chapter due to factors beyond the reasonable control of the
discharger, and excludes noncompliance to the extent caused by operational
error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment
facilities, lack of preventative maintenance or careless or improper
operation thereof.



   USER.  Any person, business, industry or contracting entity
discharging liquid-carrying wastes, waste, or liquid into any sanitary sewer,
combined sewer, or ditch that is a tributary to the village's wastewater
treatment facilities.



   USER CHARGE.  Includes that total amount of each customer's invoice
for wastewater collection and treatment services. Included in such USER
CHARGES are debt service, operation and maintenance, and replacement costs.



   UTILITY.  The Wastewater Treatment Department of the Village of
Minster, Ohio.



   VILLAGE.  The Village of Minster.



   WASTEWATER.  Industrial waste or sewage or any other liquid waste,
including that which may be unintentionally combined with any groundwater,
surface water or stormwater that may be discharged to the POTW.



   WASTEWATER FACILITIES.  The structures, equipment and process required
to collect, transport, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose
of the effluent.



   WATERCOURSE.  A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water
either continuously or intermittently.



   WEEKLY AVERAGE.  The arithmetic mean of the value for effluent samples
collected during a seven-day period.



(Ord. 04-11-3, § 100, passed 6-7-05)



§ 52.002  NON-SEWERED WATER METER POLICY.



   This policy is incorporated into the General Rules and Regulations for
the Sewer Rate and Use Ordinance covering water service, and all rules,
regulations, charges and fees are applicable to this policy. In the event of
conflicts between this policy and other polices and regulations, this policy
prevails.



   (A)   The non-sewered water meter shall be used only for external
water uses such as:



      (1)   Lawn and garden watering.



      (2)   Tree or shrubbery watering.



      (3)   Filling swimming pool that is not drained to the
sanitary sewer.



      (4)   Other uses related to industrial productions as approved
by the village.



   (B)   A non-sewered meter system cannot be used in the event of a
sprinkling ban.



   (C)   Application(s) for a non-sewered water meter shall be made by
the property owner at the village's Utility Office. There will be an
application charge equal to the applicable meter charge documented in the
“tap and service line installation” contained in § 52.003. By such
application, the property owner shall be deemed to assent, agree and commit
to all rules and regulations, policies, charges and fees pertaining to the
furnishing and utilization of water service. Such application shall state
that the property owner will responsible for the payment of all bills for
water and/or sewer services used on the premises involved.



   (D)   A piping plan detailing the proposed non-sewered installation
must be submitted with the application and be approved by a representative of
the village prior to commencement of the work. All costs associated with the
installation of a non-sewered meter system are at the expense of the owner.



   (E)   All related work must be inspected and approved by the village
before the meter is permanently installed.



   (F)   In the event that the village is satisfied that a portion of
the metered public water supply consumed upon any premises does not and will
not enter the sanitary sewer system, the owner may, at his or her sole
expense, install such separate approved metering system to determine the
portion of the metered public water supply which shall not be discharged to
the sanitary sewer system of the village. Such portion shall be subtracted
from the applicable metered public water supply to determine the quantity of
sewer discharge.



   (G)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed
after the master meter and before the non-sewered meter. In addition, an
approved pressure relief device shall be installed downstream of the
non-sewered meter in a location as required by the village. Isolation valves
shall be required as approved by the village. All related piping shall be
exposed and accessible at all times.



   (H)   All remote readers must be installed at the same height as the
electric meter and within one foot of either side of the meter, unless other
arrangements are approved by the Water Department. It is the responsibility
of the consumer to have the remote meter installed and inspected by the
village before service is provided.



   (I)   Seasonal discontinuance of the non-sewered meter is permitted
only if the house water service is discontinued at the curb stop totally.



   (J)   Except for the above, if the non-sewered service is
discontinued at the request of the owner, it shall not be reinstalled unless
there is a change in ownership.



   (K)   Any unauthorized use of the water supplied through a
non-sewered meter system shall be cause for discontinuance of the service. In
addition, a minimum charge of $100 per month for possible unmetered service
shall be added to the utility bill.



   (L)   Before any meter installation and service line tap is made,
the owner shall make the advance deposit specified herein.



(Ord. 04-11-3, Exhibit #1, passed 6-7-05)



§ 52.003  RATE SCHEDULE.



   (A)   Establishment of a schedule of rates and charges; use of water
meters.  For the payment of the proper and reasonable expense of operation,
repair, replacement, improvements, additions, betterments, extensions and the
maintenance of the sanitary sewer system and wastewater treatment facilities
and for the payment of the sums required to defray the principal and interest
of all loans and/or bonds as they become due, the Village Council shall enact
and may from time to time amend a schedule of rates and charges for the use
of and service rendered by the public sanitary sewer system of the village,
which schedule and rates and charges shall be based open the metered amount
of water supplied to or discharged from a property. A copy of the schedule,
while it is in effect, shall be maintained on file in the office of the
village.



   (B)   Applicability of rates.  Applicable to all customers served
by the village's sanitary sewer system and wastewater treatment facilities.



   (C)   Availability of service.  Service is available for consumers
in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. The policy for extension
of public sewers within and without the corporate limits of the village is
contingent upon Council approval.



   (D)   Schedule of rates.



      (1)   Within the village. This schedule is applicable to all
consumers located within the corporation limits of the village.  The total
billing for each month, or part thereof that service is turned on, shall be
the sum of the following charges:



         (a)   Effective January 1, 2011:



            1.   Minimum monthly invoices for sanitary sewer
usage per month is $6.50 monthly.



            2.   Customer charge per month: $3.00.



            3.   Usage charge per month: $3.00 / 1,000 gallons.



            4.   Cistern usage charge per month: $3.00 / 1,000
gallons.



         (b)   Effective January 1, 2012:



            1.   Minimum monthly invoices for sanitary sewer
usage per month is $6.50 monthly.



            2.   Customer charge per month: $4.00.



            3.   Usage charge per month:



               0 to 900,000 gallons per day: $3.50 / 1,000
gallons



               900,001 gallons per day and above: $6.65 /
1,000 gallons



            4.   Cistern usage charge per month: $3.50 / 1,000
gallons.



      (2)   Outside of the village. This schedule is applicable to
all consumers located outside the corporation limits of the village.  The
total billing for each month, or part thereof, that service is turned on
shall be the sum of the following charges:



         (a)   Effective January 1, 2011:



            1.   Minimum monthly invoices for sanitary sewer
usage per month is $8.13 monthly.



            2.   Customer charge per month: $3.75.



            3.   Usage per month: $4.20 / 1,000 gallons.



            4.   Cistern usage per month: $4.20 / 1,000
gallons.



         (b)   Effective January 1, 2012:



            1.   Minimum monthly invoices for sanitary sewer
usage per month is $8.13 monthly.



            2.   Customer charge per month: $5.00.



            3.   Usage per month: $4.90 / 1,000 gallons.



            4.   Cistern usage per month: $4.90 / 1,000
gallons.



      (3)   Tapping charges.



         (a)   There shall be a fee of $125 per tap for areas
within the corporate limits of the village.



         (b)   Areas outside of the village corporation limits
that are tapped to the village's sanitary sewer system shall incur a fee of:



            1.   $2,700 for standard four-inch wastewater line.



            2.   $3,100 for larger than standard size
wastewater line.



      (4)   The Village shall assess users for any additional fees,
costs and expenses as may be necessary due to enforcement actions, legal
fees, costs and damage from sludge discharges, accidental spills, bypasses,
any special non-routine compliance monitoring, surveillance and analysis
and/or other just causes applicable for an individual user.



   (E)   Delayed payment plan.  Ten percent per month shall be added
to the net bill if not paid in full within 15 days after rendition of the
bill for said service.



   (F)   Multiple occupancy.  For existing services, where multiple
services are rendered through one water meter, the monthly sanitary sewer
bill shall not be less than the minimum charge provided for above multiplied
by the number of families, apartment units, residences, stores, offices,
mobile homes, or other units receiving water service through such meter.



   (G)   Established rates applicable to properties subsequently
served.  The rates or charges so established shall be extended to cover any
additional properties hereafter served without the necessity of any hearing
or notice.



   (H)   Village subject to established rates or charges.  All
facilities operated by the village shall be subject to the established
charges and rates for services rendered the village, and shall be deemed to
be a part of the revenues of the sanitary sewer system and wastewater
treatment facilities.



   (I)   Billing and collection of service charges.  The sewage
service charges, surcharges and fees, levied by or pursuant to this chapter
shall be billed by the village or, at the discretion of the Council, by a
designated agent of the Council, to all consumers liable therefor. The
collection of said service charges, surcharges and fees shall be by the
village.



   (J)   Lien for enforcement of collection of billed rates or
charges.  All such rates or charges, if not paid when due, shall be a lien
upon the property served by such sanitary system, and if such charges are not
paid within 30 days after due date, then the amount thereof, together with a
penalty and a reasonable attorney's fee, may be recovered by the village in a
civil action in the name of the village. In connection with such action, such
lien may be foreclosed against such property, in accordance with the laws
relating thereto.



(Ord. 04-11-3, Exhibit #2, passed 6-7-05; Am. Ord. 08-12-02, passed 1-6-09;
Am. Ord. 10-09-08, passed 10-19-10; Am. Ord. 17-09-01, passed 10-3-17)



§ 52.004  SURCHARGE RATE SCHEDULE.



   (A)   The waste water extra surcharge rates established by this
section shall be applicable to any commercial or industrial consumer who has
discharged any effluent which exceeds the concentration limit for any
parameter set forth in division (B) below.



   (B)   Beginning with bills due October 1, 2017 the following extra
strength surcharge shall apply:



 


Parameter

 
Surcharge
 
Limit


cBOD
 
$2.61 per pound
 
200 mg/l


TSS
 
$0.87 per pound
 
128 mg/l


NH3
 
$3.02 per pound
 
17 mg/l


P
 
$4.90 per pound
 
3.45 mg/l



 



   (C)   The rate shall be in addition to any other charges established
for the furnishing of waste water services.



(Ord. 04-11-3, Exhibit #3, passed 6-7-05; Ord. 17-07-09, passed 9-5-17)



USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED



§ 52.015  DECLARATION OF NECESSITY.



   (A)   The use of the sewer system of the village is determined and
declared to be essential for the protection and preservation of the public
health, comfort, safety, economy and general welfare of the residents of the
village and of the area served thereby.



   (B)   The owner, tenant or occupant of a property which abuts on a
street or other public right-of-way containing a sewer service, or which, in
the judgment of the Council, is located within such a distance thereof that
sewer service is reasonably available thereto and upon which property a
building or other structure has been or shall be erected shall be required to
connect the building or structure to the sanitary sewer system or to such
part of the sanitary sewer system as may from time to time be extended or
become reasonably available, and shall, thereafter, refrain from using or
cease to use any other methods in place of the sanitary sewer system which
are now, or may hereafter become available; and shall thereafter pay all the
charges, rates or fees as herein, or may hereafter be, provided for. All such
connections shall be in accordance with the rules and regulations which shall
be adopted from time to time by the Council of the village and such rules and
regulations may provide for reasonable charges, fees or deposits required for
making such connections. The Council reserves the right to alter, amend or
add to these Rules and Regulations at any time.



   (C)   To the extent necessary, the Council shall prepare such
supplementary administrative rules, policies, forms, standards and/or
specifications as are consistent and necessary to properly enforce these
general Rules and Regulations and applicable EPA regulations.



(Ord. 04-11-3, § 200.01, passed 6-7-05)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.016  APPLICATION FOR SEWER SERVICE REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, including public bodies,
to make an initial cut-in or connection with the village sanitary sewer
service and/or otherwise use, alter or disturb that system or appurtenance
thereof without first making written application for such connection and
service to the Village Utility Billing Department and applying all costs,
charges, fees, and deposits incident thereto. Such application shall
constitute an agreement by the applicant with the village to abide by all
ordinances of the village, and all regulations and rules established by
ordinances, in regard to the use of the sewer system.



   (B)   Such application for service by firms, partnerships,
associations and corporations shall be submitted only by their duly
authorized representative, and the official titles of such agent shall be
signed to the application. Such authorized representative of an industrial
user may be:



      (1)   A principal executive officer of at least the level of
vice-president, if the industrial user is a corporation.



      (2)   A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user
is a partnership or proprietorship, respectfully.



      (3)   An authorized representative of the individual
designated above if such a representative is responsible for the overall
operation of the facilities from which the discharge originates.



   (C)   The application shall grant or cause to be granted to the
village, without cost, all rights, easements, permits, and privileges which
are necessary for the rendering of sanitary sewer service. Employees of the
village shall have access for the purposes of installing or removing any of
its property, examining pipes or fixtures, or for any purpose incidental to
the rendering of sanitary sewer service.



   (D)   The village shall have the right at all times to inspect the
piping and sanitary system, including any associated equipment, at any
reasonable hour to make certain that the provisions set forth herein are
being complied with and, if noncompliance is found, to require and take such
actions as are necessary to correct the problem(s), including immediate
discontinuance of water and/or sanitary sewer service, without notice. In the
event that the village incurs expenses in order to assure compliance with
these regulations, the property owner will be required to reimburse the
village for such expenses. In the event of a discontinuance of service, such
service shall not be reestablished until the condition is corrected to the
satisfaction of the village, with no expense to the village.



(Ord. 04-11-3, § 200.02, passed 6-7-05)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.017  PERMIT FOR CONNECTION; TAPPING CHARGES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, whether property owner, drain
layer or otherwise, to connect with or tap into a village sanitary sewer,
either directly or indirectly, without first having to obtain a permit from
the Village Utilities Department and having paid the tapping charge
established in § 52.003.



(Ord. 04-11-3, § 200.03, passed 6-7-05)  Penalty, see § 52.999



CONNECTIONS TO PUBLIC SANITARY SEWERS



§ 52.025  TAPPING OR OPENING SANITARY SEWER WITHOUT A PERMIT.



   No person shall cut, break, pierce or tap any public sanitary sewer or
appurtenances thereof, or introduce any tube, pipe trough, or conduit into
any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without a written permit from the
village.



(Ord. 04-11-3, § 300.01, passed 6-7-05)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.026  SEWER TAPS BY AUTHORIZED PERSONNEL ONLY.



   No person, except those persons employed or authorized by the village,
shall tap into the village's sanitary sewer lines.



(Ord. 04-11-3, § 300.02, passed 6-7-05)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.027  SEWER TAP CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and
connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the user(s). The user or
users shall indemnify the village from any loss or damage that may directly
or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building lateral/sewer.



   (B)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided
for every building.



   (C)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new
buildings when they are found, on examination and tested at the property
owner's expense to determine if all requirements of this chapter are met.



   (D)   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a
building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the
pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench shall conform to the
requirements of the Village of Minster Subdivision Regulations and Design
Standards or other applicable rules and regulations of the village.



   (E)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which
any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sanitary
sewer, sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an
appropriate sewage pump and discharged to the building sewer.



   (F)   No person or persons shall make connection of roof downspouts,
foundation drains, yard drains, or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected
directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.



   (G)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer
shall conform to the requirements of the Village of Minster Subdivision
Regulations and Design Standards or other applicable rules and regulations of
the village. All such connections shall be made gas-tight and water-tight and
be verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures
and materials must be approved by the village before installation.



   (H)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the
village when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection into
the public sanitary sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the
supervision of a designated representative of the village. Request for
inspection must be made at least 24 hours in advance. Inspection will not be
made after 3:00 p.m. on weekdays, on weekends, or holidays observed by the
village.



   (I)   No part of any lateral shall be covered until it has been
inspected and approved by a designated representative of the village. All
materials used in the installation must be approved and inspected by a
designated representative of the village.



   (J)   All building sewers/laterals within the village's service area
shall be constructed in accordance with the Village of Minster Subdivision
Regulations and Design Standards or other applicable rules and regulations of
the village.



   (K)   The size and slope of the lateral shall be subject to the
approval of the designated representative of the village, but in no event
shall the diameter be less than four inches. The slope of such four-inch pipe
shall not be less than 0.012 feet per lineal foot. The lowest inlet to said
sanitary sewer lateral, however, must not be less than 18 inches above the
top of the public sanitary sewer to which the lateral is connected.



   (L)   Whenever possible the lateral shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. No lateral shall be laid parallel
to or within three feet of any bearing wall, which might thereby be weakened.
The depth shall be not less than 48 inches to the top of the sanitary sewer
pipe. The lateral shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment
insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly
curved pipe and fittings, and there shall be accessible cleanouts properly
placed at any change of direction of 20 degrees or more.



   (M)   All excavations required for the installation of laterals
shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the designated
representative of the village. Sanitary pipe 1aying and backfilling shall be
performed in accordance with ASTM specifications, except that no backfill
shall be placed until the work has been inspected by a designated
representative of the village. The inside of every sanitary sewer, after it
is laid, must be left smooth and lean throughout its entire length, and be
true to line and grade. All lateral taps are to be of the saddle type.
Protruding taps will not be acceptable.



   (N)   The connection of the lateral into the public sanitary sewer
shall be made at the service connection. If such service connection is not
available, a suitable service connection will be provided by the applicant
under the direct supervision of a designated representative of the village.



   (O)   Extension of public sewers shall be done only by the village
when the need is established, or by the applicant or developer as required in
the Village of Minster Subdivision Regulations and Design Standards or other
applicable rules and regulations of the village.



   (P)   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public
from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, right-of-ways, and other public property
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the village.



(Ord. 04-11-3, § 300.03, passed 6-7-05)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.028  APPROVAL OF CONNECTIONS.



   (A)   No sewer service shall be connected until all connections
incident thereto shall have been inspected and approved by a representative
of the village.



   (B)   No sanitary sewer service line shall be connected to the
sanitary sewer system if that service line will contain flows other than
sanitary wastewater. Roof drains, yard and area drains, footer drains, or any
line other than that which serves a sanitary system are prohibited from
connection to the village's sanitary sewer system. The village reserves the
right to inspect any sanitary service line if the village has reason to
believe that the line contains flows other than sanitary wastewater. This
inspection will be at the expense of the property owner if an illegal
connection is found, and the property owner will be required to correct any
problems that have been identified by the inspection at their own expense.



   (C)   The Village Council reserves the right to limit connections to
the sanitary sewer system at any time it determines that sufficient capacity
is not available in the sanitary sewer system and/or the wastewater treatment
plant to service such connections.



(Ord. 04-11-3, § 300.04, passed 6-7-05)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.029  UNAUTHORIZED CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall connect to or turn on any sewer service, or cut into,
interconnect, tap or make any alterations to any main or distribution or
collection pipe of the village's sanitary sewer system or permit any
connection or tapping to be made to the system or permit any connection or
tapping to be made to the system on his or her premises or the premises
occupied by him or her, or knowingly use the sewer service from connections
in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any rules or
regulations adopted by the village.



(Ord. 04-11-3, § 300.05, passed 6-7-05)  Penalty, see § 52.999



DISCHARGE INTO PUBLIC SEWERS



§ 52.040  INDUSTRIAL USE OF SEWERS.



   Where the character of the sewage from any manufacturing or industrial
plant, building or property is such that it imposes a burden upon the
sanitary sewer system in addition to the burden imposed by the standard
strength sewage entering the sanitary sewer system, such additional charge
shall be made therefor as the Village Council shall deem to be necessary to
meet the additional cost of collection, treatment, and disposal of such
sewage; and the Village Council may, if it deems advisable to do so, compel
the owner, tenant or occupant of such manufacturing or industrial plant,
building or property to pretreat such sewage in such manner as shall be
specified by the Village Council before discharging it to the village
sanitary sewer system.



(Ord. 04-11-3, § 400.01, passed 6-7-05)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.041  DATA ON DISCHARGE.



   (A)   Each major contributor shall provide protection from
accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by
these regulations. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited
materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or user's own cost
and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to
provide this protection shall be submitted to the village for review, and
shall be approved by the village before construction of the facility.



   (B)   No major contributor who commences discharge to sanitary
sewers after the effective date of these regulations shall be permitted to
introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge prevention
procedures have been approved by the village.



   (C)   Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures
shall not relieve an industrial user from responsibility to modify the user's
facility as necessary to meet the requirements of these regulations. All
major contributors shall notify the village immediately of all discharges
which could affect the operation, cause pass-through, or cause elevated
levels of sludge contamination at the wastewater treatment facility. Batch
dumps, slug discharges and/or discharge from holding tanks are prohibited.
The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste,
concentration and volume, and emergency actions taken by the user. Any user
who does not comply with the above or fails to notify the village as required
shall be subject to the fine and criminal penalties indicated in § 52.999.



(Ord. 04-11-3, § 400.02, passed 6-7-05)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.042  UNPOLLUTED DISCHARGE.



   (A)   No user(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any
unpolluted waters such as stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface
drainage, or cooling water or unpolluted process water to any sanitary sewer.



   (B)   No user(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any
public sanitary sewer any harmful waters or wastes, whether liquid, solid or
gas, capable of causing the following:



      (1)   Obstruction to the flow in the sanitary sewers.



      (2)   Damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel
of the sanitary sewage system.



      (3)   Other interference with the proper operation of the
sanitary sewage system.



   (C)   No user(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any
sewage to any storm drain.



   (D)   Use of the public sanitary sewers may be terminated by the
village for any violation of any rule, regulation or condition of service and
for the following reasons:



      (1)   Misrepresentation in any application, permit to install,
and the like as to the property or fixtures to be served by the sanitary
sewer system.



      (2)   Improper or imperfect service pipes and fixtures, or
failure to keep the same in suitable state of repair.



      (3)   Failure to comply with all applicable federal and state
regulations and failure to maintain current federal or state permits.



   (E)   The discharge of industrial waste into the public sanitary
sewer system, other than those explicitly permitted, is prohibited. In
addition to meeting the requirements of these regulations, compliance must be
made with all applicable state and federal regulations, including the
village's NPDES permit.



   (F)   No user(s) shall ever increase the use of process water, or in
any other way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete
substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a pretreatment
standard or requirement. The village may impose mass limitations on users
which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations is
appropriate. No user shall in any way degrade an acceptable discharge whether
or not the resulting blend is still within established limits.



(Ord. 04-11-3, § 400.03, passed 6-7-05)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.043  FLAMMABLE, EXPLOSIVE OR HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES AND FOREIGN MATTER.



   No user(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the public
sanitary sewer, wastes designated as prohibited wastes pursuant to 40 C.F.R.
403.5 and any and all amendments thereto, and including but not limited to
the following:



   (A)   Liquids, solids, or gases which, by reason of their nature or
quantity, are or may be sufficient to cause fire or explosion, be injurious
in any other way to the sanitary sewer system, or be detrimental to the
operation and maintenance of the system. At no time shall two successive
readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the
sanitary sewer system, be more than 5%, nor any single reading over 10% of
the Lower Explosive Limit (L.E.L.) of the meter. Prohibited materials
include, but are not limited to gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene,
toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates,
perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides, and sulfides.



   (B)   Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any waste treatment process, to
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, to create a public nuisance, or to
create any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment
facility.



   (C)   Any waters or wastes having pH lower than 6.0 or higher than
9.0 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment operations and/or personnel of the wastewater
treatment facility without a permit to do so.



   (D)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size
capable of causing obstruction to the flow in the sanitary sewers, or other
interference with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities such as,
but not limited to, ashes, bones, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal,
glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood,
hair and flesh, entrails, lime slurry, lime residues, paint residues, cannery
waste, bulk solids, paper dishes, cups, milk containers and the like, either
whole or ground by garbage grinders.



   (E)   Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD,
COD, and the like) released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration
which will cause interference with the wastewater treatment facility's
operations.



   (F)   Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such
character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to
handle such materials at the wastewater treatment facility, or those having a
chlorine demand greater than 30 mg/l.



   (G)   Any plating baths or acid pickling liquor, whether neutralized
or not.



   (H)   Heat in amounts that will inhibit biological activity in the
wastewater treatment facility resulting in interference, but in no case in
such quantities that the influent wastewater at the treatment facility
exceeds 104°F (40°C).



(Ord. 04-11-3, § 400.04, passed 6-7-05)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.044  TOXIC SUBSTANCES.



   The following described substances, materials, waters, or waste shall
be limited in discharge to the municipal sanitary sewer system to
concentrations or quantities which will not harm either the sanitary sewers,
wastewater treatment process or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on
the receiving stream, and will not otherwise endanger lives, limbs, public
property, or constitute a nuisance.  The Village Council may set limitations
lower than the limitations established in these regulations if, in their
opinion, such more severe limitations are necessary to meet the above
objectives. In forming this opinion as to acceptability, the Village Council
will give consideration to such factors as the quantity of subject waste in
relation to flows and velocities in the sanitary sewers, materials or
construction of the sanitary sewers and the wastewater treatment facility,
degree of treatability of the waste in the wastewater treatment facility, and
other pertinent factors. The limitations or restrictions on materials or
characteristics of waste or wastewater discharge to the sanitary sewer which
shall not be violated without approval of the Village Council are as follows:



   (A)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150°F
(58°C).



   (B)   Any water or wastes containing petroleum oil,
non-biodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral oil origin are
prohibited if discharged in amounts that can pass through or cause
interference.



   (C)   Wastewater from industrial plants containing floatable oils,
fat or grease.



   (D) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded (see § 52.001,
Definitions). Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from
homes, motels, institutions, restaurants or similar places where garbage
originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of
consumption on the premises or when served by caterers.



   (E)   (1)   Waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous
solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity singly or in combinations
with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any waste treatment process,
render treatment process effluents or residues unfit for treatment or reuse,
pass through the wastewater treatment facility, cause violations of the
treatment works' NPDES permit, constitute a hazard to humans or animals,
create a public nuisance or create any hazard or water quality violation in
the receiving waters or the public wastewater treatment facility.



      (2)   Current listings of toxic pollutants are available from
the village. A list of such prohibited waste, designated as such pursuant to
Section 307(g) of the Clean Water Act and amendments thereto, or as hazardous
substances pursuant to Section 311(b) is published from time to time by the
United States Environmental Protection Agency.



   (F)   Any waters or wastes containing odor-producing substances and
any noxious or malodorous gas substance capable of creating a public
nuisance, or substance causing the release of noxious or poisonous gases
after discharge into the sanitary sewer.



   (G)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the Village Council in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.



   (H)   Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both which constitute a
“slug” as defined herein.



   (I)   No person shall discharge any holding tank into the sanitary
sewer without first obtaining written approval from the village. Approval
must be secured for each separate discharge.



   (J)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable
to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes, or are
amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the wastewater treatment
facility effluent can not meet the requirement of its NPDES permit for
discharge to the receiving water.



   (K)   Any waters or wastes which, by interaction with other water or
wastes in the sanitary sewer system, release noxious gases from suspended
solids which interfere with the collection system, or create a condition
deleterious to structures and treatment processes.



(Ord. 04-11-3, § 400.05, passed 6-7-05)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.045  METALS.



   (A)   All consumers in the metal machining, plating, coating,
etching, smelting industries; industries in the battery cleaning business and
consumers using chemical compounds with one or more metal salts, shall have a
process in place that would enable recycling of or otherwise safe disposal of
the metals or metal by-products prior to the disposal of the remaining fluid
into the sanitary sewer. All contaminated wastes shall be hauled by a
licensed hazardous waste hauler. Dilution of the liquid waste is not an
acceptable nor effective means of treatment. The waste manifest generated by
this activity shall be available for review by representatives of the village
within 24 hours from the request.



   (B)   Discharges of metals, dissolved or in suspension, at
concentrations which would cause the villages's POTW to violate its NPDES
permit and/or its Class A sludge program are prohibited. Those consumers that
are found to have contributed to the violation will be liable for all costs
incurred for clean-up of the waste stream and any disposal costs of sludge
and fluids that accumulate as a result of the violation. Concentration limits
will be determined on a case-by-case basis, depending on the consumer, the
type of processing and the resulting by-products.



(Ord. 04-11-3, § 400.06, passed 6-7-05)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.046  CONDITIONAL SERVICE.



   (A)   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the sanitary sewers, which waters contain the substances or
possess the characteristics enumerated in §§ 52.044 and 52.045, or which in
the judgment of the Village Council may cause the village to violate its
NPDES permit and/or have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater treatment
facilities, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or cause the water
quality standards of the streams to be violated, or which otherwise create a
hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Village Council may:



      (1)   Reject the wastes that, in the opinion of the village,
may be harmful to or exceed the capacity of the wastewater treatment facility.



      (2)   Require pretreatment, where necessary, in the opinion of
the village, the user shall provide at his expense such preliminary treatment
as may be necessary to:



         (a)   Reduce the BOD and the suspended solids loadings
to a treatable limit.



         (b)   Reduce objectionable characteristics or
constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in this chapter.



         (c)   Control the quantities and rates of discharge of
such waters or wastes.



      (3)   Require the user to cover the costs of the additional
expenses related to the treatment and/or clean-up as a result of the harmful
substances.



   (B)   Plans, specifications and other pertinent information relating
to proposed pretreatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of
the village. No construction of such facilities shall be commenced until such
approval is obtained in writing and applicable permits and approvals have
been obtained from federal and state agencies.



      (1)   Require control over the quantities and rates of
discharge.



      (2)   Require payment to cover added cost of handling and
treating the wastes not covered by existing sanitary sewer charges.



   (C)   In all such cases, special agreements or arrangements are
authorized for the treatment and disposal of such wastes by other means to
the extent that all federal, state, and local environmental laws, ordinances
and regulations are complied with.



(Ord. 04-11-3, § 400.07, passed 6-7-05)  Penalty, see § 52.999



LIABILITY



§ 52.055  UTILITY'S LIABILITY.



   The village will use reasonable diligence in supplying a regular and
uninterrupted sanitary sewer system, but shall not be liable for damages in
case such service should be interrupted or fail by reason of an act of God,
terrorism, accidents, strikes, legal processes, other governmental
interferences, breakdowns, root intrusion, grease build-up, or injury to the
machinery or wastewater collection pipes or mains of the village or for
extraordinary repairs.



(Ord. 04-11-3, § 500.01, passed 6-7-05)



§ 52.056  CONSUMER'S LIABILITY.



   (A)   The CONSUMER, as referred to throughout these General Rules
and Regulations, is defined as the property owner, inasmuch as the property
owner is, according to law, responsible for payment of all bills and is owner
of the necessary piping and connections of his or her premises.



   (B)   All water that passes through the meter installed in the
service line that supplies the consumer shall be charged as wastewater and
paid for by the consumer, whether actually used or consumed by the consumer
or whether wasted or lost by leakage of consumer's piping or equipment. This
does not apply to properly approved and installed non-sewered meters, which
are billed for water usage only.



   (C)   The consumer shall be responsible for any tampering,
interfering with or breaking of the seals of meters or other equipment of the
village installed on the consumer's premises, and will be held liable for
same, including any illegal diversion of water according to law.



   (D)   The consumer agrees that no one except the employees of the
village shall be allowed to make any internal or external adjustments to any
meter or any other piece of apparatus which is the property of the village.
The consumer also agrees to notify the Utility immediately after or prior to
any changes in the usage, piping or plumbing connected to a non-sewered
meter. The non-sewered status of such meter (or any new installation) is
strictly contingent on the village's approval.



   (E)   Only authorized employees of the village shall have the
authority to turn the water service on or off at the curb valve and no other
person shall be permitted to such water on or off without first having
approval of the village.



   (F)   If a blockage occurs on the building sewer between the
consumer's building and the sewer main, the property owner shall repair same.
The village is only responsible for the main sewer line and the connection
point to it or wye branch. If it is deemed the village's responsibility then
the repair will be made in a reasonable time considering weather, traffic,
workload, notification of utility protection services prior to excavation,
scheduling of outside contractors, and the like. If, upon excavation, it is
determined that the property owner's service line is blocked, broken or that
an illegal connection exists, then the property owner must reimburse the
village for time and equipment used to repair, identify, and/or correct the
problem.



   (G)   The village shall not be responsible for any inconvenience or
damages caused by items.



   (H)   No person shall turn, lift, remove, raise, or tamper with any
cover or any manhole, basin, inlet or other appurtenance of any public
sanitary sewer without written authorization from the village.



   (I)   No person, other than one employed by the village and while on
duty, shall enter any public sanitary sewer or appurtenance thereof, without
written authorization from the village.



   (J)   No person shall break or damage any public sanitary sewer or
appurtenance or part thereof.



(Ord. 04-11-3, § 500.02, passed 6-7-05)  Penalty, see § 52.999



CONTROL OF WASTES



§ 52.060  USER'S RESPONSIBILITY TO KEEP SANITARY SEWER CLEAN.



   The owner, tenant or occupant of the property shall be responsible for
maintaining and keeping the sanitary sewer pipe leading to and between the
plumbing system of his or her premises to the village's connecting sanitary
sewer clean and free from obstruction, and shall not cause, suffer or permit
any article or thing, liquid as well as solid, to be introduced into the pipe
which causes a blockage or stoppage of flow. In the event of any such
obstructions, the village shall not reconnect such service until such sewer
pipe is cleaned and maintained properly; and in the further event of the
failure of such user to remedy such obstruction, the village shall have the
right to enter upon said premises and make all necessary repairs, the costs
and expenses for which shall be included as part of the charges against such
property.



(Ord. 04-11-3, § 600.01, passed 6-7-05)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.061  USER'S RESPONSIBILITY TO REPAIR OR REIMBURSE FOR ILLICIT OR
ILLEGAL CONNECTIONS.



   The village shall have the right at all times to inspect the piping and
sanitary system, including any associated equipment, at any reasonable hour
to make certain that no illicit or illegal connections are in existence. If
noncompliance is found, the village shall have the right to require and take
such actions as are necessary to correct the problem(s), including immediate
discontinuance of water and/or sanitary sewer service, without notice. In the
event that the village incurs expenses in order to assure compliance with
these regulations, the property owner will be required to reimburse the
village for such expenses. In the event of a discontinuance of service, such
service shall not be reestablished until the condition is corrected to the
satisfaction of the village, with no expense to the village.



(Ord. 04-11-3, § 600.02, passed 6-7-05)



§ 52.062  GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS.



   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the village, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid
wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts as specified in §
52.044, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except
that such separators shall not be required for private living quarters or
dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by
the village, and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible
for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these separators, the
owner(s) shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by
appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain records of the
dates and means of disposal, such records being subject to review by the
village. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by
the owner's personnel must be performed by currently licensed waste disposal
firms. If requested by the village, the owner, within 24 hours, is
responsible for providing the village with all records related to material
which has been collected and properly disposed of.



(Ord. 04-11-3, § 600.03, passed 6-7-05)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.063  PRETREATMENT.



   Where pretreatment of flow-equalizing facilities are provided or
required for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation by the owner(s) at their own expense.
The operation of such treatment facilities shall be in accordance with any
and all United States Environmental Protection Agency Pretreatment Standards
as may be in effect at any given time.



(Ord. 04-11-3, § 600.04, passed 6-7-05)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.064  METERING AND SAMPLING DEVICES.



   (A)   All consumers shall be individually metered and plumbed before
permanent water service is established. For new multi-family installations
(duplexes, triplexes, and the like) the village requires that each occupancy
unit have a separate sewer line and also that all buildings designed for
multiple occupancy be separately metered for each occupancy unit. Existing
structures being converted to multi-family residences must install separate
meters for each occupancy unit before service is provided.



   (B)   All wastewater metering required by the village or requested
by a consumer must be designed, inspected and installed to village
specifications. The meter shall also be recalibrated at the consumer's
expense and arrangement, per village requirements.  The specific village
requirements may be defined on a case-by-case basis.



   (C)   Additional meters for industrial or consumer purposes, such as
non-sewered usages and/or subtraction (deduct) meters may be installed
subject to the approval of the village. All costs of such installations shall
be borne by the property owner. The owner shall notify the Utility of any
change or partial change in the status of any non-sewered water meter.
Failure to do so may result in back charging of sewer use charges for a
period of one year and/or termination of the non-sewered meter.



   (D)   Consumers may install a non-sewer water meter if approved by
the village in accordance with § 52.002.



   (E)   All meters will be equipped with a remote reader that must be
installed at the same height as the electric meter and within one foot of
either side of the meter, unless other arrangements are approved by the Water
Department. It is the responsibility of the consumer to have the remote meter
installed and inspected by the village before service is provided.



   (F)   No consumer shall sub-meter for, or allow other person or
parties to connect (either temporarily or permanently) to their sanitary
sewer facilities, whether for profit or for non-profit. Any violation of this
provision shall subject all water and/or sanitary sewer services to the
premises to be discontinued until such violation is corrected to the
satisfaction of the village.



(Ord. 04-11-3, § 600.05, passed 6-7-05)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.065  MEASUREMENTS, TESTS AND ANALYSES.



   (A)   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of
waters and wastes to which reference is made in these regulations shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health
Association, and shall conform to the requirements set forth in the current
version of 40 C.F.R. 136 (Regulations on Test Procedures for the Analysis of
Pollutants).



   (B)   The village may require industrial users to submit periodic
discharge reports, including but not limited to questionnaires, technical
reports, sampling reports, test analyses and reports of wastewater discharged.



   (C)   When a report filed by an industrial user pursuant to this
section is not adequate in the judgment of the village, the village may
require the user to supply such additional information as is necessary.



   (D)   As a minimum, the village may require industrial user(s)
having an average daily discharge greater than 25,000 gallons to complete and
file an Industrial Wastewater Survey form. An industrial user, determined to
be a major contributor as defined herein, shall be required to file and
submit periodic reports on the characteristics and volume of their discharge
as required by both the federal and State of Ohio Environmental Protection
Agencies.



   (E)   All reports required as a result of these regulations shall
contain the results of sampling and analysis of the industrial discharge,
including the flow and the nature and concentration of production and mass,
where requested by the village, of pollutants contained therein. If sampling
performed by an industrial user(s) indicates a violation, the user(s) shall
notify the village within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The
industrial user(s) shall repeat the sampling and analysis, and shall continue
on a daily basis to repeat the sampling and analysis, until such time as
compliance is achieved. The industrial user(s) shall submit the results of
the repeat analysis to the village within 15 days after becoming aware of the
violation.



   (F)   Designated industrial users are required to maintain plant
records relating to wastewater discharge volumes and characteristics. The
village will have access to these records immediately when so requested by
the village during normal business hours. Records shall be retained for at
least three years.



   (G)   The village may require the industrial user to supply
information in wastewater flow and characteristics. This information shall be
of the type specified by the village and may require disclosure of the nature
of the industrial process. Any monitoring performed by an industrial user(s)
beyond that required by the village must be included in the periodic reports
to the village.



   (H)   The village may require testing of the wastewater flow and
characteristics of a consumer's waste stream be conducted by an independent
testing entity to verify that the information being presented to the village
is true and accurate. All costs for this testing shall be assumed by the
consumer and the frequency of this testing will be determined by the village.



   (I)   Wastewater analysis shall conform to the United States
Environmental Protection Agency regulations on Test Procedures for the
Analysis of Pollutants; all industrial users shall promptly notify the
village in advance of any substantial change in the volume or character of
pollutants in their discharge.



   (J)   All required reports shall contain the following certification
statement:



“I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to assure that  qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate
the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who
manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant
penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine
and imprisonment for knowing violations.”



   (K)   All reports required herein shall be signed as follows:



      (1)   By a responsible corporate officer if the industrial
user submitting the reports required herein is a corporation. For the purpose
of this division, a RESPONSIBLE CORPORATE OFFICER means:



         (a)   A president, secretary, treasurer, or
vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function,
or any other person who performs similar policy-making or decision-making
functions for the corporation; or



         (b)   The manager of one or more manufacturing,
production or operating facilities employing more than 100 persons or having
gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000, if authority to
sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance
with corporate procedures.



      (2)   By a general partner or proprietor if the industrial
user submitting the required reports is a partnership or sole proprietorship
respectively.



      (3)   By a duly authorized representative of the individual
designated in divisions (K)(1) and (2) of this section if the authorization
is made in writing by the individual described in division (K)(1), if it is
an individual who is responsible for the overall operation of the facility
from which the industrial discharge originates, such as the position of plant
manager, or a position of equivalent responsibility, or having overall
responsibility for environmental matters for the company. If an authorization
under this division (K)(3) is no longer accurate because a different
individual or position has responsibility for environmental matters for the
company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of this division
(K)(3) must be submitted to the village, together with any reports to be
signed by an authorized representative.



(Ord. 04-11-3, § 600.06, passed 6-7-05)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.066  ACCIDENTAL SPILLS NOTIFICATION.



   (A)   Should accidental spills occur, the residue of such spills
entering the village's sanitary sewer system (and subsequently being conveyed
there-through to the village's wastewater treatment facility), the person or
entity responsible for or having knowledge of such spill will immediately
attempt to notify (in the order of precedence listed) the following
individuals of said spill until one has been contacted:



      (1)   The Wastewater Treatment Plant Superintendent



      (2)   The Village Administrator



      (3)   The Mayor



      (4)   The Police Department



      (5)   A Member of the Village Council



      (6)   The Clerk/Treasurer



   (B)   If accidental spills that enter the storm sewer or elsewhere
in the environment occur, the user should immediately contact the
Minster–Jackson Township Fire Chief or his or her designated
representative. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or
suffer such a discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification
procedures.



   (C)   The notification will contain as much information as is
available at the time, and such information should be updated every 30
minutes, as to the type of material spilled; whether it is solid, liquid, or
gas; whether the spill is continuing or has been controlled; the name of the
person reporting the spill and the telephone number that they can be reached
at; and the address and location of the spill. The purpose of this spill
notification is to reduce any damages to the sanitary sewer system and/or
wastewater treatment facility and to reduce impacts on the water quality of
the receiving stream.



   (D)   Within five days following an accidental discharge, the user
shall submit to the village a detailed written report describing the cause of
the discharge and the measures to be take by the user to prevent further
occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense,
loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage
to the village wastewater treatment facilities, fish kills, or any other
damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of
any fines, civil or criminal penalties, or other liability which may be
imposed by these regulations or other applicable laws.



(Ord. 04-11-3, § 600.07, passed 6-7-05)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.067  CONTROL OF PRODUCTION.



   (A)   The industrial user shall control production to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with these regulations. This requirement
applies in the situation where the primary source of power to the treatment
facility is reduced, lost or fails.



   (B)   If an industrial user knows in advance of the need for a
bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the village at least ten days before
the date of the bypass.



   (C)   An industrial user shall submit oral notice of an
unanticipated bypass that exceeds the requirements of these regulations to
the village within 24 hours from the time the industrial user becomes aware
of the bypass. A written submission shall be provided within five days of the
time the industrial user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission
shall contain a description of the bypass and its exact dates and times, and
if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to
continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent
reoccurrence of the bypass. The village may waive the written report on a
case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours.



   (D)   Bypass is prohibited and the village shall take enforcement
action against an industrial user for a bypass unless a bypass was
unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property
damage.



   (E)   If an industrial user requires the use of a bypass, the
village shall charge the user for the use of the bypass based upon the peak
daily average of the effluent reported to the village for that month or the
peak daily average of the influent going to the pretreatment plant of the
industrial user, whichever is higher, and the hours that the bypass was
utilized.



   (F)   Maintenance and/or repairs to a bypass shall be the
responsibility of the village; however all costs incurred for that
maintenance or repair shall be borne by the industrial user who benefits from
such a bypass.



(Ord. 04-11-3, § 600.08, passed 6-7-05)  Penalty, see § 52.999



POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS



§ 52.075  RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR PURPOSE OF DISCHARGE INSPECTION.



   A duly authorized employee of the village bearing proper credentials
and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the
purposes of inspection, observation, measurements, sampling and testing
pertinent to discharge of the sanitary sewer system in accordance with the
provisions of these regulations.



(Ord. 04-11-3, § 700.01, passed 6-7-05)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.076  COLLECTION OF INFORMATION.



   A duly authorized representative of the village is authorized to obtain
information concerning industrial processes which have a direct bearing on
the kind and source of discharge to the wastewater collection system.



(Ord. 04-11-3, § 700.02, passed 6-7-05)



§ 52.077  REQUIRED SAFETY PROCEDURES.



   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in § 52.075, the authorized representative of the village shall observe all
safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company, and the
company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the village
representatives, and the village shall indemnify the company against loss or
damage to its property by village representatives and against liability
claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against
the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operations, except as
such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe
conditions.



(Ord. 04-11-3, § 700.03, passed 6-7-05)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.078  RIGHT OF ENTRY TO AND FROM ALL NEGOTIATED EASEMENTS.



   Village representatives and contractors working for the village bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the village holds a negotiated easement for the
purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater facilities
lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said
easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the negotiated
easement pertaining to the private property involved.



(Ord. 04-11-3, § 700.04, passed 6-7-05)  Penalty, see § 52.999



AMENDMENTS AND PRECEDENCE



§ 52.085  AMENDMENTS TO THE SANITARY SEWER USE AND RATE REGULATIONS.



   Village Council shall review and cause to be enacted such amendments to
the Sanitary Sewer Use and Rate Regulations as are necessary to adjust rates
and/or to bring the ordinance into compliance with the applicable federal and
state regulations and changes thereto. All such amendments shall clearly
delineate the section to be altered or expanded.



(Ord. 04-11-3, § 800.01, passed 6-7-05)



§ 52.086  PRECEDENCE OF PAST AND PRESENT ORDINANCES.



   It shall be the responsibility of the Council to review and render a
decision as to the precedence involving a present or past ordinance to ensure
compliance with applicable statutes prior to rendering said precedence. Upon
resolution of the discrepancy and the precedence set, an amendment to the
Sanitary Sewer Use and Rate Regulations shall be enacted as stated in §
52.085.



(Ord. 04-11-3, § 800.02, passed 6-7-05)



§ 52.087  OTHER REVISIONS AND CONDITIONS.



   Other provisions and conditions of services pertaining to application
for service, furnishing service, deposits, discontinuance of services and the
like shall be as set forth in other ordinances, rules, regulations, policies
and procedures applicable to same and as may be amended from time to time.



(Ord. 04-11-3, § 800.03, passed 6-7-05)



§ 52.998  LEGAL ACTION.



   (A)   Whenever the Council has reason to believe that a person has
violated the provisions of this chapter, it may direct the Village Solicitor
to seek any or all of the following remedies from a court of competent
jurisdiction:



      (1)   Injunctive relief.



      (2)   Civil action for damages.



      (3)   Civil action to collect user charges and civil penalties.



   (B)   Council may also direct the Solicitor to refer any violation
of this chapter to the Prosecutor of the Auglaize County Municipal Court for
criminal prosecution.



(Ord. 04-11-3, § 1000.01, passed 6-7-05)



§ 52.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Civil penalty.



      (1)   Any person who violates, or continues to violate, any
provision of this chapter shall pay a civil penalty of not more than $25,000
for each violation, Each day or portion thereof during which a violation
occurs shall be considered a separate violation.



      (2)   These monies will be used to defray the costs incurred
by the village in remedying the problems associates with such violations and
shall include, but not be limited to, damage to the wastewater treatment
plant or sanitary sewer system, salaries (including overtime) of village
employees while engaged in remedying the situation, fines levied on the
village for NPDES violations or for fish kills, and legal fees associated
with all such action; or to penalize the violator in a manner that would
discourage any future violations of this chapter.



      (3)   The civil penalty shall be assessed and collected in the
following manner:



         (a)   Whenever the village has reason to believe that a
person has violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter;
notice shall be given to the violator regarding the intention of the village
to assess a civil penalty. The village shall provide the violator an
opportunity to fully discuss and present any relevant matters related to the
alleged violation and the consideration of division (A)(2) of this section.
The violator shall be provided reasonable continuances and the right to be
represented in said hearing.



         (b)   Following the hearing, the village shall assess a
civil penalty, which shall then be billed to the violator and collected as
other user charges.



         (c)   Any person who believes the civil penalty is
either inappropriate or unreasonable shall have the right to a hearing before
the Village Council. A request for hearing shall be filed, in writing, with
the Mayor, within 30 days of the date the person receives the written notice
by the village of the assessment of a civil penalty. The hearing before
Council shall be at a time allowing the petitioner sufficient opportunity for
preparation and representation. The hearing shall be open or closed, at the
request of the person.



         (d)   At the hearing the village shall first present the
basis upon which the penalty was assessed. The petitioner shall then present
to the Council any other relevant information. Strict rules of evidence shall
not apply and any evidence relevant may be considered.



         (e)   Following the hearing, Council shall either
approve the civil penalty as imposed by the village, or assess no civil
penalty, or assess a civil penalty in an amount either greater than or less
than that imposed by the village.



         (f)   Any person who is assessed a civil penalty by the
Village Council shall have the right to appeal the assessment to the Auglaize
County Municipal Court. Said appeal shall filed within 30 days of the
person's receipt of written notice of the imposition of the penalty by the
Village Council.



         (g)   There shall be no trial de novo, but the issue
shall be limited to whether or not due process of law was provided to the
user, as is required in administrative actions.



   (B)   Criminal penalty.  Any person who violates or continues to
violate any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
of the first degree and fined an amount not less than $500 or not to exceed
$1,000, or imprisonment of not less than 30 days or more than six months, or
both. Each day or separate portion thereof, of violation, shall be considered
a separate offense. No fines shall be reduced or suspended.



(Ord. 04-11-3, §§ 1000.02, 1000.03, passed 6-7-05)



CHAPTER 53:  WATER



Section



   53.01   Backflow prevention; cross-connection control



   53.02   Permit for drilling well



   53.03   Water rate schedule



§ 53.01  BACKFLOW PREVENTION; CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL.



   (A)   If, in the judgment of the village, an approved backflow
prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public water system, the
village shall give notice to the water consumer to install such an approved
device immediately. The water consumer shall, at his or her own expense,
install such an approved device at a location and in a manner approved by the
village and shall have independent inspections and tests made of such
approved devices as required by the village.



   (B)   That no person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit
to be established or maintain or permit to be maintained any connection
whereby a private auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular
public water supply of the village may enter the supply or distributing
system of said municipality, unless such private, auxiliary or emergency
water supply and the method of connection and use of such supply shall have
been approved by the village and by the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency.



   (C)   That it shall be the duty of the village to cause surveys and
investigations to be made of water consumers and other properties served by
the public water supply where actual or potential hazards to the public water
supply may exist. Such surveys and investigations shall be made a matter of
public record and shall be repeated as often as the village deems necessary.



   (D)   That the village or their duly authorized representative shall
have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a
connection to the public water supply, or distribution system of the village
for the purpose of inspecting the piping system or systems thereof. On demand
the owner, lessee or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the
village any information, which the village requests regarding the piping
system or systems or water use of such property. The refusal of such
information, when demanded, shall, within the discretion of the village, be
deemed evidence of the presence of improper connections as provided in this
section.



   (E)   That the village is hereby authorized and directed to
discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupant thereof, the water
service to any property, wherein any connection in violation of the
provisions of this section is known to exist, and to take such precautionary
measures as may be deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination
of the public water supply. Water services to such property shall not be
restored until such conditions shall have been eliminated or corrected in
compliance with the provisions of this section.



(Ord. 1978-, passed  - -78; Am. Ord. 18-04-01, passed 5-15-18)



§ 53.02  PERMIT FOR DRILLING WELL.



   (A)   No person, entity, organization, or any other unit shall drill
a well inside the village, without first obtaining a well drilling permit
from the Village Administrator of the village.



   (B)   The charge for this permit shall be $50 per permit, payable in
advance.



   (C)   The village shall retain the right to restrict the usage of
such well in case of emergency, drought, or any other time the village finds
it necessary to preserve the health and welfare of the residents of the
village.



   (D)   The water from any well shall be used only by the owner of the
property on which it is located, and not for human consumption or for sale.



(Ord. 1978-10-1, passed  - -78)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.03  WATER RATE SCHEDULE.



   (A)   The water rates established by this section shall be
applicable to all residential, commercial, and industrial water consumers who
acquire service within and use water within the corporate limits of the
village. These rates shall also be applicable to all residential, commercial,
and industrial water consumers who, upon the authority of the Village
Council, acquire and use municipal water service outside the village
corporation limits, in which case the rates for minimum monthly charges and
monthly usage charges shall be increased by the addition of the surcharge in
the amount of 25% of the entire bill.



   (B)   Water rates shall be established as follows:



      (1)   Minimum monthly charge.



         (a)   Beginning with bills due on July 1, 2014:



 


Inside village corporation limit

 

$5.00/meter/month




Outside village corporation limit

 

$6.25/meter/month









         (b)   Beginning with bills due on July 1, 2015:



 


Inside village corporation limit

 

$5.00/meter/month




Outside village corporation limit

 

$6.25/meter/month









         (c)   Beginning with bills due on July 1, 2016:



 


Inside village corporation limit

 

$5.00/meter/month




Outside village corporation limit

 

$6.25/meter/month









      (2)   Monthly usage charge.



         (a)   Beginning with bills due on July 1, 2014:



 


Inside village corporation limit

 

$1.90/1,000 gallons




Outside village corporation limit

 

$2.38/1,000 gallons









         (b)   Beginning with bills due on July 1, 2015:



 


Inside village corporation limit

 

$1.95/1,000 gallons




Outside village corporation limit

 

$2.44/1,000 gallons









         (c)   Beginning with bills due on July 1, 2016:



 


Inside village corporation limit

 

$2.00/1,000 gallons




Outside village corporation limit

 

$2.50/1,000 gallons









      (3)   The village shall assess users for any additional fees,
costs and expenses as may be necessary due to enforcement actions, any
special non-routine compliance monitoring, surveillance and analysis and/or
other just causes applicable for an individual user.



   (C)   Ten percent per month shall be added to the net bill if not
paid in full within 15 days after rendition of the bill for said service.



(Ord. 97-6-1, passed  - -97; Am. Ord. 08-12-01, passed 1-6-09; Am. Ord.
14-03-02, passed 4-15-14)



Cross-reference:



   General Service Rules, see §§ 50.15 through 50.22



CHAPTER 54:  ELECTRIC SERVICE RATES



Section



   54.01   Applicability



   54.02   Residential rate No. 1



   54.03   General service rate No. 1



   54.04   General service rate No. 2



   54.05   Primary power rate (Schedule P-P)



   54.06   Private outdoor lighting service rate



   54.07   Power cost adjustment



   54.08   Interruptible power rate (Schedule I-P)



   54.09   Large power rate (Schedule LP)



§ 54.01  APPLICABILITY.



   The electric service rates set forth in this chapter shall be
applicable to the first bills rendered on or after June 1, 2015.



(Ord. 10-02-02, passed 3-2-10; Am. Ord. 15-03-01, passed 4-21-15; Am. Ord.
15-06-01, passed 6-16-15)



§ 54.02  RESIDENTIAL RATE NO. 1.



   (A)   Applicable: This rate is available, as shown, to all
single-family residence, single flats, single apartments and churches for
lighting, operation of appliances, cooking, supplemental space heating, water
heating and incidental power. This rate is not available for multiple-family
suites. Multiple-family units shall be served under the applicable general
service rate.



   (B)   Character of service: 120/240 volts, single phase, alternating
current, 60 hertz (cycles per second).



   (C)   Minimum customer charge per month:



   For bills rendered on or after:



 


June 1, 2015

 

$10.00




January 1, 2016

 

$12.00




January 1, 2017

 

$14.00



January 1, 2018
 

$16.00



January 1, 2019
 

$18.00



January 1, 2020
 

$20.00




 



   (D)   Energy charges:



      For each kilowatt-hour of billing energy per month: $0.110.



   (E)   Excise (kilowatt-hour) tax adjustment: For all customers
located outside the village’s corporation limits, the rates set forth above
shall be increased by an amount equal to excise (kilowatt- hour) tax imposed
on the village’s electrical distribution system under R.C. § 5727.81. Such
increase shall become effective with the bills that include May 1, 2001 as
part of the usage period and shall be automatically adjusted to reflect any
change in the kilowatt-hour tax imposed by R.C. § 5727.81.



   (F)   Power cost adjustment: The above rates shall be adjusted in
accordance with the power cost adjustment set forth in § 54.07.



   (G)   Delayed payment charge: Ten percent shall be added to the net
bill if not paid full within 15 days after rendition of bill for such service.



   (H)   Terms and conditions:



      (1)   This rate is only available to consumers whose entire
requirements are measured through one meter.



      (2)   All electric service of the village is rendered under
and subject to the general service rules and regulations of the village as
amended from time to time.



(Ord. 10-02-02, passed 3-2-10; Am. Ord. 15-03-01, passed 4-21-15; Am. Ord.
15-06-01, passed 6-16-15)



§ 54.03  GENERAL SERVICE RATE NO. 1.



   (A)   Applicable: This rate is available to all commercial and
industrial establishments for lighting, heating, cooking and power.



   (B)   Character of service: Standard 3 or 4 wire, single or three
phase, secondary voltage, alternating current, 60 hertz (cycle per second).



   (C)   Minimum customer charge per month:



 


For bills rendered on or after:

 

Single Phase

 

Three Phase



June 1, 2015
 

$15.00

 

$25.00



January 1, 2016
 

$17.00

 

$27.00



January 1, 2017
 

$19.00

 

$29.00



January 1, 2018
 

$21.00

 

$31.00



January 1, 2019
 

$23.00

 

$33.00



January 1, 2020
 

$25.00

 

$35.00




 



   (D)   Demand charge (per kW):



      For each kilowatt of billing demand, per month, per kW:  $12.00



   (E)   Energy charges:



      For each kilowatt-hour, per month, per kWh for bills rendered on
or after:



 


June 1, 2015

 
$0.0725


January 1, 2016
 
$0.08



 



   (F)   Excise (kilowatt-hour) tax adjustment: For all customers
located outside the village’s corporation limits, the rates set forth above
shall be increased by an amount equal to excise (kilowatt- hour) tax imposed
on the village’s electrical distribution system under R.C. § 5727.81. Such
increase shall become effective with the bills that include May 1, 2001 as
part of the usage period and shall be automatically adjusted to reflect any
change in the kilowatt-hour tax imposed by R.C. § 5727.81.



   (G)   Power cost adjustment: The above rates shall be adjusted in
accordance with the power cost adjustment set forth in § 54.07.



   (H)   Primary voltage service: When service is supplied and metered
at the option of the village 7200/12,500 volts, the computed charges for
demand and energy shall be subject to a 1% discount of total bill.



   (I)   Delayed payment charge: Ten percent shall be added to the net
bill if not paid full within 15 days after rendition of bill for such service.



   (J)   Terms and conditions:



      (1)   A minimum monthly contract service charge and minimum
contract term may be established by the village to consumers having abnormal
demand requirements (less than 150 hours use of maximum demand per month).



      (2)   If a consumer has low power factor (less than 85%
lagging), at the time of maximum demand, then such power factor shall be
corrected by the consumer at the consumers expense within 60



days upon written notice received from the village or the village may
increase the billing demand by 1% for each 1% the power factor is below 85%.



      (3)   All electric service of the village is rendered under
and subject to the general service rules and regulations of the village as
amended from time to time.



(Ord. 10-02-02, passed 3-2-10; Am. Ord. 15-03-01, passed 4-21-15; Am. Ord.
15-06-01, passed 6-16-15)



§ 54.04  GENERAL SERVICE RATE NO. 2.



   (A)   Applicable: This rate is available only to those
non-residential customers whose monthly use of power and energy do not
generally exceed 10 kilowatts of demand and/or 2,000 kilowatt-hours per
month, and are receiving service under this rate prior to April 17, 2001.



   (B)   Character of service: Standard single phase and three phase,
secondary voltage, alternating current, 60 hertz (cycles per second) as
presently utilized.



   (C)   Minimum customer charge per month:



 




For bills rendered on or after:
 

Single
Phase

 

Three
Phase



June 1, 2015
 

$10.00

 

$15.00



January 1, 2016
 

$12.00

 

$17.00



January 1, 2017
 

$14.00

 

$19.00



January 1, 2018
 

$16.00

 

$21.00



January 1, 2019
 

$18.00

 

$23.00



January 1, 2020
 

$20.00

 

$25.00




 



   (D)   Energy charges:



      For each kilowatt-hour, per month, per kWh: $0.135.



   (E)   Excise (kilowatt-hour) tax adjustment: For all customers
located outside the village’s corporation limits, the rates set forth above
shall be increased by an amount equal to excise (kilowatt- hour) tax imposed
on the village’s electrical distribution system under R.C. § 5727.81. Such
increase shall become effective with the bills that include May 1, 2001 as
part of the usage period and shall be automatically adjusted to reflect any
change in the kilowatt-hour tax imposed by R.C. § 5727.81.



   (F)   Power cost adjustment: The above rates shall be adjusted in
accordance with the power cost adjustment set forth in § 54.07.



   (G)   Delayed payment charge: Ten percent shall be added to the net
bill if not paid full within 15 days after rendition of bill for such service.



   (H)   Terms and conditions:



      (1)   This rate is available only to those customers who are
receiving service under this rate prior to April 17, 2001.



      (2)   All electric service of the village is rendered under
and subject to the general service rules and regulations of the village as
amended from time to time.



(Ord. 10-02-02, passed 3-2-10; Am. Ord. 15-03-01, passed 4-21-15; Am. Ord.
15-06-01, passed 6-16-15)



§ 54.05  PRIMARY POWER RATE (SCHEDULE P-P).



   (A)   Applicable: This rate is available, upon application, to power
consumers for power, including lighting, where the monthly maximum demand of
the consumer is at least 500 kilowatts each and every month of the past 12
(immediate preceding) billing months and where the consumer furnishes and
maintains all equipment necessary to receive and utilize all the energy at
the primary supply voltage from a point designated by the village. This rate
is not available for auxiliary, standby, or supplementary service.



   (B)   Character of service: Any primary voltage designated by the
village. Voltages currently available are 12,470 volts. All services are to
be three phase, 60 hertz, with balanced three phase loading. All energy shall
be primary metered unless the village desires secondary metering in which
case the kilowatt-hours and kilowatt and kilovar demands shall be adjusted to
reflect consumption as subsequently stated herein.



   (C)   Minimum monthly charge:



      (1)   Three phase: $4,800.



   (D)   Demand charge:



      (1)   First 500 kW or less of billing demand per month: $4,800.



      (2)   Over 500 kW of Billing demand per month, per kilowatt:
$9.60.



   (E)   Energy charges:



      (1)   For each kilowatt-hour of billing energy per month:
$0.480.



   (F)   Reactive charge:



      (1)   All kilovar of reactive billing demand per month: $0.750.



   (G)   Excise (kilowatt-hour) tax adjustment: For all customers
located outside the village’s corporation limits, the rates set forth above
shall be increased by an amount equal to excise (kilowatt-hour) tax imposed
on the village’s electrical distribution system under R.C. § 5727.81. Such
increase shall become effective with the bills that include May 1, 2001 as
part of the usage period and shall be automatically adjusted to reflect any
change in the kilowatt-hour tax imposed by R.C. § 5727.81.



   (H)   Power cost adjustment: The above rates shall be adjusted in
accordance with the power cost adjustment set forth in § 54.07.



   (I)   Delayed payment charge: Ten percent shall be added to the net
bill if not paid full within 15 days after rendition of bill for such service.



   (J)   Determination of billing demand: The billing demand shall be
in 15-minute integrated demand, ascertained in kilowatts by instruments
suitable for that purpose. Billing shall be on a monthly basis and the
monthly billing demand shall be the greater of the following:



      (1)   Off-peak: Seventy percent of the greatest such demand
occurring during the billing month, either within the period between 11:00
p.m. of one day and 7:00 a.m. the following day or on a Saturday or Sunday,
or on New Years Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving
Day or Christmas Day; or



      (2)   On-peak: One hundred percent of the greatest such demand
occurring during the billing month at anytime not within the period and not
on the days specifically mentioned in division (J)(1), above.



   (K)   Service voltage adjustment: These rates are based on metered
service at 12,470 volts (primary service). When at the option of the village
metering is at a secondary voltage (480 volts or less), the metered
kilowatt-hours and metered kilowatt and kilovar demands shall be increased by
1.5% to obtain the billing kilowatt-hours and billing kilowatt and kilovar
demands without affecting the minimum monthly charge.



   (L)   Contract requirements: At the option of the village, service
under this rate schedule may only be available under a service contract with
consideration for size, character and location of the consumer’s load and
the amount of facilities to be furnished by the village in serving such load.
Contract term initially shall be at least five years.



   (M)   Terms and conditions:



      (1)   All electric service of the village is rendered under
and subject to the general service rules and regulations of the village as
amended from time to time



      (2)   This rate is only available upon application in writing
to the village and with reasonable lead time for implementation.



(Ord. 10-02-02, passed 3-2-10)



§ 54.06  PRIVATE OUTDOOR LIGHTING SERVICE RATE.



   (A)   Applicable: To all consumers served by the village. The
village reserves the right to refuse service when in its judgment an
installation will be objectionable to neighboring property owners. This rate
is not available for auxiliary, standby, or supplementary service.



   (B)   Character of service: This rate is available for all-night
outdoor lighting service to any consumer for lighting or driveways and other
outdoor areas on private property by aerial construction only, where such
service can be supplied by the installation of lighting fixtures on existing
village-owned poles and supplied directly from existing secondary circuits on
such poles.



   (C)   Rate:



      (1)   For each lamp with luminary and, where needed, an
upsweep arm not over six feet in length, controlled automatically, where
service is supplied from an existing poles and secondary facilities of the
village.



         (a)   100 watt high pressure sodium; $10.00 per month.



         (b)   175 watt mercury vapor: $10.00 per month.



         (c)   250 watt high pressure sodium: $15.00 per month.



         (d)   400 watt Mercury Vapor: $15.00 per month.



      (2)   Where no poles are available, additional poles and
secondary spans, as required, shall be installed by the village and consumer
shall reimburse the village for all costs associated with such installation.
Such additional poles and spans shall be owned and maintained by the village.



   (D)   Excise (kilowatt-hour) tax adjustment: For all customers
located outside the village’s corporation limits, the rates set forth above
shall be increased by an amount equal to excise (kilowatt-hour) tax imposed
on the village’s electrical distribution system under R.C. § 5727.81. Such
increase shall become effective with the bills that include May 1, 2001 as
part of the usage period and shall be automatically adjusted to reflect any
change in the kilowatt-hour tax imposed by R.C. § 5727.81.



   (E)   Payment: Bills for such service shall be due and payable
within 15 days of rendition. Billing for such service is to be made a part of
the bill for other electric service, and shall be subject to the same delayed
payment policy.



   (F)   Term of contract: For a fixed term of not less than two years,
and for such time thereafter until terminated by either party giving 30 days
written notice to the other.



   (G)   Terms and conditions:



      (1)   All facilities shall be owned by the village.



      (2)   The village will maintain the equipment and replace
burned out lamps. All service and necessary maintenance will be performed
only during regular scheduled working hours of the village. The village does
not guarantee continuous lighting and shall not be liable to the consumer or
anyone else for any damage, loss or injury resulting from an interruption in
such lighting due to any cause.



      (3)   All electric service of the village is rendered under
and subject to the general service rules and regulations of the village as
amended from time to time.



(Ord. 10-02-02, passed 3-2-10; Am. Ord. 15-03-01, passed 4-21-15; Am. Ord.
15-06-01, passed 6-16-15)



§ 54.07  POWER COST ADJUSTMENT.



   (A)   Applicable: The rates and charges set forth in village’s
electrical services rates are based upon an assumed average cost of
village’s power supply. In the event that such monthly overall average
power costs per kWh is increased or decreased due to changes in load
characteristics, wholesale rates, fuel costs, taxes, other adjustments, or
modifications to the village’s power supply arrangements, the village’s
electrical services rates to which this power costs adjustment applies
(except outdoor lighting) will be adjusted as specified below.



   (B)   Base power cost: The overall base power cost to be used to
determine the adjustment applicable to the village’s electric rate
schedules shall be that included in the village's retail rates of $0.07264
per kWh.



   (C)   Monthly determination of power cost adjustment:



      (1)   Each month, the village’s running three month average
power supply cost per kWh shall be determined by dividing (1) the sum of (i)
the previous two and current months’ total power supply costs from all
suppliers plus (ii) the previous two and current months’ costs associated
with ownership and operation of generating facilities owned in whole or in
part, by the village, plus (iii) the previous two and current months’
transmission related charges and AMP service fees, by (2) the total energy
delivered to the village in the previous two months and current month.



      (2)   If such running three month average power cost for the
current month is above or below the base power cost of $ 0.07264 per kWh, the
rates per kWh set forth in village’s electric service rates shall be
increased or decreased in the manner specified in divisions (C)(3) and
(C)(4), below.



      (3)   Any increase or decrease per kWh above or below the base
power cost of $0.07264 per kWh shall be determined to five decimal places
($0.00000) and any resultant differential shall be multiplied by 1.10 to
compensate for the village’s distribution system energy losses.



      (4)   The rates per KWh set forth in village’s electrical
service rates shall be increased or decreased accordingly.



   (D)   Application of power costs adjustment to all consumer bills:



      (1)   Any applicable adjustment shall be applied to the kWh
billed consumers for the meter reading period that the village determines as
most nearly corresponding to the meter reading period set forth in
village’s billings from its power suppliers.



      (2)   All adjustments shall be applied to the total kWh billed
to consumer and shall be in addition to the minimum charge applicable for the
schedule involved.



(Ord. 10-02-02, passed 3-2-10; Am. Ord. 15-03-01, passed 4-21-15; Am. Ord.
15-06-01, passed 6-16-15)



§ 54.08  INTERRUPTIBLE POWER RATE (SCHEDULE I-P).



   (A)   Applicable: This rate is available upon application to power
consumers for power which can be interrupted with at least a half-hour
notice, where the monthly maximum demand of the interruptible load is at
least 500 kilowatts each and every month of the past 12 (immediately
preceding) billing months. This rate is not available for auxiliary or
supplementary service.



   (B)   Character of service: Standard three phase primary voltage as
presently utilized.



   (C)   Rate:



      (1)   Energy charge: All energy supplied to the customer used
to supply the customer’s interruptible load will be billed at a base rate
of $0.067/ kWh. This rate will be adjusted annually on March 1 and will be
based on the energy rate specified in Schedule P-P plus the average power
cost adjustment over the prior three months rounded to three digits.



      (2)   Additional energy charges: In addition to the above base
rate energy charge, the customer will pay any additional energy charges above
the base rate incurred by the village to supply the customer’s
interruptible load. The customer will be notified of any additional charges
to be incurred during the next day by 6:00 pm each day. The customer will
have the option to interrupt its operation or pay the higher cost during each
hour that the village’s cost of power exceeds the base rate. If next day
prices are not sent by the village or their agent, all power for that day
will be priced at the base rate.



   (D)   Interruption of load: During periods when the village or its
agent determine the need to reduce load in order to decrease transmission
load, alleviate a system emergency, or for other reasons as determined by the
village or its agent, customer agrees to reduce its interruptible load within
no less than 30 minutes upon notification by the village or its agent. Should
the customer fail to interrupt when instructed, the entire demand portion of
the customer’s load will be billed under rate schedule P-P plus any
additional costs incurred by the village to supply customer’s load.



   (E)   Scheduling: By January 15 and June 15 of each year, the
customer will supply the village with a Schedule of Interruptible Load (SIL)
which the customer desires to be served under this rate schedule, such SIL
will be in not less than 100 kW increments. Once such SIL is submitted to the
village, the non-interruptible load may not be decreased without the
village’s consent.



   (F)   Verification of interruptible load: Suitable metering
equipment shall be installed at the customer’s facility in order that the
amount of load interrupted by the customer can be verified by the village.



   (G)   Non-interruptible load: The portion of the customer’s
non-interruptible load will be billed under the appropriate rate schedule
currently serving the customer. The monthly billing demand for the
customer’s non-interruptible load will be the amount of non-interruptible
load specified in the SIL. The Village Administrator may on 30 days’
written notice prior to the billing period withdraw this schedule due to
non-compliance by the customer.



   (H)   Contract requirements: At the option of the village, service
under this rate schedule may only be available under a service contract with
consideration for size, character and location of the consumer’s load and
the amount of facilities to be furnished by the village in servicing the
load. Contract term initially shall be at least one year.



   (I)   Delayed payment charge: Ten percent shall be added to the net
bill if not paid within a period of 15 days after rendition of bill for said
service. Reasonable allowance may be made for out of town and absentee
billing.



   (J)   Service voltage adjustments: These rates are based on metered
service at 12,470 volts (primary service). When at the option of the village
metering is at a secondary voltage (480 volts or less), the metered
kilowatt-hours shall be increased by 1.5% to obtain the amount of energy
billed.



(Ord. 10-02-02, passed 3-2-10; Am. Ord. 15-03-01, passed 4-21-15; Am. Ord.
15-06-01, passed 6-16-15)



§ 54.09 LARGE POWER RATE (SCHEDULE LP).



   (A)   Applicable: This rate is available, upon application, to power
consumers for power, including lighting, where the monthly maximum demand of
the consumer is at least 500 kilowatts each and every month of the past 12
(immediate preceding) billing months. This rate is not available for
auxiliary, standby, or supplementary service.



   (B)   Character of service: Any secondary or primary voltage
designated by the village. All services are to be three phase, 60 hertz, with
balanced three phase loading. All energy shall be secondary metered unless
the village desires primary metering in which case the kilowatt-hours and
kilowatt and kilovar demands shall be adjusted to reflect consumption as
subsequently stated herein.



   (C)   Monthly customer charge per meter per month:  $50.00.



   (D)   Demand charge:



      (1)   First 500 kW or less of billing demand per month: $7,500.



      (2)   Over 500 kW of billing demand per month, per kilowatt:
$15.00.



   (E)   Energy charges:



      For each kilowatt-hour of billing energy per month: $0.060.



   (F)   Reactive charge:



      All kilovar of reactive billing demand per month: $0.75.



   (G)   Excise (kilowatt-hour) tax adjustment: For all customers
located outside the village’s corporation limits, the rates set forth above
shall be increased by an amount equal to excise (kilowatt- hour) tax imposed
on the village’s electrical distribution system under R.C. § 5727.81. Such
increase shall become effective with the bills that include May 1, 2001 as
part of the usage period and shall be automatically adjusted to reflect any
change in the kilowatt-hour tax imposed by R.C. § 5727.81.



   (H)   Power cost adjustment: The above rates shall be adjusted in
accordance with the power cost adjustment set forth in § 54.07.



   (I)   Delayed payment charge: Ten percent shall be added to the net
bill if not paid full within 15 days after rendition of bill for such service.



   (J)   Determination of billing demand: The billing demand shall be
in 15-minute integrated demand, ascertained in kilowatts by instruments
suitable for that purpose. Billing shall be on a monthly basis and the
monthly billing demand shall be the greater of the following:



      (1)   Off-peak: Seventy percent of the greatest such demand
occurring during the billing month, either within the period between 11:00
p.m. of one day and 7:00 a.m. the following day or on a Saturday or Sunday,
or on New Years Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving
Day or Christmas Day; or



      (2)   On-peak: One hundred percent of the greatest such demand
occurring during the billing month at anytime not within the period and not
on the days specifically mentioned in division (J)(1), above.



   (K)   Meter voltage adjustment: These rates are based on service
metered at secondary voltage. When at the option of the village service is
metered at a primary voltage the metered kilowatt-hours and metered kilowatt
and kilovar demands shall be decreased by 1.5% to obtain the billing
kilowatt-hours and billing kilowatt and kilovar demands.



   (L)   Service voltage adjustment: When service is provided at
primary voltage consumer shall receive a credit of $0.50 per kilowatt of
billing demand.



   (M)   Multiple metering points: When service to a single, contiguous
facility is metered through multiple metering points, meter data shall be
aggregated and treated as one coincident load for billing purposes and
determination of the billing kilowatt and kilovar demands.



   (N)   Contract requirements: At the option of the village, service
under this rate schedule may only be available under a service contract with
consideration for size, character and location of the consumer’s load and
the amount of facilities to be furnished by the village in serving such load.
Contract term initially shall be at least five years.



   (O)   Terms and conditions:



      (1)   All electric service of the village is rendered under
and subject to the general service rules and regulations of the village as
amended from time to time



      (2)   This rate is only available upon application in writing
to the village and with reasonable lead time for implementation.



(Ord. 15-03-01, passed 4-21-15; Am. Ord. 15-06-01, passed 6-16-15)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



      Chapter




         70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS





         71.   LICENSING PROVISIONS





         72.   TRAFFIC RULES





         73.   MOTOR VEHICLE CRIMES





         74.   EQUIPMENT AND LOADS





         75.   BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES, AND OFF-ROAD VEHICLES





         76.   PARKING REGULATIONS





         77.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES





         78.   PARKING SCHEDULES




CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section




General Provisions




   70.01   Definitions



   70.02   Compliance with order of police officer



   70.03   Emergency vehicles to proceed cautiously past red or stop
signal



   70.04   Exceptions generally; emergency, public safety and coroner
vehicles exempt



   70.05   Persons riding or driving animals upon roadways



   70.06   Prohibitions against pedestrians and slow-moving vehicles on
freeways



   70.07   Use of private property for vehicular travel



   70.08   Names of persons damaging real property by operation of
vehicle to be provided to owner



   70.09   Limited access highways; barriers along; vehicles to enter
and leave at designated intersections



   70.10   Through highways



   70.11   Officer may remove ignition key



   70.12   Removal of vehicles after accidents




Traffic-Control Devices




   70.20   Obeying traffic-control devices



   70.21   Signal lights



   70.22   Signals over reversible lanes



   70.23   Ambiguous or non-working traffic signals



   70.24   Pedestrian-control signals



   70.25   Reserved



   70.26   Unauthorized signs and signals prohibited



   70.27   Alteration, defacement, or removal prohibited



   70.28   Unauthorized possession or sale of devices



   70.29   Signal preemption devices; prohibitions




Impoundment Guidelines




   70.40   Purpose



   70.41   Disposition of vehicle when person arrested; vehicle
reported stolen



   70.42   Impounding, safe keeping, storage and release procedures



 



   70.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Jurisdiction in traffic violations, see § 33.01



   Streets and sidewalks, general regulations, see Ch. 94



   Unauthorized use of a motor vehicle, see § 131.09



   Unclaimed and abandoned motor vehicles, see Ch. 91



Statutory reference:



   Local traffic regulations, scope and authority, see R.C. § 4511.07



   Notice of arrest of certain commercial drivers, see R.C. § 5577.14



   Traffic law photo-monitoring devices, state regulations, see R.C. §§
4511.092 et seq.



   Uniform application and precedence of state traffic laws, see R.C. §
4511.06



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 70.01  DEFINITIONS.



   Except as otherwise provided, the definitions set forth in R.C. §
4501.01 shall apply to this Title, Chapter 91, and the penal laws of the
municipality.  For the purpose of this Title and Chapter 91, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   AGRICULTURAL TRACTOR. Every self-propelled vehicle designed or used for
drawing other vehicles or wheeled machinery, but having no provision for
carrying loads independently of such other vehicles, and used principally for
agricultural purposes.



   ALLEY. A street or highway intended to provide access to the rear or
side of lots or buildings in urban districts, and not intended for the
purpose of through vehicular traffic, and any street or highway that has been
declared an ALLEY by the Legislative Authority of the municipality in which
the street or highway is located.



   ARTERIAL STREET. Any United States or state numbered route,
controlled-access highway, or other major radial or circumferential street or
highway designated by local authorities within their respective jurisdictions
as part of a major arterial system of streets or highways.



   BEACON. A highway traffic signal with one or more signal sections that
operate in a flashing mode.



   BICYCLE. Every device, other than a device that is designed solely for
use as a play vehicle by a child, that is propelled solely by human power
upon which a person may ride, and that has two or more wheels, any of which
is more than 14 inches in diameter.



   BUS. Every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than nine
passengers, and used for the transportation of persons other than in a
ridesharing arrangement, and every motor vehicle, automobile for hire, or
funeral car, other than a taxicab or motor vehicle used in a ridesharing
arrangement, designed and used for the transportation of persons for
compensation.



   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory fronting upon a street or highway,
including the street or highway, between successive intersections within the
municipality, where 50% or more of the frontage between successive
intersections is occupied by buildings in use for business, or within or
outside the municipality where 50% or more of the frontage for a distance of
300 feet or more is occupied by buildings in use for business, and the
character of the territory is indicated by official traffic-control devices.



   CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINE. A motor vehicle that is designed to carry nine
or fewer passengers and is operated for hire pursuant to a prearranged
contract for the transportation of passengers on public roads and highways
along a route under the control of the person hiring the vehicle and not over
a defined and regular route. “Prearranged contract” means an agreement,
made in advance of boarding, to provide transportation from a specific
location in a chauffeured limousine. CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINE does not include
any vehicle that is used exclusively in the business of funeral directing.
(R.C. § 4501.01(LL))



   CHILD DAY-CARE CENTER and TYPE A FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME. These terms
shall have the same meanings as set forth in R.C. § 5104.01.



   COMMERCIAL TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle having motive power designed or
used for drawing other vehicles, and not so constructed as to carry any load
thereon, or designed or used for drawing other vehicles while carrying a
portion of the other vehicles, or the load thereon, or both.



   CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY. Every street or highway in respect to which
owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal right
or access to or from the same except at certain points only and in a manner
as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over the
street or highway.



   CROSSWALK.



      (1)   That part of a roadway at intersections ordinarily
included within the real or projected prolongation of property lines and curb
lines or, in the absence of curbs, the edges of the traversable roadway;



      (2)   Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or
elsewhere, distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other
markings on the surface;



      (3)   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this
definition, there shall not be a crosswalk where the Legislative Authority
has placed signs indicating no crossing.



   DRIVER or OPERATOR. Any person who drives or is in actual physical
control of a vehicle.



   ELECTRIC BICYCLE. Means a "class 1 electric bicycle", a "class 2
electric bicycle", or a "class 3 electric bicycle" as defined below.



      (1)   CLASS 1 ELECTRIC BICYCLE. Means a bicycle that is
equipped with fully operable pedals and an electric motor of less than 750
watts that provides assistance only when the rider is pedaling and ceases to
provide assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of 20 miles per hour.



      (2)   CLASS 2 ELECTRIC BICYCLE. Means a bicycle that is
equipped with fully operable pedals and an electric motor of less than 750
watts that may provide assistance regardless of whether the rider is pedaling
and is not capable of providing assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed
of 20 miles per hour.



      (3)   CLASS 3 ELECTRIC BICYCLE. Means a bicycle that is
equipped with fully operable pedals and an electric motor of less than 750
watts that provides assistance only when the rider is pedaling and ceases to
provide assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of 28 miles per hour.



   EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Emergency vehicles of municipal, township or county
departments or public utility corporations, when identified as such as
required by law, the Director of Public Safety, or local authorities, and
motor vehicles when commandeered by a police officer.



   EXPLOSIVES. Any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is
intended for the purpose of producing an explosion that contains any
oxidizing and combustible units or other ingredients in such proportions,
quantities, or packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion,
by percussion, or by a detonator of any part of the compound or mixture may
cause a sudden generation of highly heated gases, such that the resultant
gaseous pressures are capable of producing destructive effects on contiguous
objects, or of destroying life or limb. Manufactured articles shall not be
held to be explosives when the individual units contain explosives in limited
quantities of such nature or in such packing that it is impossible to procure
a simultaneous or a destructive explosion of the units, to the injury of
life, limb, or property by fire, friction, concussion, percussion, or by a
detonator, such as fixed ammunition for small arms, firecrackers, or safety
fuse matches.



   EXPRESSWAY. A divided arterial highway for through traffic with full or
partial control of access with an excess of 50% of all crossroads separated
in grade.



   FLAMMABLE LIQUID. Any liquid which has a flash point of 70°F or less,
as determined by a tagliabue or equivalent closed cup test device.



   FREEWAY. A divided multi-lane highway for through traffic with
crossroads separated in grade and with full control of access.



   FUNERAL ESCORT VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle, including a funeral hearse,
while used to facilitate the movement of a funeral procession.



   GROSS WEIGHT. The weight of a vehicle plus the weight of any load
thereon.



   HIGHWAY MAINTENANCE VEHICLE. A vehicle used in snow and ice removal or
road surface maintenance, including a snow plow, traffic line striper, road
sweeper, mowing machine, asphalt distributing vehicle, or other such vehicle
designed for use in specific highway maintenance activities.



   HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SIGNAL. A power-operated traffic control device by
which traffic is warned or directed to take some specific action. The term
does not include a power-operated sign, steadily illuminated pavement marker,
warning light, or steady burning electric lamp.



   HYBRID BEACON. A type of beacon that is intentionally placed in a dark
mode between periods of operation where no indications are displayed and,
when in operation, displays both steady and flashing traffic control signal
indications.



   INTERSECTION.



      (1)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection
of the lateral curb lines, or, if none, the lateral boundary lines of the
roadways of two highways that join one another at, or approximately at, right
angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways
that join at any other angle might come into conflict. The junction of an
alley or driveway with a roadway or highway does not constitute an
intersection unless the roadway or highway at the junction is controlled by a
traffic control device.



      (2)   If a highway includes two roadways that are 30 feet or
more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an
intersecting highway constitutes a separate intersection. If both
intersecting highways include two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every
crossing of any two roadways of such highways constitutes a separate
intersection.



      (3)   At a location controlled by a traffic control signal,
regardless of the distance between the separate intersections as described in
division (2) of this definition:



         (a)   If a stop line, yield line, or crosswalk has not
been designated on the roadway within the median between the separate
intersections, the two intersections and the roadway and median constitute
one intersection.



         (b)   Where a stop line, yield line, or crosswalk line
is designated on the roadway on the intersection approach, the area within
the crosswalk and any area beyond the designated stop line or yield line
constitute part of the intersection.



         (c)   Where a crosswalk is designated on a roadway on
the departure from the intersection, the intersection includes the area that
extends to the far side of the crosswalk.



   LANED HIGHWAY. A highway the roadway of which is divided into two or
more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.



   LOCAL AUTHORITIES. Every county, municipal, and other local board or
body having authority to adopt police regulations under the Constitution and
laws of this state.



   MEDIAN. The area between two roadways of a divided highway, measured
from edge of traveled way to edge of traveled way, but excluding turn lanes.
The width of a median may be different between intersections, between
interchanges, and at opposite approaches of the same intersection.



   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle propelled or drawn by power other than
muscular power or power collected from overhead electric trolley wires,
except motorized bicycles, road rollers, traction engines, power shovels,
power cranes and other equipment used in construction work, and not designed
for or employed in general highway transportation, hole-digging machinery,
well-drilling machinery, ditch-digging machinery, farm machinery, and
trailers designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of
storage and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a
street or highway for a distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of
25 miles per hour or less.



   MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle, other than a tractor, having a seat or
saddle for the use of the operator and designed to travel on not more than
three wheels in contact with the ground, including, but not limited to, motor
vehicles known as “motor-driven cycle,” “motor scooter,”
“autocycle,”  “cab-enclosed motorcycle,” or “motorcycle” without
regard to weight or brake horsepower.



   MOTORIZED BICYCLE or MOPED. Any vehicle having either two tandem wheels
or one wheel in the front and two wheels in the rear, that may be capable of
being pedaled, and that is equipped with a helper motor of not more than 50
cubic centimeters piston displacement that produces not more than one brake
horsepower, and is capable of propelling the vehicle at a speed of not
greater than 20 miles per hour on a level surface. The terms do not include
an electric bicycle.



   MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIR. Any self-propelled vehicle designed for, and used
by, a person with a disability and that is incapable of a speed in excess of
eight miles per hour.



   MULTI-WHEEL AGRICULTURAL TRACTOR. A type of agricultural tractor that
has two or more wheels or tires on each side of one axle at the rear of the
tractor, is designed or used for drawing other vehicles or wheeled machinery,
has no provision for carrying loads independently of the drawn vehicles or
machinery, and is used principally for agricultural purposes.



   OPERATE. To cause or have caused movement of a vehicle.



   PARKING or PARKED. The standing of a vehicle upon a street, road,
alley, highway or public ground, whether accompanied or unaccompanied by a
driver, but does not include the temporary standing of a vehicle for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or loading merchandise or
passengers.



   PEDESTRIAN. Any natural person afoot. The term includes a personal
delivery device as defined in R.C. § 4511.513 unless the context clearly
suggests otherwise.



   PERSON. Every natural person, firm, partnership, association or
corporation.



   POLE TRAILER. Every trailer or semitrailer attached to the towing
vehicle by means of a reach, pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to
the towing vehicle, and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregular
shaped loads such as poles, pipes, or structural members capable, generally,
of sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting connections.



   POLICE OFFICER. Every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic,
or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.



   PREDICATE MOTOR VEHICLE OR TRAFFIC OFFENSE.  Any of the following:



      (1) A violation of R.C. §§ 4511.03, 4511.051, 4511.12,
4511.132, 4511.16, 4511.20, 4511.201, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.213, 4511.22,
4511.23, 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31,
4511.32, 4511.33, 4511.34, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39,
4511.40, 4511.41, 4511.42, 4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.432, 4511.44, 4511.441,
4511.451, 4511.452, 4511.46, 4511.47, 4511.48, 4511.481, 4511.49, 4511.50,
4511.511, 4511.53, 4511.54, 4511.55, 4511.56, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59,
4511.60, 4511.61, 4511.64, 4511.66, 4511.661, 4511.68, 4511.70, 4511.701,
4511.71, 4511.711, 4511.712, 4511.713, 4511.72, 4511.73, 4511.763, 4511.771,
4511.78, or 4511.84;



      (2)   A violation of R.C. §§ 4511.17(A)(2), 4511.51(A) to
(D), or 4511.74(A);



      (3)   A violation of any provision of R.C. §§ 4511.01 to
4511.76 for which no penalty otherwise is provided in the section that
contains the provision violated;



      (4)   A violation of R.C. § 4511.214;



      (5)   A violation of a municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to any section or provision set forth or described
in division (1), (2), (3), or (4) of this definition.



   PRIVATE ROAD OPEN TO PUBLIC TRAVEL. A private toll road or road,
including any adjacent sidewalks that generally run parallel to the road,
within a shopping center, airport, sports arena, or other similar business or
recreation facility that is privately owned but where the public is allowed
to travel without access restrictions. The term includes a gated toll road
but does not include a road within a private gated property where access is
restricted at all times, a parking area, a driving aisle within a parking
area, or a private grade crossing.



   PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY. Every way or place in private ownership used
for vehicular travel by the owner, and those having express or implied
permission from the owner, but not by other persons.



   PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE. Any of the following:



      (1)   Ambulances, including private ambulance companies under
contract to a municipality, township, or county, and private ambulances and
nontransport vehicles bearing license plates issued under R.C. § 4503.49;



      (2)   Motor vehicles used by public law enforcement officers
or other persons sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state;



      (3)   Any motor vehicle when properly identified as required
by the Director of Public Safety, when used in response to fire emergency
calls or to provide emergency medical service to ill or injured persons, and
when operated by a duly qualified person who is a member of a volunteer
rescue service or a volunteer fire department, and who is on duty pursuant to
the rules or directives of that service. The State Fire Marshal shall be
designated by the Director of Public Safety as the certifying agency for all
public safety vehicles described herein;



      (4)   Vehicles used by fire departments, including motor
vehicles when used by volunteer firefighters responding to emergency calls in
the fire department service when identified as required by the Director of
Public Safety;



      (5)   Any vehicle used to transport or provide emergency
medical service to an ill or injured person, when certified as a PUBLIC
SAFETY VEHICLE, shall be considered such a vehicle when transporting an ill
or injured person to a hospital, regardless of whether such vehicle has
already passed a hospital;



      (6)   Vehicles used by the Motor Carrier Enforcement Unit for
the enforcement of orders and rules of the Public Utilities Commission as
specified in R.C. § 5503.34.



   RAILROAD. A carrier of persons or property operating upon rails placed
principally on a private right-of-way.



   RAILROAD SIGN OR SIGNAL. Any sign, signal, or device erected by
authority of a public body or official or by a railroad, and intended to give
notice of the presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train.



   RAILROAD TRAIN. A steam engine or an electric or other motor, with or
without cars coupled thereto, operated by a railroad.



   RESIDENCE DISTRICT. The territory, not comprising a business district,
fronting on a street or highway, including the street or highway, where, for
a distance of 300 feet or more, the frontage is improved with residences or
residences and buildings in use for business.



   RIDESHARING ARRANGEMENT. Includes the transportation of persons in a
motor vehicle where the transportation is incidental to another purpose of a
volunteer driver, and includes RIDESHARING ARRANGEMENTS known as carpools,
vanpools, and buspools.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY. Either of the following, as the context requires:



      (1)   The right of a vehicle or pedestrian to proceed
uninterruptedly in a lawful manner in the direction in which it, he or she is
moving, in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching from a
different direction into its, his or her path;



      (2)   A general term denoting land, property, or the interest
therein, usually in the configuration of a strip, acquired for or devoted to
transportation purposes. When used in this context, RIGHT-OF-WAY includes the
roadway, shoulders or berm, ditch, and slopes extending to the right-of- way
limits under the control of the state or local authority.



   ROAD SERVICE VEHICLE.  Wreckers, utility repair vehicles and state,
county and municipal service vehicles equipped with visual signals by means
of flashing, rotating or oscillating lights.



   ROADWAY. That portion of a highway improved, designed, or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel, except the berm or shoulder. If a highway includes
two or more separate roadways, the term ROADWAY means any roadway separately,
but not all the roadways collectively.



   RURAL MAIL DELIVERY VEHICLE. Every vehicle used to deliver United
States mail on a rural mail delivery route.



   SAFETY ZONE. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway
for the exclusive use of pedestrians, and protected or marked or indicated by
adequate signs so as to be plainly visible at all times.



   SCHOOL BUS. Every bus designed for carrying more than nine passengers
which is owned by a public, private, or governmental agency or institution of
learning, and operated for the transportation of children to or from a school
session or a school function, or owned by a private person and operated for
compensation for the transportation of children to or from a school session
or a school function; provided SCHOOL BUS does not include a bus operated by
a municipally owned transportation system, a mass transit company operating
exclusively within the territorial limits of a municipality, or within such
limits and the territorial limits of municipalities immediately contiguous to
the municipality, nor a common passenger carrier certified by the Public
Utilities Commission unless the bus is devoted exclusively to the
transportation of children to and from a school session or a school function,
and SCHOOL BUS does not include a van or bus used by a licensed child
day-care center or Type A Family Day-Care Home to transport children from the
child day-care center or Type A Family Day-Care Home to a school if the van
or bus does not have more than 15 children in the van or bus at any time.



   SEMITRAILER. Every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or
property with another and separate motor vehicle so that in operation a part
of its own weight or that of its load, or both, rests upon and is carried by
another vehicle.



   SHARED-USE PATH. A bikeway outside the traveled way and physically
separated from motorized vehicular traffic by an open space or barrier and
either within the highway right-of-way or within an independent alignment. A
shared-use path also may be used by pedestrians, including skaters, joggers,
users of manual and motorized wheelchairs, and other authorized motorized and
non- motorized users. A shared-use path does not include any trail that is
intended to be used primarily for mountain biking, hiking, equestrian use, or
other similar uses, or any other single track or natural surface trail that
has historically been reserved for non-motorized use.



   SIDEWALK. That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the
lateral line of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for the
use of pedestrians.



   STATE HIGHWAY. A highway under the jurisdiction of the Department of
Transportation, outside the limits of municipalities, provided that the
authority conferred upon the Director of Transportation in R.C. § 5511.01 to
erect state highway route markers and signs directing traffic shall not be
modified by R.C. §§ 4511.01 through 4511.79 and 4511.99.



   STATE ROUTE. Every highway which is designated with an official state
route number and so marked.



   STOP. When required, means a complete cessation of movement.



   STOP INTERSECTION. Any intersection at one or more entrances of which
stop signs are erected.



   STOPPING or STANDING. When prohibited, means any halting of a vehicle,
even momentarily, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic
or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control
device.



   STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every
way open to the use of the public as a thoroughfare for purposes of vehicular
travel.



   THROUGH HIGHWAY. Every street or highway as provided in R.C. §
4511.65, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



   THRUWAY. A through highway whose entire roadway is reserved for through
traffic and on which roadway parking is prohibited.



   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars,
and other devices, either singly or together, while using for purposes of
travel any highway or private road open to public travel.



   TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE. A flagger, sign, signal, marking, or other
device used to regulate, warn, or guide traffic, placed on, over, or adjacent
to a street, highway, private road open to public travel, pedestrian
facility, or shared-use path by authority of a public agency or official
having jurisdiction, or, in the case of a private road open to public travel,
by authority of the private owner or private official having jurisdiction.



   TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL. Any highway traffic signal by which traffic is
alternately directed to stop and permitted to proceed.



   TRAILER. Every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or
property wholly on its own structure, and for being drawn by a motor vehicle,
including any vehicle when formed by or operated as a combination of a
semitrailer and a vehicle of the dolly type, such as that commonly known as a
trailer dolly, a vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or
agricultural production materials between a local place of storage or supply
and the farm when drawn or towed on a street or highway at a speed greater
than 25 miles per hour and a vehicle designed and used exclusively to
transport a boat between a place of storage and a marina, or in and around a
marina, when drawn or towed on a street or highway for a distance of more
than ten miles or at a speed of more than 25 miles per hour.



   TRUCK. Every motor vehicle, except trailers and semitrailers, designed
and used to carry property.



   URBAN DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including any street or
highway which is built up with structures devoted to business, industry, or
dwelling houses situated at intervals of less than 100 feet for a distance of
one-quarter of a mile or more, and the character of the territory is
indicated by official traffic-control devices.



   VEHICLE. Every device, including a motorized bicycle, and an electric
bicycle, in, upon, or by which any person or property may be transported or
drawn upon a highway, except that VEHICLE does not include any motorized
wheelchair, any electric personal assistive mobility device, any personal
delivery device as defined in R.C. § 4511.513, any device that is moved by
power collected from overhead electric trolley wires or that is used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, or any device, other than a
bicycle, that is moved by human power.



   WASTE COLLECTION VEHICLE. A vehicle used in the collection of garbage,
refuse, trash, or recyclable materials.



(R.C. § 4511.01)



§ 70.02  COMPLIANCE WITH ORDER OF POLICE OFFICER.



   (A)   No person shall fail to comply with any lawful order or
direction of any police officer invested with authority to direct, control,
or regulate traffic.



   (B)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle so as willfully to
elude or flee a police officer after receiving a visible or audible signal
from a police officer to bring the person's motor vehicle to a stop.



   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to
comply with an order or signal of a police officer.



      (2)   A violation of division (A) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (3)   Except as provided in divisions (C)(4) and (5) of this
section, a violation of division (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.



      (4)   Except as provided in division (C)(5) of this section, a
violation of division (B) of this section is a felony and shall be prosecuted
under appropriate state law if the jury or judge as trier of fact finds by
proof beyond a reasonable doubt that in committing the offense, the offender
was fleeing immediately after the commission of a felony.



      (5)   (a)   A violation of division (B) of this section is
a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law if the jury or
judge as trier of fact finds any of the following by proof beyond a
reasonable doubt:



            1.   The operation of the motor vehicle by the
offender was a proximate cause of serious physical harm to persons or
property.



            2.   The operation of the motor vehicle by the
offender caused a substantial risk of serious physical harm to persons or
property.



         (b)   If a police officer pursues an offender who is
violating division (B) of this section and division (C)(5)(a) of this section
applies, the sentencing court, in determining the seriousness of an
offender's conduct for purposes of sentencing the offender for a violation of
division (B) of this section, shall consider, along with the factors set
forth in R.C. §§ 2929.12 and 2929.13 that are required to be considered,
all of the following:



            1.   The duration of the pursuit;



            2.   The distance of the pursuit;



            3.   The rate of speed at which the offender
operated the motor vehicle during the pursuit;



            4.   Whether the offender failed to stop for
traffic lights or stop signs during the pursuit;



            5.   The number of traffic lights or stop signs
for which the offender failed to stop during the pursuit;



            6.   Whether the offender operated the motor
vehicle during the pursuit without lighted lights during a time when lighted
lights are required;



            7.   Whether the offender committed a moving
violation during the pursuit;



            8.   The number of moving violations the offender
committed during the pursuit;



            9.   Any other relevant factors indicating that
the offender's conduct is more serious than conduct normally constituting the
offense.



   (D)   In addition to any other sanction imposed for a violation of
division (A) of this section or a misdemeanor violation of division (B) of
this section, the court shall impose a class five suspension from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(5). If the offender previously has been found
guilty of an offense under this section or under R.C. § 2921.331 or any
other substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, in addition to any other
sanction imposed for the offense, the court shall impose a class one
suspension as described in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(1). The court may grant limited
driving privileges to the offender on a suspension imposed for a misdemeanor
violation of this section as set forth in R.C. § 4510.021. No judge shall
suspend any portion of the suspension under a class one suspension of an
offender’s license, permit, or privilege required by this division.



   (E)   As used in this section:



      MOVING VIOLATION has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2743.70.



      POLICE OFFICER has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.



(R.C. § 2921.331(A) - (C), (E), (F))



Cross-reference:



   Resisting arrest, see § 136.08



§ 70.03  EMERGENCY VEHICLES TO PROCEED CAUTIOUSLY PAST RED OR STOP SIGNAL.



   (A)   The driver of any emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle,
when responding to an emergency call, upon approaching a red or stop signal
or any stop sign, shall slow down as necessary for safety to traffic, but may
proceed cautiously past the red or stop sign or signal with due regard for
the safety of all persons using the street or highway.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.03)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.04  EXCEPTIONS GENERALLY; EMERGENCY, PUBLIC SAFETY AND CORONER
VEHICLES EXEMPT.



   (A)   The provisions of this traffic code, except for §§ 73.01 and
73.011, do not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles, and other equipment
while actually engaged in work upon the surface of a highway within an area
designated by traffic-control devices, but apply to those persons and
vehicles when traveling to or from such work.



   (B)   The driver of a highway maintenance vehicle owned by this
state or any political subdivision of this state, while the driver is engaged
in the performance of official duties upon a street or highway, provided the
highway maintenance vehicle is equipped with flashing lights and such other
markings as are required by law and such lights are in operation when the
driver and vehicle are so engaged, shall be exempt from criminal prosecution
for violations of R.C. §§ 4511.22, 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28,
4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.33, 4511.35, 4511.66, 4513.02, and 5577.01 to 5577.09,
and any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



   (C)   (1)   This section does not exempt a driver of a highway
maintenance vehicle from civil liability arising from a violation of R.C.
§§ 4511.22, 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.33,
4511.35, 4511.66, or 4513.02 or R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



      (2)   This section does not exempt a driver of a vehicle who
is not a state employee and who is engaged in the transport of highway
maintenance equipment from criminal liability for a violation of R.C. §§
5577.01 through 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



   (D)   As used in this section, ENGAGED IN THE PERFORMANCE OF
OFFICIAL DUTIES includes driving a highway maintenance vehicle to and from
the manufacturer or vehicle maintenance provider and transporting a highway
maintenance vehicle, equipment, or materials to and from a work location.



(R.C. § 4511.04)



   (E)   The provisions of R.C. §§ 4511.12, 4511.13, 4511.131,
4511.132, 4511.14, 4511.202, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.22, 4511.23, 4511.25,
4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33,
4511.34, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40, 4511.41,
4511.42, 4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.432, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.57, 4511.58,
4511.59, 4511.60, 4511.61, 4511.62, 4511.66, 4511.68, 4511.681, and 4511.69,
and any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, do not apply to the
driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle if the emergency
vehicle or public safety vehicle is responding to an emergency call, is
equipped with and displaying at least one flashing, rotating, or oscillating
light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet
to the front of the vehicle and if the driver of the vehicles is giving an
audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle, or bell. This section does not
relieve the driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the
duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon
the highway.



(R.C. § 4511.041)



   (F)   The provisions of R.C. §§ 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27,
4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33, 4511.35, 4511.36,
4511.37, 4511.38, and 4511.66, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinances, do not apply to a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner's
investigator operating a motor vehicle in accordance with R.C. § 4513.171 or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance. This division does not
relieve a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner's investigator operating a motor
vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons
and property upon the highway.



§ 70.05  PERSONS RIDING OR DRIVING ANIMALS UPON ROADWAYS.



   Every person riding, driving, or leading an animal upon a roadway is
subject to the provisions of this traffic code, applicable to the driver of a
vehicle, except those provisions of this traffic code which by their nature
are inapplicable.



(R.C. § 4511.05)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.06  PROHIBITIONS AGAINST PEDESTRIANS AND SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES ON
FREEWAYS.



   (A)   No person, unless otherwise directed by a police officer,
shall:



      (1)   As a pedestrian, occupy any space within the limits of
the right-of-way of a freeway, except: in a rest area; on a facility that is
separated from the roadway and shoulders of the freeway and is designed and
appropriately marked for pedestrian use; in the performance of public works
or official duties; as a result of an emergency caused by an accident or
breakdown of a motor vehicle; or to obtain assistance;



      (2)   Occupy any space within the limits of the right-of-way
of a freeway, with: an animal-drawn vehicle; a ridden or led animal; herded
animals; a pushcart; a bicycle, except on a facility that is separated from
the roadway and shoulders of the freeway and is designed and appropriately
marked for bicycle use; an electric bicycle; a bicycle with motor attached; a
motor-driven cycle with a motor which produces not to exceed five brake
horsepower; an agricultural tractor; farm machinery; except in the
performance of public works or official duties.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.051)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Designation of a freeway, see R.C. § 4511.011



§ 70.07  USE OF PRIVATE PROPERTY FOR VEHICULAR TRAVEL.



   The provisions of this traffic code do not prevent the owner of real
property, used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel by permission
of the owner and not as a matter of right, from prohibiting such use or from
requiring additional conditions to those specified in this traffic code, or
otherwise regulating such use as may seem best to the owner.



(R.C. § 4511.08)



§ 70.08  NAMES OF PERSONS DAMAGING REAL PROPERTY BY OPERATION OF VEHICLE TO
BE PROVIDED TO OWNER.



   (A)   As used in this section, MOTOR VEHICLE has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 4501.01.



   (B)   If damage is caused to real property by the operation of a
motor vehicle in, or during the, violation of any section of the Revised Code
or of any municipal ordinance, the law enforcement agency that investigates
the case, upon request of the real property owner, shall provide the owner
with the names of the persons who are charged with the commission of the
offense. If a request for the names is made, the agency shall provide the
names as soon as possible after the persons are charged with the offense.



   (C)   The personnel of law enforcement agencies who act pursuant to
division (B) of this section in good faith are not liable in damages in a
civil action allegedly arising from their actions taken pursuant to that
division. Political subdivisions and the state are not liable in damages in a
civil action allegedly arising from the actions of personnel of their law
enforcement agencies if the personnel have immunity under this division.



(R.C. § 2935.28)



§ 70.09  LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAYS; BARRIERS ALONG; VEHICLES TO ENTER AND
LEAVE AT DESIGNATED INTERSECTIONS.



   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall cut, injure, remove, or
destroy any fence or other barrier designed and erected to prevent traffic
from entering or leaving a limited access highway without the permission of
the Director of Transportation, except in a case of emergency where life or
property is in danger. No person, firm or corporation shall cause a vehicle
of any character to enter or leave a limited access highway at any point
other than intersections designated by the Director for such purposes, except
in a case of emergency where life or property is in danger.



(R.C. § 3767.201)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 3767.99(D))



§ 70.10  THROUGH HIGHWAYS.



   (A)   All state routes are hereby designated as through highways,
provided that stop signs, yield signs, or traffic-control signals shall be
erected at all intersections with such through highways by the Department of
Transportation as to highways under its jurisdiction and by local authorities
as to highways under their jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this
section. Where two or more state routes that are through highways intersect,
and no traffic-control signal is in operation, stop signs or yield signs
shall be erected at one or more entrances thereto by the Department or by
local authorities having jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this
section. Whenever the Director of Transportation determines on the basis of
an engineering and traffic investigation that stop signs are necessary to
stop traffic on a through highway for safe and efficient operation, nothing
in this section shall be construed to prevent such installations. When
circumstances warrant, the Director also may omit stop signs on roadways
intersecting through highways under his or her jurisdiction. Before the
Director either installs or removes a stop sign under this division, he or
she shall give notice, in writing, of that proposed action to the affected
local authority at least 30 days before installing or removing the stop sign.



   (B)   Other streets or highways, or portions thereof, are hereby
designated as through highways if they are within the municipality, if they
have a continuous length of more than one mile between the limits of the
street or highway or portion thereof, and if they have stop or yield signs or
traffic-control signals at the entrances of the majority of intersecting
streets or highways. For purposes of this section, the limits of the street
or highway, or portion thereof, shall be the municipal corporation line, the
physical terminus of the street or highway, or any point on the streets or
highway at which vehicular traffic thereon is required by regulatory signs to
stop or yield to traffic on the intersecting street, provided, that in
residence districts, the municipality may by ordinance designate such street
or highway, or portion thereof, not to be a through highway and thereafter
the affected residence district shall be indicated by official
traffic-control devices. Where two or more through highways designated under
this division intersect and no traffic-control signal is in operation, stop
signs or yield signs shall be erected at one or more entrances thereto by the
Department or by local authorities having jurisdiction, except as otherwise
provided in this section.



   (C)   The Department or local authorities having jurisdiction need
not erect stop signs at intersections they find to be so constructed as to
permit traffic to safely enter a through highway without coming to a stop.
Signs shall be erected at such intersections indicating that the operator of
a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to or merge with all traffic
proceeding on the through highway.



   (D)   Local authorities, with reference to highways under their
jurisdiction, may designate additional through highways, and shall erect stop
signs, yield signs, or traffic-control signals at all streets and highways
intersecting such through highways, or may designate any intersection as a
stop or yield intersection, and shall erect like signs at one or more
entrances to the intersection.



(R.C. § 4511.65)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.11  OFFICER MAY REMOVE IGNITION KEY.



   A law enforcement officer may remove the ignition key left in the
ignition switch of an unlocked and unattended motor vehicle parked on a
street or highway. The officer removing the key shall place notification upon
the vehicle detailing his or her name and badge number, the place where the
key may be reclaimed, and the procedure for reclaiming the key. The key shall
be returned to the owner of the motor vehicle upon presentation of proof of
ownership.



(R.C. § 4549.05)



§ 70.12  REMOVAL OF VEHICLES AFTER ACCIDENTS.



   (A)   If a motor vehicle accident occurs on any highway, public
street, or other property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel
and if any motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property that has been damaged
or spilled as a result of the motor vehicle accident is blocking the highway,
street, or other property or is otherwise endangering public safety, a public
safety official may do either of the following without the consent of the
owner but with the approval of the law enforcement agency conducting any
investigation of the accident:



      (1)   Remove, or order the removal of, the motor vehicle if
the motor vehicle is unoccupied, cargo, or personal property from the portion
of the highway, public street, or property ordinarily used for vehicular
travel on the highway, public street, or other property open to the public
for purposes of vehicular travel.



      (2)   If the motor vehicle is a commercial motor vehicle,
allow the owner or operator of the vehicle the opportunity to arrange for the
removal of the motor vehicle within a period of time specified by the public
safety official. If the public safety official determines that the motor
vehicle cannot be removed within the specified period of time, the public
safety official shall remove or order the removal of the motor vehicle.



   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) of this
section, the Department of Transportation, any employee of the Department of
Transportation, or a public safety official who authorizes or participates in
the removal of any unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property as
authorized by division (A) of this section, regardless of whether the removal
is executed by a private towing service, is not liable for civil damages for
any injury, death, or loss to person or property that results from the
removal of that unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property.
Further, except as provided in division (B)(2) of this section, if a public
safety official authorizes, employs, or arranges to have a private towing
service remove any unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property as
authorized by division (A) of this section, that private towing service is
not liable for civil damages for any injury, death, or loss to person or
property that results from the removal of that unoccupied motor vehicle,
cargo, or personal property.



      (2)   Division (B)(1) of this section does not apply to any of
the following:



         (a)   Any person or entity involved in the removal of an
unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property pursuant to division
(A) of this section if that removal causes or contributes to the release of a
hazardous material or to structural damage to the roadway;



         (b)   A private towing service that was not authorized,
employed, or arranged by a public safety official to remove an unoccupied
motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property under this section;



         (c)   Except as provided in division (B)(2)(d) of this
section, a private towing service that was authorized, employed, or arranged
by a public safety official to perform the removal of the unoccupied motor
vehicle, cargo, or personal property but the private towing service performed
the removal in a negligent manner;



         (d)   A private towing service that was authorized,
employed, or arranged by a public safety official to perform the removal of
the unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property that was
endangering public safety but the private towing service performed the
removal in a reckless manner.



   (C)   As used in divisions (A) and (B) of this section:



      HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2305.232.



      PUBLIC SAFETY OFFICIAL. Means any of the following:



         (a)   The sheriff of the county, or the chief of police
in the municipal corporation, township, or township or joint police district,
in which the accident occurred;



         (b)   A state highway patrol trooper;



         (c)   The chief of the fire department having
jurisdiction where the accident occurred;



         (d)   A duly authorized subordinate acting on behalf of
an official specified in divisions (a) to (c) of this definition.



(R.C. § 4513.66)



   (D)   If a towing service is removing a motor vehicle, and the
removal was not authorized under R.C. § 4513.60, 4513.601, 4513.61, or
4513.66, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, prior to
removing the motor vehicle, the towing service shall provide a written
estimate of the price for the removal to the operator of the motor vehicle,
if requested.



   (E)   The towing service shall ensure that any estimate provided
under division (D) of this section includes the fees, services to be
rendered, and destination of the vehicle.



   (F)   If a towing service fails to provide a written estimate as
required by this section, the towing service shall not charge fees for the
towing and storage of the motor vehicle that exceed 25% of any applicable
fees established by the public utilities commission in rules adopted under
R.C. § 4921.25(B)(4) or, if the vehicle was towed within a municipal
corporation that has established vehicle removal and storage fees, 25% of the
fees established by the municipal corporation.



   (G)   Any storage facility that accepts towed vehicles shall
conspicuously post a notice at the entrance to the storage facility that
states the limitation on fees established under division (F) of this section.



(R.C. § 4513.68)



TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES



§ 70.20  OBEYING TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.



   (A)   (1)   No pedestrian or driver of a vehicle shall disobey
the instructions of any traffic- control device placed in accordance with the
provisions of this traffic code, unless at the time otherwise directed by a
police officer.



      (2)   No provision of this traffic code for which signs are
required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and
place of the alleged violation, an official sign is not in proper position
and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person.
Whenever a particular section of this traffic code does not state that signs
are required, that section shall be effective even though no signs are
erected or in place.



(R.C. § 4511.12(A))



   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (C) of this section,
any operator of a commercial motor vehicle, upon approaching a scale location
established for the purpose of determining the weight of the vehicle and its
load, shall comply with any traffic control device or the order of a peace
officer directing the vehicle to proceed to be weighed or otherwise inspected.



      (2)   Any operator of a commercial motor vehicle, upon
bypassing a scale location in accordance with division (C) of this section,
shall comply with an order of a peace officer to stop the vehicle to verify
the use and operation of an electronic clearance device.



   (C)   Any operator of a commercial motor vehicle that is equipped
with an electronic clearance device authorized by the Superintendent of the
State Highway Patrol under R.C. § 4549.081 may bypass a scale location,
regardless of the instruction of a traffic control device to enter the scale
facility, if either of the following apply:



      (1)   The in-cab transponder displays a green light or other
affirmative visual signal and also sounds an affirmative audible signal;



      (2)   Any other criterion established by the Superintendent of
the State Highway Patrol is met.



   (D)   Any peace officer may order the operator of a commercial motor
vehicle that bypasses a scale location to stop the vehicle to verify the use
and operation of an electronic clearance device.



   (E)   As used in this section, COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE means any
combination of vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating or an actual gross
vehicle weight of more than 10,000 pounds if the vehicle is used in
interstate or intrastate commerce to transport property and also means any
vehicle that is transporting hazardous materials for which placarding is
required pursuant to 49 C.F.R. Parts 100 to 180.



(R.C. § 4511.121(A)-(C), (E))



   (F)   No person shall use an electronic clearance device if the
device or its use is not in compliance with rules of the Superintendent of
the State Highway Patrol.



(R.C. § 4549.081(B))



   (G)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division,
whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the
offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle
or traffic offenses, whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offender commits the offense
while distracted and the distracting activity is a contributing factor to the
commission of the offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine
established under § 70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.12(B))



      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty
of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division
(B) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more
violations of division (B) of this section or any substantially equivalent
state law or municipal ordinance, whoever violates division (B) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offender
commits the offense while distracted and the distracting activity is a
contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the offender is subject
to the additional fine established under § 70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.121(D))



      (3)   Whoever violates division (F) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of
the third degree on each subsequent offense.



(R.C. § 4549.081(C))  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Traffic-control devices to conform to the state manual and
specifications, see R.C. § 4511.11



   Placing traffic-control devices on state highways, permission required,
see R.C. § 4511.10



   Uniform system of traffic-control devices, see R.C. § 4511.09



§ 70.21  SIGNAL LIGHTS.



   Highway traffic signal indications for vehicles and pedestrians shall
have the following meanings:



   (A)   Steady green signal indication.



      (1)   (a)   Vehicular traffic facing a circular green
signal indication is permitted to proceed straight through or turn right or
left or make a u-turn movement except as such movement is modified by a
lane-use sign, turn prohibition sign, lane marking, roadway design, separate
turn signal indication, or other traffic control device. Such vehicular
traffic, including vehicles turning right or left or making a u-turn
movement, shall yield the right-of-way to both of the following:



            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated
crosswalk;



            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the
intersection.



         (b)   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or
making a u-turn movement to the left shall yield the right-of-way to other
vehicles approaching from the opposite direction so closely as to constitute
an immediate hazard during the time when such turning vehicle is moving
across or within the intersection.



      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal
indication, displayed alone or in combination with another signal indication,
is permitted to cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement
indicated by such arrow, or such other movement as is permitted by other
indications displayed at the same time. Such vehicular traffic, including
vehicles turning right or left or making a u-turn movement, shall yield the
right-of-way to both of the following:



         (a)   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated
crosswalk;



         (b)   Other traffic lawfully using the intersection.



      (3)   (a)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian
signal indication, as provided in R.C. § 4511.14, pedestrians facing a
circular green signal indication are permitted to proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. The pedestrian shall
yield the right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection or so
close as to create an immediate hazard at the time that the green signal
indication is first displayed.



         (b)   Pedestrians facing a green arrow signal
indication, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or
other traffic control device, shall not cross the roadway.



   (B)   Steady yellow signal indication.



      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular yellow signal
indication is thereby warned that the related green movement or the related
flashing arrow movement is being terminated or that a steady red signal
indication will be exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic
shall not enter the intersection. The provisions governing vehicular
operation under the movement being terminated shall continue to apply while
the steady circular yellow signal indication is displayed.



      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow arrow signal
indication is thereby warned that the related green arrow movement or the
related flashing arrow movement is being terminated. The provisions governing
vehicular operation under the movement being terminated shall continue to
apply while the steady yellow arrow signal indication is displayed.



      (3)   Pedestrians facing a steady circular yellow or yellow
arrow signal indication, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal
indication as provided in R.C. § 4511.14 or other traffic control device,
shall not start to cross the roadway.



   (C)   Steady red signal indication.



      (1)   (a)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red
signal indication, unless entering the intersection to make another movement
permitted by another signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line; but if there is no stop line, traffic shall stop before entering the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk,
then before entering the intersection; and shall remain stopped until a
signal indication to proceed is displayed except as provided in divisions
(C)(1), (C)(2), and (C)(3) of this section.



         (b)   Except when a traffic control device is in place
prohibiting a turn on red or a steady red arrow signal indication is
displayed, vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red signal indication
is permitted, after stopping, to enter the intersection to turn right, or to
turn left from a one-way street into a one-way street. The right to proceed
with the turn shall be subject to the provisions that are applicable after
making a stop at a stop sign.



      (2)   (a)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow
signal indication shall not enter the intersection to make the movement
indicated by the arrow and, unless entering the intersection to make another
movement permitted by another signal indication, shall stop at a clearly
marked stop line; but if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk
on the near side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, then
before entering the intersection; and shall remain stopped until a signal
indication or other traffic control device permitting the movement indicated
by such red arrow is displayed.



         (b)   When a traffic control device is in place
permitting a turn on a steady red arrow signal indication, vehicular traffic
facing a steady red arrow indication is permitted, after stopping, to enter
the intersection to turn right, or to turn left from a one-way street into a
one-way street. The right to proceed with the turn shall be limited to the
direction indicated by the arrow and shall be subject to the provisions that
are applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.



      (3)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal
indication as provided in R.C. § 4511.14 or other traffic control device,
pedestrians facing a steady circular red or steady red arrow signal
indication shall not enter the roadway.



      (4)   Local authorities by ordinance, or the Director of
Transportation on state highways, may prohibit a right or a left turn against
a steady red signal at any intersection, which shall be effective when signs
giving notice thereof are posted at the intersection.



   (D)   Flashing green signal indication. A flashing green signal
indication has no meaning and shall not be used.



   (E)   Flashing yellow signal indication.



      (1)   (a)   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an
intersection, facing a flashing circular yellow signal indication, is
permitted to cautiously enter the intersection to proceed straight through or
turn right or left or make a u-turn movement except as such movement is
modified by lane-use signs, turn prohibition signs, lane markings, roadway
design, separate turn signal indications, or other traffic control devices.
Such vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left or making a
u-turn movement, shall yield the right-of-way to both of the following:



            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated
crosswalk;



            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the
intersection.



         (b)   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or
making a u-turn to the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles
approaching from the opposite direction so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard during the time when such turning vehicle is moving across
or within the intersection.



      (2)   (a)   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an
intersection, facing a flashing yellow arrow signal indication, displayed
alone or in combination with another signal indication, is permitted to
cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such
arrow, or other such movement as is permitted by other signal indications
displayed at the same time. Such vehicular traffic, including vehicles
turning right or left or making a u-turn, shall yield the right-of-way to
both of the following:



            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated
crosswalk;



            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the
intersection.



         (b)   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or
making a u-turn to the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles
approaching from the opposite direction so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard during the time when such turning vehicle is moving across
or within the intersection.



      (3)   Pedestrians facing any flashing yellow signal indication
at an intersection, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal
indication or other traffic control device, are permitted to proceed across
the roadway within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. Pedestrians
shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at
the time that the flashing yellow signal indication is first displayed.



      (4)   When a flashing circular yellow signal indication is
displayed as a beacon to supplement another traffic control device, road
users are notified that there is a need to pay additional attention to the
message contained thereon or that the regulatory or warning requirements of
the other traffic control device, which might not be applicable at all times,
are currently applicable.



   (F)   Flashing red signal indication.



      (1)   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection,
facing a flashing circular red signal indication, shall stop at a clearly
marked stop line; but if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk
on the near side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, at the
point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the
intersection. The right to proceed shall be subject to the provisions that
are applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.



      (2)   Pedestrians facing any flashing red signal indication at
an intersection, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication
or other traffic control device, are permitted to proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. Pedestrians shall yield
the right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time
that the flashing red signal indication is first displayed.



      (3)   When a flashing circular red signal indication is
displayed as a beacon to supplement another traffic control device, road
users are notified that there is a need to pay additional attention to the
message contained thereon or that the regulatory requirements of the other
traffic control device, which might not be applicable at all times, are
currently applicable. Use of this signal indication shall be limited to
supplementing stop, do not enter, or wrong way signs, and to applications
where compliance with the supplemented traffic control device requires a stop
at a designated point.



   (G)   In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this
section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their
nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or
marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the
absence of any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal.



   (H)   This section does not apply at railroad grade crossings.
Conduct of drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall be
governed by R.C. §§ 4511.61 and 4511.62.



(R.C. § 4511.13)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.22  SIGNALS OVER REVERSIBLE LANES.



   The meanings of lane-use control signal indications are as follows:



   (A)   A steady downward green arrow. A road user is permitted to
drive in the lane over which the arrow signal indication is located.



   (B)   A steady yellow “X”. A road user is to prepare to vacate
the lane over which the signal indication is located because a lane control
change is being made to a steady red “X” signal indication.



   (C)   A steady white two-way left-turn arrow. A road user is
permitted to use a lane over which the signal indication is located for a
left turn, but not for through travel, with the understanding that common use
of the lane by oncoming road users for left turns also is permitted.



   (D)   A steady white one-way left-turn arrow. A road user is
permitted to use a lane over which the signal indication is located for a
left turn, without opposing turns in the same lane, but not for through
travel.



   (E)   A steady red “X”. A road user is not permitted to use the
lane over which the signal indication is located and that this signal
indication shall modify accordingly the meaning of other traffic controls
present.



(R.C. § 4511.131)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.23  AMBIGUOUS OR NON-WORKING TRAFFIC SIGNALS.



   (A)   The driver of a vehicle who approaches an intersection where
traffic is controlled by traffic control signals shall do all of the
following if the signal facing the driver exhibits no colored lights or
colored lighted arrows, exhibits a combination of such lights or arrows that
fails to clearly indicate the assignment of right-of-way, or, if the vehicle
is a bicycle, or an electric bicycle, the signals are otherwise
malfunctioning due to the failure of a vehicle detector to detect the
presence of the bicycle or electric bicycle:



      (1)   Stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, stop
before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if
none, stop before entering the intersection;



      (2)   Yield the right-of-way to all vehicles in the
intersection or approaching on an intersecting road, if the vehicles will
constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or
within the intersection or junction of roadways;



      (3)   Exercise ordinary care while proceeding through the
intersection.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.132)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.24  PEDESTRIAN-CONTROL SIGNALS.



   Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words
“walk” or “don't walk,” or the symbol of a walking person or an
upraised palm are in place, these signals shall indicate the following
instructions:



   (A)   A steady walking person signal indication, which symbolizes
“walk”, means that a pedestrian facing the signal indication is permitted
to start to cross the roadway in the direction of the signal indication,
possibly in conflict with turning vehicles. The pedestrian shall yield the
right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that
the walking person signal indication is first shown.



   (B)   A flashing upraised hand signal indication, which symbolizes
“don't walk”, means that a pedestrian shall not start to cross the
roadway in the direction of the signal indication, but that any pedestrian
who has already started to cross on a steady walking person signal indication
shall proceed to the far side of the traveled way of the street or highway,
unless otherwise directed by a traffic control device to proceed only to the
median of a divided highway or only to some other island or pedestrian refuge
area.



   (C)   A steady upraised hand signal indication means that a
pedestrian shall not enter the roadway in the direction of the signal
indication.



   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to invalidate the
continued use of pedestrian control signals utilizing the word “wait” if
those signals were installed prior to March 28, 1985.



   (E)   A flashing walking person signal indication has no meaning and
shall not be used.



(R.C. § 4511.14)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.25  RESERVED.



§ 70.26  UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS AND SIGNALS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or
in view of any highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device
which purports to be, is an imitation of, or resembles a traffic-control
device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement
of traffic, or hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any
traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal, and no person shall
place or maintain, nor shall any public authority permit, upon any highway
any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising. This
section does not prohibit either the erection upon private property adjacent
to highways of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that
cannot be mistaken for traffic-control devices, or the erection upon private
property of traffic-control devices by the owner of real property in
accordance with R.C. §§ 4511.211 and 4511.432.



      (2)   Every prohibited sign, signal, marking, or device is a
public nuisance, and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway may
remove the same or cause it to be removed.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.16)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.27  ALTERATION, DEFACEMENT, OR REMOVAL PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person, without lawful authority, shall do any of the
following:



      (1)   Knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy, or otherwise
improperly tamper with any traffic-control device, any railroad sign or
signal, or any inscription, shield, or insignia on the device, sign, or
signal, or any part of the device, sign, or signal;



      (2)   Knowingly drive upon or over any freshly applied
pavement marking material on the surface of a roadway while the marking
material is in an undried condition, and is marked by flags, markers, signs,
or other devices intended to protect it;



      (3)   Knowingly move, damage, destroy, or otherwise improperly
tamper with a manhole cover.



   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division,
whoever violates division (A)(1) or (3) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. If a violation of division (A)(1) or (3) of
this section creates a risk of physical harm to any person, the offender is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If a violation of division
(A)(1) or (3) of this section causes serious physical harm to property that
is owned, leased, or controlled by a state or local authority, the offender
is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates division (A)(2) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates division (A)(2) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the
offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle
or traffic offenses, whoever violates division (A)(2) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.17) 



§ 70.28  UNAUTHORIZED POSSESSION OR SALE OF DEVICES.



   (A)   As used in this section, TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE means any
sign, traffic control signal or other device conforming to and placed or
erected in accordance with the manual adopted under R.C. § 4511.09 by
authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose
of regulating, warning or guiding traffic, including signs denoting the names
of streets and highways, but does not mean any pavement marking.



   (B)   No individual shall buy or otherwise possess, or sell, a
traffic control device, except when one of the following applies:



      (1)   In the course of the individual's employment by the
state or a local authority for the express or implied purpose of
manufacturing, providing, erecting, moving or removing such a traffic control
device;



      (2)   In the course of the individual's employment by any
manufacturer of traffic control devices other than a state or local authority;



      (3)   For the purpose of demonstrating the design and function
of a traffic control device to state or local officials;



      (4)   When the traffic control device has been purchased from
the state or a local authority at a sale of property that is no longer needed
or is unfit for use; or



      (5)   When the traffic control device has been properly
purchased from a manufacturer for use on private property and the person
possessing the device has a sales receipt for the device or other
acknowledgment of sale issued by the manufacturer.



   (C)   This section does not preclude, and shall not be construed as
precluding, prosecution for theft in violation of R.C. § 2913.02, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or for receiving stolen
property in violation of R.C. § 2913.51, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.18)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.29  SIGNAL PREEMPTION DEVICES; PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall possess a portable signal preemption
device.



      (2)   No person shall use a portable signal preemption device
to affect the operation of a traffic- control device.



   (B)   Division (A)(1) of this section does not apply to any of the
following persons and division (A)(2) of this section does not apply to any
of the following persons when responding to an emergency call:



      (1)   A peace officer, as defined in R.C. § 109.17(A)(1),
(A)(12), (A)(14), or (A)(19);



      (2)   A state highway patrol officer;



      (3)   A person while occupying a public safety vehicle as
defined in R.C. § 4511.01(E)(1), (E)(3), or (E)(4).



   (C)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) of this section is guilty of
a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Whoever violates division (A)(2) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.



   (D)   As used in this section, PORTABLE SIGNAL PREEMPTION DEVICE
means a device that, if activated by a person, is capable of changing a
traffic-control signal to green out of sequence.



(R.C. § 4511.031)



IMPOUNDMENT GUIDELINES



§ 70.40  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish guidelines for the
officer as to when motor vehicles should be impounded. In addition the
purpose of this section is to provide security for motor vehicles belonging
to persons who have been arrested. It is of the utmost importance that
vehicles belonging to, or which have been driven by persons arrested, are not
left sitting on the streets creating traffic hazards or potential security
liability problems for the village. Therefore it is necessary for the officer
to take steps to make sure that such vehicles are securely kept.



(Ord. 94-8-1, passed 8-16-94)



§ 70.41  DISPOSITION OF VEHICLE WHEN PERSON ARRESTED; VEHICLE REPORTED
STOLEN.



   (A)   When a person is arrested for a crime which is a felony, which
involves the use of a motor vehicle, that motor vehicle shall be impounded
and held by the Police Department until such time that  the motor vehicle
can be disposed of according to law.



   (B)   When a person who is operating a motor vehicle has been
arrested and that person has been taken into custody for the purpose of
incarceration the motor vehicle which the arrested person had been operating
shall be impounded and held for safe keeping.



   (C)   When a person has been arrested for a charge of driving a
motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol or driving a motor vehicle
while under suspension that motor vehicle shall be impounded for the purposes
of safe keeping and held until such a time as a licensed driver who is able
to legally operate a motor vehicle calls for the vehicle. The vehicle may
then be released to the owner or an authorized agent of the owner.



   (D)   Any motor vehicle which has been reported as stolen and
recovered by a member of this department shall be impounded and held for safe
keeping until such a time as the rightful owner claims the vehicle.



(Ord. 94-8-1, passed 8-16-94)



§ 70.42     IMPOUNDING, SAFE KEEPING, STORAGE AND RELEASE PROCEDURES.



   When motor vehicles are impounded for any reason by members of the
Police Department such motor vehicles will be handled as follows.



   (A)   Vehicles which are of an evidential value will be stored in
the garage at the Police Department. These vehicles will be held inside until
they are processed and no longer have any evidential value.



   (B)   Vehicles which have no evidential value will be stored in the
locked fence at the Waste Water Treatment Plant.



   (C)   When vehicles are impounded by members of the Police
Department (for any reason) the impounding officer will make a complete
inventory search of the vehicle, prior to its impound. A complete list of all
items found in the vehicle will be made and all items of evidence and/or
contraband found in the vehicle will be seized. These items of evidence
and/or contraband will be placed in the property room of the Police
Department.



   (D)   An evidence/property form will be completed on all vehicles
that are impounded. This evidence/property form will be turned over to the
Police Department Evidence Officer.



   (E)   Photographs of all sides of the vehicle will be taken prior to
its being impounded. Photographs will be taken of all evidence and/or
contraband in the vehicle prior to its removal from the vehicle.



   (F)   Upon release of any vehicle impounded the person requesting
the vehicle must show proof of ownership and proper vehicle registration is
necessary, also the person requesting the vehicle must pay any tow bills
prior to vehicle release. A storage fee will also be paid prior to release of
the vehicle. The storage fees are as follows: $10 per day for inside storage,
and $5 per day for outside storage. The impounding officer, if possible, will
inform the owner of the vehicle the per day storage fee at the time that the
vehicle is impounded. In addition, the officer will have the person to whom
the vehicle is being released sign the property release form.



(Ord. 94-8-1, passed 8-16-94)



§ 70.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this traffic code for which
no penalty otherwise is provided in the section violated is guilty of one of
the following:



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (A)(2) or
(A)(3) of this section, a minor misdemeanor;



      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor
vehicle or traffic offense, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree;



      (3)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.99(A))



   (B)   Violations committed while distracted.



      (1)   As used in this section and each section referenced in
division (B)(2) of this section, all of the following apply:



         (a)   "Distracted" means doing either of the following
while operating a vehicle:



            1.   Using a handheld electronic wireless
communications device, as defined in R.C. § 4511.204, except when utilizing
any of the following:



               a.   The device's speakerphone function;



               b.   A wireless technology standard for
exchanging data over short distances;



               c.   A "voice-operated or hands-free" device
that allows the person to use the electronic wireless communications device
without the use of either hand except to activate, deactivate, or initiate a
feature or function;



               d.   Any device that is physically or
electronically integrated into the motor vehicle.



            2.   Engaging in any activity that is not
necessary to the operation of a vehicle and impairs, or reasonably would be
expected to impair, the ability of the operator to drive the vehicle safely.



         (b)   "Distracted" does not include operating a motor
vehicle while wearing an earphone or earplug over or in both ears at the same
time. A person who so wears earphones or earplugs may be charged with a
violation of R.C. § 4511.84, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.



         (c)   "Distracted" does not include conducting any
activity while operating a utility service vehicle or a vehicle for or on
behalf of a utility, provided that the driver of the vehicle is acting in
response to an emergency, power outage, or a circumstance affecting the
health or safety of individuals. As used in this division (B)(1)(c):



            UTILITY means an entity specified in R.C. §
4905.03(A), (C), (D), (E), or (G).



            UTILITY SERVICE VEHICLE means a vehicle owned or
operated by a utility.



      (2)   If an offender violates R.C. § 4511.03, 4511.051,
4511.12, 4511.121, 4511.132, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.213, 4511.22, 4511.23,
4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32,
4511.33, 4511.34, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40,
4511.41, 4511.42, 4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.451, 4511.46,
4511.47, 4511.54, 4511.55, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59, 4511.60, 4511.61,
4511.64, 4511.71, 4511.711, 4511.712, 4511.713, 4511.72, or 4511.73, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
violation, the offender is subject to the applicable penalty for the
violation and, notwithstanding R.C. § 2929.28, is subject to an additional
fine of not more than $100 as follows:



         (a)   1.   Subject to Traffic Rule 13, if a law
enforcement officer issues an offender a ticket, citation, or summons for a
violation of any of the aforementioned sections of the Ohio Revised Code, or
any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that indicates that the
offender was distracted while committing the violation and that the
distracting activity was a contributing factor to the commission of the
violation, the offender may enter a written plea of guilty and waive the
offender's right to contest the ticket, citation, or summons in a trial
provided that the offender pays the total amount of the fine established for
the violation and pays the additional fine of $100.



            2.   In lieu of payment of the additional fine of
$100, the offender instead may elect to attend a distracted driving safety
course, the duration and contents of which shall be established by the Ohio
Director of Public Safety. If the offender attends and successfully completes
the course, the offender shall be issued written evidence that the offender
successfully completed the course. The offender shall be required to pay the
total amount of the fine established for the violation, but shall not be
required to pay the additional fine of $100, so long as the offender submits
to the court both the offender's payment in full and such written evidence.



         (b)   1.   If the offender appears in person to
contest the ticket, citation, or summons in a trial and the offender pleads
guilty to or is convicted of the violation, the court, in addition to all
other penalties provided by law, may impose the applicable penalty for the
violation and may impose the additional fine of not more than $100.



            2.   If the court imposes upon the offender the
applicable penalty for the violation and an additional fine of not more than
$100, the court shall inform the offender that, in lieu of payment of the
additional fine of not more than $100, the offender instead may elect to
attend the distracted driving safety course described in division (B)(2)(a)
of this section. If the offender elects the course option and attends and
successfully completes the course, the offender shall be issued written
evidence that the offender successfully completed the course. The offender
shall be required to pay the total amount of the fine established for the
violation, but shall not be required to pay the additional fine of not more
than $100, so long as the offender submits to the court the offender's
payment and such written evidence.



(R.C. § 4511.991)



   (C)   Whoever is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor or
minor misdemeanor shall be sentenced in accordance with § 130.99.



Cross-reference:



   Imposing sentence for misdemeanor, see § 130.18



   Multiple sentences, see § 130.19



Statutory reference:



   Electronically monitored house arrest, detention, and early release,
see R.C. § 2929.23



   Reimbursement for costs of confinement, see R.C. §§ 2929.35 et seq.



   Where imprisoned related to offense, see R.C. § 2929.221



CHAPTER 71:  LICENSING PROVISIONS



Section




Motor Vehicle Licensing




   71.01   Display of license plates or validation stickers;
registration



   71.02   Improper use of noncommercial motor vehicle



   71.03   Operating motor vehicle ordered immobilized; forfeiture



   71.04   Operation or sale without certificate of title



   71.05   Display of certificate of registration



   71.06   Use of unauthorized plates



   71.07   Operating without dealer or manufacturer license plates




Driver's Licenses




   71.10   Prohibited acts



   71.11   Permitting minor to operate vehicle prohibited; temporary
instruction permit; probationary license



   71.12   License required as driver or commercial driver on public or
private property; nonresident exemption



   71.13   Employment of a minor to operate a taxicab prohibited



   71.14   Restriction against owner lending vehicle for use of another



   71.15   Suspension of driver's licenses; license suspended by court
of record



   71.16   Display of license



   71.17   Prohibition against false statements



   71.18   Driving under suspension or in violation of license
restriction



   71.19   Operating motor vehicle or motorcycle without valid license



   71.20   Driving under OVI suspension



   71.21   Driving under financial responsibility law suspension or
cancellation; driving under a nonpayment of judgment suspension



   71.22   Failure to reinstate license




Commercial Driver's Licenses




   71.25   Definitions



   71.26   Use of actual gross weight in lieu of rating



   71.27   Prohibited acts



   71.28   Prerequisites to operation of commercial motor vehicle



   71.29   Physical qualification to operate commercial motor vehicles



   71.30   Criminal offenses



   71.31   Application of federal regulations



   71.32   Employment of drivers of commercial vehicles




Annual License Tax




   71.45   Tax on operation of motor vehicles



 



   71.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Bicycle licenses, see § 75.08



Statutory reference:



   Commercial driver's licenses, see R.C. Chapter 4506



   Driver's licenses, see R.C. Chapter 4507



   Motor vehicle licensing, see R.C. Chapter 4504



   Municipal motor vehicle license tax, see R.C. § 4504.06



   Notice of arrest of certain commercial drivers, see R.C. § 5577.14



   Proof of financial responsibility required; civil penalties; peace
officers as agents of Registrar of Motor Vehicles; procedures and rules, see
R.C. §§ 4509.101 et seq.



   Suspension and revocation of driver's licenses, see R.C. Chapter 4510



   Suspension of driver's licenses; municipal power to suspend for a
period not to exceed time permitted or required by state law, see R.C. §
4510.05



MOTOR VEHICLE LICENSING



§ 71.01  DISPLAY OF LICENSE PLATES OR VALIDATION STICKERS; REGISTRATION.



   (A)   (1)   No person who is the owner or operator of a motor
vehicle shall fail to display in plain view on the front and rear of the
motor vehicle a license plate that bears the distinctive number and
registration mark assigned to the motor vehicle by the Ohio Director of
Public Safety, including any county identification sticker and any validation
sticker issued under R.C. §§ 4503.19 and 4503.191, except as follows:



         (a)   A manufacturer of motor vehicles or dealer
therein, the holder of an in transit permit, and the owner or operator of a
motorcycle, motorized bicycle or moped, motor-driven cycle or motor scooter,
autocycle, cab-enclosed motorcycle, manufactured home, mobile home, trailer,
or semitrailer shall display a license plate on the rear only.



         (b)   A motor vehicle that is issued two license plates
shall display the validation sticker only on the rear license plate, except
that a commercial tractor that does not receive an apportioned license plate
under the international registration plan shall display the validation
sticker on the front of the commercial tractor.



         (c)   An apportioned vehicle receiving an apportioned
license plate under the international registration plan shall display the
license plate only on the front of a commercial tractor and on the rear of
all other vehicles.



      (2)   All license plates shall be securely fastened so as not
to swing, and shall not be covered by any material that obstructs their
visibility.



      (3)   No person to whom a temporary license placard or
windshield sticker has been issued for the use of a motor vehicle under R.C.
§ 4503.182, and no operator of that motor vehicle, shall fail to display the
temporary license placard in plain view from the rear of the vehicle either
in the rear window or on an external rear surface of the motor vehicle, or
fail to display the windshield sticker in plain view on the rear window of
the motor vehicle. No temporary license placard or windshield sticker shall
be covered by any material that obstructs its visibility.



      (4)   A law enforcement officer shall only issue a ticket,
citation, or summons, or cause the arrest or commence a prosecution, for the
failure to display a license plate in plain view on the front of a parked
motor vehicle if the officer first determines that another offense has
occurred and either places the operator or vehicle owner under arrest or
issues a ticket, citation, or summons to the operator or vehicle owner for
the other offense.



(R.C. § 4503.21(A), (B))



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided by R.C. §§ 4503.103, 4503.173,
4503.41, 4503.43, and 4503.46, no person who is the owner or chauffeur of a
motor vehicle operated or driven upon the public roads or highways shall fail
to file annually the application for registration or to pay the tax therefor.



(R.C. § 4503.11(A))



   (C)    (1)   Within 30 days of becoming a resident of this state,
any person who owns a motor vehicle operated or driven upon the public roads
or highways shall register the vehicle in this state. If such a person fails
to register a vehicle owned by the person, the person shall not operate any
motor vehicle in this state under a license issued by another state.



      (2)   For purposes of division (C)(1) of this section,
RESIDENT means any person to whom any of the following applies:



         (a)   The person maintains their principal residence in
this state and does not reside in this state as a result of the person’s
active service in the United States armed forces.



         (b)   The person is determined by the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles to be a resident in accordance with standards adopted by the
Registrar under R.C. § 4507.01.



(R.C. § 4503.111(A), (C))



   (D)    Upon the transfer of ownership of a motor vehicle, the
registration of the motor vehicle expires, and the original owner immediately
shall remove the license plates from the motor vehicle, except as otherwise
provided in R.C. § 4503.12.



(R.C. § 4503.12(A))



   (E)   No person shall operate or drive upon the highways of this
municipality a motor vehicle acquired from a former owner who has registered
the motor vehicle, while the motor vehicle displays the distinctive number or
identification mark assigned to it upon its original registration.



(R.C. § 4549.11(A))



   (F)   No person who is the owner of a motor vehicle and a resident
of this state shall operate or drive the motor vehicle upon the highways of
this municipality while it displays a distinctive number or identification
mark issued by or under the authority of another state, without complying
with the laws of this state relating to the registration and identification
of motor vehicles.



(R.C. § 4549.12(A))



   (G)   (1)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division
(G)(1)(b), whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.



         (b)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section by
failing to display a license plate in plain view on the front of a motor
vehicle as required under division (A) of this section while the motor
vehicle is otherwise legally parked is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and may
be fined not more than $100. A person who is subject to the penalty
prescribed in this division (G)(1)(b) is not subject to the charging of
points under R.C. § 4510.036.



         (c)   The offense established under division (A) of this
section is a strict liability offense and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The
designation of this offense as a strict liability offense shall not be
construed to imply that any other offense, for which there is no specified
degree of culpability, is not a strict liability offense.



(R.C. § 4503.21(C))



      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty
of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4503.11(D))



      (3)   (a)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section
is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



         (b)   The offense established under division (G)(3)(a)
of this section is a strict liability offense and strict liability is a
culpable mental state for purposes of R.C. § 2901.20. The designation of
this offense as a strict liability offense shall not be construed to imply
that any other offense, for which there is no specified degree of
culpability, is not a strict liability offense.



(R.C. § 4503.111(B))



      (4)   Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 4503.12(D))



      (5)   Whoever violates division (E) of this section is guilty
of operation of a motor vehicle bearing license plates or an identification
mark issued to another, a minor misdemeanor on a first offense and a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree on each subsequent offense.



(R.C. § 4549.11(B))



      (6)   Whoever violates division (F) of this section is guilty
of illegal operation by a resident of this state of a motor vehicle bearing
the distinctive number or identification mark issued by a foreign
jurisdiction, a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4549.12(B))  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.02  IMPROPER USE OF NONCOMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE.



   (A)   No person shall use a motor vehicle registered as a
noncommercial motor vehicle for other than the purposes set forth in R.C. §
4501.01.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 4503.05)



§ 71.03  OPERATING MOTOR VEHICLE ORDERED IMMOBILIZED; FORFEITURE.



   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle or permit the
operation of a motor vehicle upon any public or private property used by the
public for vehicular travel or parking knowing or having reasonable cause to
believe that the motor vehicle has been ordered immobilized pursuant to an
immobilization order issued under R.C. § 4503.233.



   (B)   A motor vehicle that is operated by a person during a
violation of division (A) of this section shall be criminally forfeited to
the state in accordance with the procedures contained in R.C. § 4503.234.



   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree.



(R.C. § 4503.236)



§ 71.04  OPERATION OR SALE WITHOUT CERTIFICATE OF TITLE.



   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Operate in this municipality a motor vehicle for which a
certificate of title is required without having that certificate in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 4505 or, if a physical certificate of title has
not been issued for a motor vehicle, operate the motor vehicle in this state
knowing that the ownership information relating to the vehicle has not been
entered into the automated title processing system by a Clerk of a Court of
Common Pleas;



      (2)   Display or display for sale or sell as a dealer or
acting on behalf of a dealer, a motor vehicle without having obtained a
manufacturer's or importer's certificate, a certificate of title, or an
assignment of a certificate of title for it as provided in R.C. Chapter 4505;



      (3)   Fail to surrender any certificate of title or any
certificate of registration or license plates upon cancellation of the same
by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles and notice of the cancellation as
prescribed in R.C. Chapter 4505;



      (4)   Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a Clerk of
a Court of Common Pleas as provided in R.C. Chapter 4505 in case of the
destruction or dismantling or change of a motor vehicle in such respect that
it is not the motor vehicle described in the certificate of title;



      (5)   Violate any rules adopted pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4505;



      (6)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapters 4505 and
4517, sell at wholesale a motor vehicle ownership of which is not evidenced
by an Ohio certificate of title, or the current certificate of title issued
for the motor vehicle, or the manufacturer's certificate of origin, and all
title assignments that evidence the seller's ownership of the motor vehicle,
and an odometer disclosure statement that complies with R.C. § 4505.06 and
subchapter IV of the “Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act,” 86
Stat. 961 (1972), 15 U.S.C. § 1981;



      (7)   Operate in this state a motor vehicle knowing that the
certificate of title to the vehicle or ownership of the vehicle as otherwise
reflected in the automated title processing system has been canceled.



   (B)   This section does not apply to persons engaged in the business
of warehousing or transporting motor vehicles for the purpose of salvage
disposition.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than
$200, imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both.



(R.C. § 4505.18)



§ 71.05  DISPLAY OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.



   (A)   (1)   The operator of a COMMERCIAL CAR, as defined in R.C.
§ 4501.01, when the commercial car is required to be registered under state
law, shall, when operating the commercial car, trailer or semitrailer on the
streets, roads, or highways of this municipality display inside or on the
vehicle the certificate of registration for the commercial car, trailer or
semitrailer provided for in R.C. § 4503.19, or shall carry the certificate
on the operator's person and display it upon the demand of any peace officer.



      (2)   Every person operating a commercial car, trailer or
semitrailer required to be registered under state law shall permit the
inspection of the certificate of registration upon demand of any peace
officer.



   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
commercial car certificate of registration violation, a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4549.18)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.06  USE OF UNAUTHORIZED PLATES.



   (A)   No person shall operate or drive a motor vehicle upon the
public roads and highways in this municipality if it displays a license plate
or a distinctive number or identification mark that meets any of the
following criteria:



      (1)   It is fictitious;



      (2)   It is a counterfeit or an unlawfully made copy of any
distinctive number or identification mark;



      (3)   It belongs to another motor vehicle, provided that this
section does not apply to a motor vehicle that is operated on the public
roads and highways in this municipality when the motor vehicle displays
license plates that originally were issued for a motor vehicle that
previously was owned by the same person who owns the motor vehicle that is
operated on the public roads and highways in this municipality during the
30-day period described in R.C. § 4503.12(A)(4).



   (B)   A person who fails to comply with the transfer of registration
provisions of R.C. § 4503.12 and is charged with a violation of that section
shall not be charged with a violation of this section.



   (C)   Whoever violates division (A)(1), (2), or (3) of this section
is guilty of operating a motor vehicle bearing an invalid license plate or
identification mark, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense
and a misdemeanor of the third degree on each subsequent offense.



(R.C. § 4549.08)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.07  OPERATING WITHOUT DEALER OR MANUFACTURER LICENSE PLATES.



   (A)   No person shall operate or cause to be operated upon a public
road or highway a motor vehicle of a manufacturer or dealer unless the
vehicle carries and displays two placards, except as provided in R.C. §
4503.21, issued by the Director of Public Safety that bear the registration
number of its manufacturer or dealer.



   (B)    Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
illegal operation of a manufacturer's or dealer's motor vehicle, a minor
misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4549.10)  Penalty, see § 70.99



DRIVER'S LICENSES



§ 71.10  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Display or cause or permit to be displayed, or possess
any identification card, driver's or commercial driver's license, temporary
instruction permit, or commercial driver's license temporary instruction
permit knowing the same to be fictitious, or to have been canceled,
suspended, or altered;



      (2)   Lend to a person not entitled thereto, or knowingly
permit a person not entitled thereto to use any identification card, driver's
or commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit or commercial
driver's license temporary instruction permit issued to the person so lending
or permitting the use thereof;



      (3)   Display, or represent as one's own, any identification
card, driver's or commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit,
or commercial driver's license temporary instruction permit not issued to the
person so displaying the same;



      (4)   Fail to surrender to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles,
upon the Registrar's demand, any identification card, driver's or commercial
driver's license, temporary instruction permit, or commercial driver's
license temporary instruction permit that has been suspended or canceled;



      (5)   In any application for an identification card, driver's
or commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, or commercial
driver's license temporary instruction permit or any renewal or duplicate
thereof, knowingly conceal a material fact or present any physician's
statement required under R.C. §§ 4507.08 or 4507.081 when knowing the same
to be false or fictitious.



   (B)   Whoever violates any division of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 4507.30)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.11  PERMITTING MINOR TO OPERATE VEHICLE PROHIBITED; TEMPORARY
INSTRUCTION PERMIT; PROBATIONARY LICENSE.



   (A)   No person shall cause or knowingly permit any minor to drive a
motor vehicle upon a highway as an operator, unless the minor has first
obtained a license or permit to drive a motor vehicle under R.C. Chapter 4507.



(R.C. § 4507.31(A))



   (B)   (1)   No holder of a temporary instruction permit issued
under R.C. § 4507.05(A) shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking in violation of the conditions established under R.C. §
4507.05(A).



      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (B)(3)(b) of
this section, no holder of a temporary instruction permit that is issued
under R.C. § 4507.05(A) and that is issued on or after July 1, 1998, and who
has not attained the age of 18 years, shall operate a motor vehicle upon a
highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m.



         (b)   The holder of a temporary instruction permit
issued under R.C. § 4507.05(A) on or after July 1, 1998, who has not
attained the age of 18 years, may operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposed of vehicular
travel or parking between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. if, at the time
of such operation, the holder is accompanied by the holder's parent,
guardian, or custodian, and the parent, guardian, or custodian holds a
current valid driver's or commercial driver's license issued by this state
and is actually occupying a seat beside the permit holder.



(R.C. § 4507.05(F))



   (C)   (1)   (a)   No holder of a probationary driver’s
license who has held the license for less than 12 months shall operate a
motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used by the
public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking between the hours of
midnight and 6:00 a.m. unless the holder is accompanied by the holder’s
parent or guardian.



         (b)   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who
has held the license for 12 months or longer shall operate a motor vehicle
upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and
5:00 a.m. unless the holder is accompanied by the holder’s parent or
guardian.



      (2)   (a)   Subject to division (E)(1) of this section,
division (C)(1)(a) of this section does not apply to the holder of a
probationary driver’s license who is doing either of the following:



            1.   Traveling to or from work between the hours
of midnight and 6:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s
immediate possession written documentation from the holder’s employer.



            2.   Traveling to or from an official function
sponsored by the school the holder attends between the hours of midnight and
6:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s immediate
possession written documentation from an appropriate official of the school;



            3.   Traveling to or from an official religious
event between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m., provided that the holder
has in the holder’s immediate possession written documentation from an
appropriate official affiliated with the event.



         (b)   Division (C)(1)(b) of this section does not apply
to the holder of a probationary driver’s license who is doing either of the
following:



            1.   Traveling to or from work between the hours
of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s
immediate possession written documentation from the holder’s employer.



            2.   Traveling to or from an official function
sponsored by the school the holder attends between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and
5:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s immediate
possession written documentation from an appropriate official of the school;



            3.   Traveling to or from an official religious
event between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., provided that the holder
has in the holder’s immediate possession written documentation from an
appropriate official affiliated with the event.



      (3)   An employer, school official, or official affiliated
with a religious event is not liable in damages in a civil action for any
injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly arises from, or
is related to, the fact that the employer, school official, or official
affiliated with a religious event provided the holder of a probationary
driver’s license with the written documentation described in division
(C)(2) of this section. The Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall make available
at no cost a form to serve as the written documentation described in division
(C)(2) of this section, and employers, school officials, officials affiliated
with religious events, and holders of probationary driver’s licenses may
utilize that form or may choose to utilize any other written documentation to
meet the requirements of that division.



      (4)   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who has
held the license for less than 12 months shall operate a motor vehicle upon a
highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking with more than one person who is not a family
member occupying the vehicle unless the probationary license holder is
accompanied by the probationary license holder’s parent, guardian, or
custodian.



   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to a violation of division
(C)(1)(a) or (C)(1)(b) of this section if, at the time of the violation, an
emergency existed that required the holder of the probationary driver’s
license to operate a motor vehicle in violation of division (C)(1)(a) or
(C)(1)(b) of this section or the holder was an emancipated minor.



   (E)   (1)   If a person is issued a probationary driver’s
license prior to attaining the age of 17 years and the person pleads guilty
to, is convicted of, or is adjudicated in juvenile court of having committed
a moving violation during the six-month period commencing on the date on
which the person is issued the probationary driver’s license, the court
with jurisdiction over the violation may order that the holder must be
accompanied by the holder’s parent or guardian whenever the holder is
operating a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property
used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking for a period
not to exceed six months or the date the holder attains the age of 17 years,
whichever occurs first.



      (2)   Any person who is subject to the operating restrictions
established under division (E)(1) of this section as a result of a first
moving violation may petition the court for driving privileges without being
accompanied by the holder’s parent or guardian during the period of time
determined by the court under that division. In granting the driving
privileges, the court shall specify the purposes of the privileges and shall
issue the person appropriate forms setting forth the privileges granted. If a
person is convicted of, pleads guilty to, or is adjudicated in juvenile court
of having committed a second or subsequent moving violation, the court with
jurisdiction over the violation may terminate any driving privileges
previously granted under this division.



      (3)   No person shall violate any operating restriction
imposed under division (E)(1) or (E)(2) of this section.



   (F)   No holder of a probationary license shall operate a motor
vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public
for purposes of vehicular travel or parking unless the total number of
occupants of the vehicle does not exceed the total number of occupant
restraining devices originally installed in the motor vehicle by its
manufacturer, and each occupant of the vehicle is wearing all of the
available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device.



   (G)   A restricted license may be issued to a person who is 14 or 15
years of age under proof of hardship satisfactory to the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles.



   (H)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary,
no law enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a motor vehicle being
operated on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole
purpose of determining whether each occupant of the motor vehicle is wearing
all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining
device as required by this section, or for the sole purpose of issuing a
ticket, citation or summons if that requirement has been or is being
violated, or for causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a
person for a violation of that requirement.



   (I)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no
law enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a motor vehicle being
operated on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole
purpose of determining whether a violation of division (C)(1)(a) or (C)(1)(b)
of this section has been or is being committed or for the sole purpose of
issuing a ticket, citation or summons for such a violation or for causing the
arrest or commencing a prosecution of a person for such a violation.



   (J)   As used in this section:



      FAMILY MEMBER of a probationary license holder includes any of
the following:



         (a)   A spouse;



         (b)   A child or stepchild;



         (c)   A parent, stepparent, grandparent, or
parent-in-law;



         (d)   An aunt or uncle;



         (e)   A sibling, whether of the whole or half blood or
by adoption, a brother-in-law, or a sister-in-law;



         (f)   A son or daughter of the probationary license
holder’s stepparent if the stepparent has not adopted the probationary
license holder;



         (g)   An eligible adult, as defined in R.C. § 4507.05.



      MOVING VIOLATION means any violation of any statute or ordinance
that regulates the operation of vehicles on the highways or streets. MOVING
VIOLATION does not include a violation of R.C. § 4513.263 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, or a violation of any statute or ordinance
regulating pedestrians or the parking of vehicles, vehicle size or load
limitations, vehicle fitness requirements, or vehicle registration.



      OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICE has the same meaning as in R.C. §
4513.263.



(R.C. § 4507.071(B) - (I))



   (K)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 4507.31(B))



      (2)    Whoever violates divisions (B), (C)(1), (C)(4), (E)(3),
or (F) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. §§ 4507.05(I), 4507.071(J))  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.12  LICENSE REQUIRED AS DRIVER OR COMMERCIAL DRIVER ON PUBLIC OR
PRIVATE PROPERTY; NONRESIDENT EXEMPTION.



   (A)   (1)   (a)   No person shall permit the operation of a
motor vehicle upon any public or private property used by the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking, knowing the operator does not have a
valid driver’s license issued to the operator by the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles under R.C. Chapter 4507 or a valid commercial driver’s license
issued under R.C. Chapter 4506. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, whoever violates this division is guilty of an unclassified
misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender
shall be sentenced pursuant to § 130.18, § 130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to
2929.28, except that the offender shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the
offender shall not be sentenced to a community residential sanction pursuant
to § 130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding § 130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and
R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to $1,000; and,
notwithstanding § 130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender
may be ordered pursuant to § 130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a
term of community service of up to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to
complete a term of community service imposed by the court may be punished as
indirect criminal contempt under R.C. § 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the
underlying case.



         (b)   If, within three years of the offense, the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more
violations of this section or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
the offense is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (2)   No person shall receive a driver’s license, or a
motorcycle operator’s endorsement of a driver’s or commercial driver’s
license, unless and until the person surrenders to the Registrar all valid
licenses issued to the person by another jurisdiction recognized by this
state. The Registrar shall report the surrender of a license to the issuing
authority, together with information that a license is now issued in this
state. The Registrar shall destroy any such license that is not returned to
the issuing authority. No person shall be permitted to have more than one
valid license at any time.



(R.C. § 4507.02(A))



   (B)   (1)   No person shall be required to obtain a driver’s or
commercial driver’s license for the purpose of temporarily driving,
operating, drawing, moving, or propelling a road roller or road machinery
upon a street or highway.



      (2)   No person shall be required to obtain a driver’s or
commercial driver’s license for the purpose of temporarily driving,
operating, drawing, moving, or propelling any agricultural tractor or
implement of husbandry upon a street or highway at a speed of 25 miles per
hour or less.



      (3)   No person shall drive, operate, draw, move, or propel
any agricultural tractor or implement of husbandry upon a street or highway
at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour unless the person has a current,
valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license.



      (4)   No person having a valid driver’s or commercial
driver’s license shall be required to have a motorcycle operator’s
endorsement to operate a motorcycle having three wheels with a motor of not
more than 50 cubic centimeters piston displacement.



      (5)   No person having a valid driver’s or commercial
driver’s license shall be required to have a motorcycle operator’s
endorsement to operate an autocycle or a cab-enclosed motorcycle.



      (6)   Every person on active duty in the military or naval
forces of the United States, when furnished with a driver’s permit and when
operating an official motor vehicle in connection with such duty, is exempt
from the license requirements of R.C. Chapters 4506 and 4507. Every person on
active duty in the military or naval forces of the United States or in
service with the peace corps, volunteers in service to America, or the
foreign service of the United States, is exempt from the license requirements
of such sections for the period of the person’s active duty or service and
for six months thereafter, provided such person was a licensee under such
sections at the time the person commenced the person’s active duty or
service. This section does not prevent such a person or the person’s spouse
or dependent from making an application, as provided in R.C. § 4507.10(C),
for the renewal of a driver’s license or motorcycle operator’s
endorsement or as provided in R.C. § 4506.14 for the renewal of a commercial
driver’s license during the period of the person’s active duty or service.



      (7)   Whoever violates division (B)(3) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 4507.03)



   (C)    Nonresidents, permitted to drive upon the highways of their
own state, may operate any motor vehicle upon any highway in this state
without examination or license under R.C. §§ 4507.01 to 4507.39, inclusive,
upon condition that such nonresident may be required at any time or place to
prove lawful possession or their right to operate such motor vehicle, and to
establish proper identity.



(R.C. § 4507.04) 



   (D)   Surrender of driver's license from another state.



      (1)   Any person who becomes a resident of this state, within
30 days of becoming a resident, shall surrender any driver's license issued
by another state to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a deputy registrar. If
such a person intends to operate a motor vehicle upon the public roads or
highways, the person shall apply for a driver's license in this state. If the
person fails to apply for a driver's license within 30 days of becoming a
resident, the person shall not operate any motor vehicle in this state under
a license issued by another state.



      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates division (D)(1) of this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



         (b)   The offense established under division (D)(2)(a)
of this section is a strict liability offense and strict liability is a
culpable mental state for purposes of R.C. § 2901.20. The designation of
this offense as a strict liability offense shall not be construed to imply
that any other offense, for which there is no specified degree of
culpability, is not a strict liability offense.



      (3)   For purposes of division (D)(1) of this section,
"resident" means any person to whom any of the following applies:



         (a)   The person maintains their principal residence in
this state and does not reside in this state as a result of the person's
active service in the United States armed forces.



         (b)   The person is determined by the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles to be a resident in accordance with standards adopted by the
Registrar under R.C. § 4507.01.



(R.C. § 4507.04)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.13  EMPLOYMENT OF A MINOR TO OPERATE A TAXICAB PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Notwithstanding the definition of CHAUFFEUR in R.C. §
4501.01, no person shall employ any minor for the purpose of operating a
taxicab.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.



(R.C. § 4507.321)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.14  RESTRICTION AGAINST OWNER LENDING VEHICLE FOR USE OF ANOTHER.



   (A)   No person shall permit a motor vehicle owned by the person or
under the person's control to be driven by another if any of the following
apply:



      (1)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe
that the other person does not have a valid driver's or commercial driver's
license or permit or valid nonresident driving privileges.



      (2)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe
that the other person's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or
nonresident operating privileges have been suspended or canceled under R.C.
Chapter 4510 or any other provision of the Revised Code.



      (3)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe
that the other person's act of driving the motor vehicle would violate any
prohibition contained in R.C. Chapter 4509.



      (4)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe
that the other person's act of driving would violate R.C. § 4511.19 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



      (5)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe
that the vehicle is the subject of an immobilization waiver order issued
under R.C. § 4503.235 and the other person is prohibited from operating the
vehicle under that order.



   (B)   Without limiting or precluding the consideration of any other
evidence in determining whether a violation of division (A)(1), (2), (3),
(4), or (5) of this section has occurred, it shall be prima-facie evidence
that the offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the operator
of the motor vehicle owned by the offender or under the offender's control is
in a category described in division (A)(1), (2), (3), (4), or (5) of this
section if any of the following applies:



      (1)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category
described in division (A)(1), (3), or (5) of this section, the offender and
the operator of the motor vehicle reside in the same household and are
related by consanguinity or affinity.



      (2)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category
described in division (A)(2) of this section, the offender and the operator
of the motor vehicle reside in the same household, and the offender knows or
has reasonable cause to believe that the operator has been charged with or
convicted of any violation of law or ordinance, or has committed any other
act or omission, that would or could result in the suspension or cancellation
of the operator's license, permit, or privilege.



      (3)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category
described in division (A)(4) of this section, the offender and the operator
of the motor vehicle occupied the motor vehicle together at the time of the
offense.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of wrongful
entrustment of a motor vehicle, and shall be punished as provided in
divisions (C) to (H) of this section.



      (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(2) of this section,
whoever violates division (A)(1), (A)(2), or (A)(3) of this section is guilty
of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified
misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to § 130.18, § 130.99
or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to § 130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26;
notwithstanding § 130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the
offender may be fined up to $1,000; and, notwithstanding § 130.99(F)(1)(c)
and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant to §
130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up
to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community
service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt
under R.C. § 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.



      (2)   (a)   If, within three years of a violation of
division (A)(1), (A)(2), or (A)(3) of this section, the offender previously
has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of two or more violations of division
(A)(1), (A)(2), or (A)(3) of this section, R.C. § 4511.203(A)(1), (A)(2), or
(A)(3), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offender is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.



         (b)   Whoever violates division (A)(4) or (A)(5) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (3)   For any violation of this section, in addition to the
penalties imposed under this Code or R.C. Chapter 2929, the court may impose
a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial
driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or
nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. §
4510.02(A)(7), and, if the vehicle involved in the offense is registered in
the name of the offender, the court may order one of the following:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(3)(b)
or (C)(3)(c) of this section, the court may order, for 30 days, the
immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment of
that vehicle’s license plates. If issued, the order shall be issued and
enforced under R.C. § 4503.233.



         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section, R.C. § 4511.203, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court may order, for 60
days, the immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense and the
impoundment of that vehicle’s license plates. If issued, the order shall be
issued and enforced under R.C. § 4503.233.



         (c)   If the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section, R.C. §
4511.203, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court may
order the criminal forfeiture to the state of the vehicle involved in the
offense. If issued, the order shall be issued and enforced under R.C. §
4503.234.



      (4)   If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to an order
for criminal forfeiture under division (C)(3)(c) of this section is assigned
or transferred and R.C. § 4503.234(B)(2) or (B)(3) applies, in addition to
or independent of any other penalty established by law, the court may fine
the offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of the
national automobile dealers association. The proceeds from any fine imposed
under this division shall be distributed in accordance with R.C. §
4503.234(C)(2).



   (D)   If a court orders the criminal forfeiture of a vehicle under
division (C)(3)(a) or (C)(3)(b) of this section, the court shall not release
the vehicle from the immobilization before the termination of the period of
immobilization ordered unless the court is presented with current proof of
financial responsibility with respect to that vehicle.



   (E)   If a court orders the criminal forfeiture of a vehicle under
division (C) of this section, upon receipt of the order from the court,
neither the Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor any deputy registrar shall accept
any application for the registration or transfer of registration of any motor
vehicle owned or leased by the person named in the order. The period of
denial shall be five years after the date the order is issued, unless, during
that five-year period, the court with jurisdiction of the offense that
resulted in the order terminates the forfeiture and notifies the Registrar of
the termination. If the court terminates the forfeiture and notifies the
Registrar, the Registrar shall take all necessary measures to permit the
person to register a vehicle owned or leased by the person or to transfer the
registration of the vehicle.



   (F)   This section does not apply to motor vehicle rental dealers or
motor vehicle leasing dealers, as defined in R.C. § 4549.65.



   (G)   Evidence of a conviction of, plea of guilty to, or
adjudication as a delinquent child for a violation of this section shall not
be admissible as evidence in any civil action that involves the offender or
delinquent child who is the subject of the conviction, plea, or adjudication
and that arises from the wrongful entrustment of a motor vehicle.



   (H)   For purposes of this section, a vehicle is owned by a person
if, at the time of a violation of this section, the vehicle is registered in
the person's name.



(R.C. § 4511.203)



§ 71.15  SUSPENSION OF DRIVER'S LICENSE; LICENSE SUSPENDED BY COURT OF
RECORD.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 4510.07 or in any
other provision of the Revised Code, whenever an offender is convicted of or
pleads guilty to a violation of any provision of this code that is
substantially equivalent to a provision of the Revised Code, and a court is
permitted or required to suspend a person's driver's or commercial driver's
license or permit for a violation of that provision, a court, in addition to
any other penalties authorized by law, may suspend the offender's driver's or
commercial driver's license or permit or non resident operating privileges
for the period of time the court determines appropriate, but the period of
suspension imposed for the violation of the provision of this code shall not
exceed the period of suspension that is permitted or required to be imposed
for the violation of the provision of the Revised Code to which the provision
of this code is substantially equivalent.



(R.C. § 4510.05)



   (B)   Whenever a person is found guilty under the laws of this state
or any ordinance of any political subdivision of this state, of operating a
motor vehicle in violation of any such law or ordinance relating to reckless
operation, the trial court of any court of record, in addition to or
independent of all other penalties provided by law, may impose a class five
suspension of the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. §
4510.02(A)(5).



   (C)   Suspension of a commercial driver's license under this section
shall be concurrent with any period of suspension disqualification under R.C.
§§ 3123.58 or 4506.16. No person who is disqualified for life from holding
a commercial driver's license under R.C. § 4506.16 shall be issued a
driver's license under R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period for which the
commercial driver's license was suspended under this section, and no person
whose commercial driver's license is suspended under this section shall be
issued a driver's license under R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period of the
suspension.



(R.C. § 4510.15)



§ 71.16  DISPLAY OF LICENSE.



   (A)   The operator of a motor vehicle shall display the operator's
driver's license, or furnish satisfactory proof that the operator has a
driver's license, upon demand of any peace officer or of any person damaged
or injured in any collision in which the licensee may be involved. When a
demand is properly made, and the operator has the operator's driver's license
on or about the operator's person, the operator shall not refuse to display
the license. A person's failure to furnish satisfactory evidence that the
person is licensed under R.C. Chapter 4507 when the person does not have the
person's license on or about the person's person shall be prima facie
evidence of the person's not having obtained a driver's license.



   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) of this
section, whoever violates this section is guilty of an unclassified
misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender
shall be sentenced pursuant to § 130.18, § 130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to
2929.28, except that the offender shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the
offender shall not be sentenced to a community residential sanction pursuant
to § 130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding § 130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and
R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to $1,000; and
notwithstanding § 130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender
may be ordered pursuant to § 130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a
term of community service of up to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to
complete a term of community service imposed by the court may be punished as
indirect criminal contempt under R.C. § 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the
underlying case.



      (2)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations
of this section, R.C. § 4507.35, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 4507.35)



§ 71.17  PROHIBITION AGAINST FALSE STATEMENTS.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly make a false statement to any matter
or thing required by the provisions of this traffic code.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.



(R.C. § 4507.36)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.18  DRIVING UNDER SUSPENSION OR IN VIOLATION OF LICENSE RESTRICTION.



   (A)   Driving under suspension or in violation of license
restriction.



      (1)   Except as provided in division (A)(2) of this section,
division (B) of this section, § 71.21 and in R.C. §§ 4510.111 and 4510.16,
no person whose driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or
nonresident operating privilege has been suspended under any provision of the
Revised Code, other than R.C. Chapter 4509, or under any applicable law in
any other jurisdiction in which the person's license or permit was issued
shall operate any motor vehicle upon the public roads and highways or upon
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking within this municipality during the period of suspension
unless the person is granted limited driving privileges and is operating the
vehicle in accordance with the terms of the limited driving privileges.



      (2)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway
or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking in this municipality  in violation of any
restriction of the person's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit
imposed under R.C. § 4506.10(D) or 4507.14.



      (3)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority,
a noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows
the name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with
a violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section may be admitted into
evidence as prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under
suspension at the time of the alleged violation of division (A)(1) of this
section or the person operated a motor vehicle in violation of a restriction
at the time of the alleged violation of division (A)(2) of this section. The
person charged with a violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section
may offer evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.



      (4)   (a)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court may
impose upon the offender a class seven suspension of the offender’s
driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the
range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).



         (b)   1.   Except as provided in division (A)(4)(b)2.
or (A)(4)(b)3. of this section, the court, in addition to any other penalty
that it imposes on the offender and if the vehicle is registered in the
offender’s name and if, within three years of the offense, the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this
section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the court, in addition to or independent of any other
sentence that it imposes upon the offender, may order the immobilization of
the vehicle involved in the offense for 30 days and the impoundment of that
vehicle’s license plates for 30 days in accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.



            2.   If the vehicle is registered in the
offender’s name and if, within three years of the offense, the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of this
section, or any combination of two violations of this section, R.C. §
4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16, or of a substantially similar municipal
ordinance, the court, in addition to any other sentence that it imposes on
the offender, may order the immobilization of the vehicle involved in the
offense for 60 days and the impoundment of that vehicle’s license plates
for 60 days in accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.



            3.   If the vehicle is registered in the
offender’s name and if, within three years of the offense, the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more
violations of this section, or any combination of three or more violations of
this section or R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16, or of a substantially
similar municipal ordinance, the court, in addition to any other sentence
that it imposes on the offender, may order the criminal forfeiture of the
vehicle involved in the offense to the state.



      (5)   Any order for immobilization and impoundment under this
section shall be issued and enforced under R.C. §§ 4503.233 and 4507.02, as
applicable. The court shall not release a vehicle from immobilization ordered
under this section unless the court is presented with current proof of
financial responsibility with respect to that vehicle.



      (6)   Any order of criminal forfeiture under this section
shall be issued and enforced under R.C. § 4503.234. Upon receipt of the copy
of the order from the court, neither the Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor a
deputy registrar shall accept any application for the registration or
transfer of registration of any motor vehicle owned or leased by the person
named in the declaration of forfeiture. The period of registration denial
shall be five years after the date of the order, unless, during that period,
the court having jurisdiction of the offense that led to the order terminates
the forfeiture and notifies the registrar of the termination. The registrar
then shall take necessary measures to permit the person to register a vehicle
owned or leased by the person or to transfer registration of the vehicle.



      (7)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of
financial responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails
to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any
other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to
§ 130.99(G) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any
economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and
proximate result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during,
or after committing the offense for which the offender is sentenced under
this section.



(R.C. § 4510.11) 



   (B)   Driving under suspension in violation of other provisions.



      (1)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway
or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking in this municipality whose driver’s or
commercial driver’s license has been suspended pursuant to R.C. §
2151.354, 2151.87, 2935.27, 3123.58, 4301.99, 4510.032, 4510.22, or 4510.33,
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



      (2)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority,
a noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows
the name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with
a violation of division (B)(1) of this section may be admitted into evidence
as prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under suspension
at the time of the alleged violation of division (B)(1) of this section. The
person charged with a violation of division (B)(1) of this section may offer
evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.



      (3)   Whoever violates division (B)(1) of this section is
guilty of driving under suspension and shall be punished as provided in
division (B)(3)(a) or division (B)(3)(b) of this section.



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(3)(b)
of this section, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. The offender
shall be sentenced pursuant to § 130.18, § 130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to
2929.28, except that the offender shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the
offender shall not be sentenced to a community residential sanction pursuant
to § 130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding § 130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and
R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to $1,000; and,
notwithstanding § 130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender
may be ordered pursuant to § 130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a
term of community service of up to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to
complete a term of community service imposed by the court may be punished as
indirect criminal contempt under R.C. § 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the
underlying case.



         (b)   If, within three years of the offense, the
offender previously was convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more
violations of division (B)(1) of this section, or any combination of two or
more violations of division (B)(1) of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111
or 4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is
a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, and the offender shall provide the court
with proof of financial responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the
offender fails to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then in
addition to any other penalties provided by law, the court may order
restitution pursuant to R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for
any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct
and proximate result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before,
during, or after committing the offense for which the offender is sentenced
under this section.



(R.C. § 4510.111)



   (C)   Repeat traffic offender; point system suspension. Any person
whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident
operating privileges are suspended as a repeat traffic offender under R.C. §
4510.037 and who, during the suspension, operates any motor vehicle upon any
public roads and highways is guilty of driving under a twelve-point
suspension, a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court shall sentence the
offender to a minimum term of three days in jail. No court shall suspend the
first three days of jail time imposed pursuant to this division.



(R.C. § 4510.037(J))



   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under
this division (A) of section that the alleged offender drove under
suspension, without a valid permit or driver's or commercial driver's
license, or in violation of a restriction because of a substantial emergency,
and because no other person was reasonably available to drive in response to
the emergency.



(R.C. § 4510.04) 



§ 71.19  OPERATING MOTOR VEHICLE OR MOTORCYCLE WITHOUT VALID LICENSE.



   (A)   (1)   No person, except those expressly exempted under R.C.
§§ 4507.03, 4507.04, and 4507.05, shall operate any motor vehicle upon a
public road or highway or any public or private property used by the public
for purposes of vehicular travel or parking in this municipality unless the
person has a valid driver's license issued under R.C. Chapter 4507 or a
commercial driver's license issued under R.C. Chapter 4506.



      (2)   No person, except a person expressly exempted under R.C.
§§ 4507.03, 4507.04, and 4507.05, shall operate any motorcycle upon a
public road or highway or any public or private property used by the public
for purposes of vehicular travel or parking in this municipality unless the
person has a valid license as a motorcycle operator that was issued upon
application by the registrar of motor vehicles under R.C. Chapter 4507. The
license shall be in the form of an endorsement, as determined by the
registrar, upon a driver's or commercial driver's license, if the person has
a valid license to operate a motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle, or in
the form of a restricted license as provided in R.C. § 4507.14, if the
person does not have a valid license to operate a motor vehicle or commercial
motor vehicle.



   (B)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the registrar of motor vehicles that shows
the name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with
a violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section may be admitted into
evidence as prima facie evidence that the person did not have either a valid
driver’s or commercial driver’s license at the time of the alleged
violation of division (A)(1) of this section or a valid license as a
motorcycle operator either in the form of an endorsement upon a driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or a restricted license at the time of the
alleged violation of division (A)(2) of this section. The person charged with
a violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section may offer evidence
to rebut this prima facie evidence.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a motor
vehicle or motorcycle without a valid license and shall be punished as
follows:



      (1)   If the trier of fact finds that the offender never has
held a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license issued by this state
or any other jurisdiction, or, in a case involving the operation of a
motorcycle by the offender, if the offender has never held a valid license as
a motorcycle operator, either in the form of an endorsement upon a driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or in the form of a restricted license,
except as otherwise provided in this division, the offense is an unclassified
misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender
shall be sentenced pursuant to § 130.18, § 130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to
2929.28, except that the offender shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the
offender shall not be sentenced to a community residential sanction pursuant
to § 130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding § 130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and
R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to $1,000; and,
notwithstanding § 130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender
may be ordered pursuant to § 130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a
term of community service of up to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to
complete a term of community service imposed by the court may be punished as
indirect criminal contempt under R.C. § 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the
underlying case. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to any violation of this section or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (2)   If the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or permit or, in a case involving the operation of a motorcycle by
the offender, the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license
bearing the motorcycle endorsement or the offender’s restricted license was
expired at the time of the offense, except as otherwise provided in this
division, the offense is a minor misdemeanor. If within three years of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
two or more violations of this section or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



   (D)   The court shall not impose a license suspension for a first
violation of this section or if more than three years have passed since the
offender's last violation of R.C. § 4510.12, this section, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



   (E)   If the offender is sentenced under division (C)(2) of this
section, if within three years of the offense the offender previously was
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of R.C. § 4510.12,
this section, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and if the
offender’s license was expired for more than six months at the time of the
offense, the court may impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s
driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the
range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).



(R.C. § 4510.12) 



§ 71.20  DRIVING UNDER OVI SUSPENSION.



   (A)   No person whose driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit or nonresident operating privilege has been suspended under R.C. §
4511.19, 4511.191, or 4511.196 or under R.C. § 4510.07 for a conviction of a
violation of a municipal OVI ordinance shall operate any motor vehicle upon
the public roads or highways within this municipality during the period of
the suspension.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of driving under OVI
suspension. The court shall sentence the offender under R.C. Chapter 2929,
subject to the differences authorized or required by this section.



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2) or (3)
of this section, driving under OVI suspension is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:



         (a)   A mandatory jail term of three consecutive days.
The three-day term shall be imposed, unless, subject to division (C) of this
section, the court instead imposes a sentence of not less than 30 consecutive
days of house arrest with electronic monitoring. A period of house arrest
with electronic monitoring imposed under this division shall not exceed six
months. If the court imposes a mandatory three-day jail term under this
division, the court may impose a jail term in addition to that term, provided
that in no case shall the cumulative jail term imposed for the offense exceed
six months;



         (b)   A fine of not less than $250 and not more than
$1,000;



         (c)   A license suspension under division (E) of this
section;



         (d)   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the
time of the offense is registered in the offender's name, immobilization for
30 days of the offender's vehicle and impoundment for 30 days of the
identification license plates of that vehicle. The order for immobilization
and impoundment shall be issued and enforced in accordance with R.C. §
4503.233.



      (2)   If, within six years of the offense, the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this
section or one equivalent offense, driving under OVI suspension is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all
of the following:



         (a)   A mandatory jail term of 10 consecutive days.
Notwithstanding the jail terms provided in R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, the
court may sentence the offender to a longer jail term of not more than one
year. The 10-day mandatory jail term shall be imposed unless, subject to
division (C) of this section, the court instead imposes a sentence of not
less than 90 consecutive days of house arrest with electronic monitoring. The
period of house arrest with electronic monitoring shall not exceed one year;



         (b)   Notwithstanding the fines provided for in R.C.
Chapter 2929, a fine of not less than $500 and not more than $2,500;



         (c)   A license suspension under division (E) of this
section;



         (d)   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the
time of the offense is registered in the offender's name, immobilization of
the offender's vehicle for 60 days and the impoundment for 60 days of the
identification license plates of that vehicle. The order for immobilization
and impoundment shall be issued and enforced in accordance with R.C. §
4503.233.



      (3)   If, within six years of the offense, the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations
of this section or two or more equivalent offenses, driving under OVI
suspension is a misdemeanor. The court shall sentence the offender to all of
the following:



         (a)   A mandatory jail term of 30 consecutive days.
Notwithstanding the jail terms provided in R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, the
court may sentence the offender to a longer jail term of not more than one
year. The court shall not sentence the offender to a term of house arrest
with electronic monitoring in lieu of the mandatory portion of the jail term;



         (b)   Notwithstanding the fines set forth in R.C.
Chapter 2929, a fine of not less than $500 and not more than $2,500;



         (c)   A license suspension under division (E) of this
section;



         (d)    If the vehicle the offender was operating at the
time of the offense is registered in the offender's name, criminal forfeiture
to the state of the offender's vehicle. The order of criminal forfeiture
shall be issued and enforced in accordance with R.C. § 4503.234. If title to
a motor vehicle that is subject to an order for criminal forfeiture under
this division is assigned or transferred and R.C. § 4503.234(B)(2) or (3)
applies, the court may fine the offender the value of the vehicle as
determined by publications of the National Automobile Dealers Association.
The proceeds from any fine so imposed shall be distributed in accordance with
division R.C. § 4503.234(C)(2).



   (C)   (1)   No court shall impose an alternative sentence of
house arrest with electronic monitoring under division (B)(1) or (2) of this
section unless, within 60 days of the date of sentencing, the court issues a
written finding on the record that, due to the unavailability of space at the
jail where the offender is required to serve the jail term imposed, the
offender will not be able to begin serving that term within the 60-day period
following the date of sentencing.



      (2)   An offender sentenced under this section to a period of
house arrest with electronic monitoring shall be permitted work release
during that period.



   (D)   Fifty percent of any fine imposed by a court under division
(B)(1), (2), or (3) of this section shall be deposited into the municipal
indigent drivers alcohol treatment fund under the control of that court, as
created by the municipality pursuant to R.C. § 4511.191(H).



   (E)   In addition to or independent of all other penalties provided
by law or ordinance, the trial judge of any court of record or the mayor of a
mayor's court shall impose on an offender who is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a violation of this section a class seven suspension of the
offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02 (A)(7). 



      (1)   When permitted as specified in R.C. § 4510.021, if the
court grants limited driving privileges during a suspension imposed under
this section, the privileges shall be granted on the additional condition
that the offender must display restricted license plates, issued under R.C.
§ 4503.231, on the vehicle driven subject to the privileges, except as
provided in R.C. § 4503.231(B).



      (2)   A suspension of a commercial driver's license under this
section shall be concurrent with any period of suspension or disqualification
under R.C. § 3123.58 or 4506.16. No person who is disqualified for life from
holding a commercial driver's license under R.C. § 4506.16 shall be issued a
driver's license under R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period for which the
commercial driver's license was suspended under this section, and no person
whose commercial driver's license is suspended under this section shall be
issued a driver's license under R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period of the
suspension.



   (F)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to
provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any
other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to
§ 130.99(G) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any
economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and
proximate result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during,
or after committing the offense that is a misdemeanor of the first degree
under this section for which the offender is sentenced.



   (G)   As used in this section:



      ELECTRONIC MONITORING has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.



      EQUIVALENT OFFENSE means any of the following:



         (a)   A violation of a municipal ordinance, law of
another state, or law of the United States that is substantially equivalent
to division (A) of this section;



         (b)   A violation of a former law of this state that was
substantially equivalent to division (A) of this section.



      JAIL has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.



      MANDATORY JAIL TERM means the mandatory term in jail of 3, 10, or
30 consecutive days that must be imposed under division (B)(1), (2), or (3)
of this section upon an offender convicted of a violation of division (A) of
this section and in relation to which all of the following apply:



         (a)   Except as specifically authorized under this
section, the term must be served in a jail.



         (b)   Except as specifically authorized under this
section, the term cannot be suspended, reduced, or otherwise modified
pursuant to any provision of the Ohio Revised Code.



(R.C. § 4510.14) 



   (H)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under
this section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a
valid permit or driver's or commercial driver's license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person
was reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.



(R.C. § 4510.04)



Statutory reference:



   Immobilization of vehicle; impoundment of license plates; criminal
forfeiture of vehicle, see R.C. § 4510.161



§ 71.21  DRIVING UNDER FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY LAW SUSPENSION OR
CANCELLATION; DRIVING UNDER A NONPAYMENT OF JUDGMENT SUSPENSION.



   (A)   No person, whose driver's or commercial driver's license or
temporary instruction permit or nonresident's operating privilege has been
suspended or canceled pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4509, shall operate any motor
vehicle within this municipality, or knowingly permit any motor vehicle owned
by the person to be operated by another person in the municipality, during
the period of the suspension or cancellation, except as specifically
authorized by R.C. Chapter 4509. No person shall operate a motor vehicle
within this municipality, or knowingly permit any motor vehicle owned by the
person to be operated by another person in the municipality, during the
period in which the person is required by R.C. § 4509.45 to file and
maintain proof of financial responsibility for a violation of R.C. §
4509.101, unless proof of financial responsibility is maintained with respect
to that vehicle.



   (B)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking in this municipality if the person’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or temporary instruction permit or nonresident
operating privilege has been suspended pursuant to R.C. § 4509.37 or 4509.40
for nonpayment of a judgment.



   (C)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the registrar of motor vehicles that shows
the name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with
a violation of division (A) or (B) of this section may be admitted into
evidence as prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under
either a financial responsibility law suspension at the time of the alleged
violation of division (A) of this section or a nonpayment of judgment
suspension at the time of the alleged violation of division (B) of this
section. The person charged with a violation of division (A) or (B) of this
section may offer evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.



   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
driving under financial responsibility law suspension or cancellation and
shall be punished as provided in this division (D). Whoever violates division
(B) of this section is guilty of driving under a nonpayment of judgment
suspension and shall be punished as provided in this division (D).



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (D)(2) of
this section, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is
an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to §
130.18, § 130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender
shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to
a community residential sanction pursuant to § 130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26;
notwithstanding § 130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the
offender may be fined up to $1,000; and, notwithstanding § 130.99(F)(1)(c)
and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant to §
130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up
to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community
service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt
under R.C. § 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.



      (2)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender
previously was convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of
this section, or any combination of two violations of this section, R.C. §
4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



      (3)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of
financial responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails
to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then in addition to any
other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to
R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss
arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate
result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense for which the offender is sentenced under this section.



(R.C. § 4510.16) 



   (E)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution
brought under this section that the alleged offender drove under suspension,
without a valid permit or driver's or commercial driver's license, or in
violation of a restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no
other person was reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.



      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought
under this section that the order of suspension resulted from the failure of
the alleged offender to respond to a financial responsibility random
verification request under R.C. § 4509.101(A)(3)(c) and that, at the time of
the initial financial responsibility random verification request, the alleged
offender was in compliance with division R.C. § 4509.101(A)(1) as shown by
proof of financial responsibility that was in effect at the time of that
request.



(R.C. § 4510.04) 



Statutory reference:



   Immobilization of vehicle; impoundment of license plates; criminal
forfeiture of vehicle, see R.C. § 4510.161



§ 71.22  FAILURE TO REINSTATE LICENSE.



   (A)   No person whose driver's license, commercial driver's license,
temporary instruction permit, or nonresident's operating privilege has been
suspended shall operate any motor vehicle upon a public road or highway or
any public or private property after the suspension has expired unless the
person has complied with all license reinstatement requirements imposed by
the court, the bureau of motor vehicles, or another provision of the Ohio
Revised Code.



   (B)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the registrar of motor vehicles that shows
the name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with
a violation of division (A) of this section may be admitted into evidence as
prima facie evidence that the license of the person had not been reinstated
by the person at the time of the alleged violation of division (A) of this
section. The person charged with a violation of division (A) of this section
may offer evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to
reinstate a license, and shall be punished as follows:



      (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(2) of this section,
whoever violates this section is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When
the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to § 130.18, § 130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that
the offender shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be
sentenced to a community residential sanction pursuant to § 130.99(E) or
R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding § 130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C. §
2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to $1,000; and,
notwithstanding § 130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender
may be ordered pursuant to § 130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a
term of community service of up to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to
complete a term of community service imposed by the court may be punished as
indirect criminal contempt under R.C. § 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the
underlying case.



      (2)   If, within three years of a violation of division (A) of
this section, the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted
of two or more violations of this section, R.C. § 4510.21 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.



      (3)   In all cases, the court may impose upon the offender a
class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial
driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary driver's
license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C.
§ 4510.02(A)(7).



(R.C. § 4510.21) 



   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under
this section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a
valid permit or driver's or commercial driver's license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person
was reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.



(R.C. § 4510.04)



COMMERCIAL DRIVER'S LICENSES



§ 71.25  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALCOHOL CONCENTRATION. The concentration of alcohol in a person's
blood, breath or urine. When expressed as a percentage, it means grams of
alcohol per the following:



      (1)   100 milliliters of whole blood, blood serum, or blood
plasma;



      (2)   210 liters of breath;



      (3)   100 milliliters of urine.



   COMMERCIAL DRIVER'S LICENSE. A license issued in accordance with R.C.
Chapter 4506 that authorizes an individual to drive a commercial motor
vehicle.



   COMMERCIAL DRIVER'S LICENSE INFORMATION SYSTEM. The information system
established pursuant to the requirements of the “Commercial Motor Vehicle
Safety Act of 1986,” 100 Stat. 3207-171, 49 U.S.C. App. 2701.



   COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE. Except when used in R.C. § 4506.25, any
motor vehicle designed or used to transport persons or property that meets
any of the following qualifications:



      (1)   Any combination of vehicles with a gross vehicle weight
or combined gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 pounds or more, provided
that the gross vehicle weight or gross vehicle weight rating of the vehicle
or vehicles being towed is in excess of 10,000 pounds;



      (2)   Any single vehicle with a gross vehicle weight or gross
vehicle weight rating of 26,001 pounds or more;



      (3)   Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles that is
not a Class A or Class B vehicle, but is designed to transport 16 or more
passengers including the driver;



      (4)   Any school bus with a gross vehicle weight or gross
vehicle weight rating of less than 26,001 pounds that is designed to
transport fewer than 16 passengers including the driver;



      (5)   Is transporting hazardous materials for which placarding
is required under 49 C.F.R. Part 172, Subpart F, as amended; or



      (6)   Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles that is
designed to be operated and to travel on a public street or highway and is
considered by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration to be a
commercial motor vehicle, including, but not limited to, a motorized crane, a
vehicle whose function is to pump cement, a rig for drilling wells, and a
portable crane.



   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Includes all of the following:



      (1)   Any substance classified as a controlled substance under
the “Controlled Substances Act,” 80 Stat. 1242 (1970), 21 U.S.C. §
802(6), as amended;



      (2)   Any substance included in Schedules I through V of 21
C.F.R. part 1308, as amended;



      (3)   Any drug of abuse.



   CONVICTION. An unvacated adjudication of guilt or a determination that
a person has violated or failed to comply with the law in a court of original
jurisdiction or an authorized administrative tribunal, an unvacated
forfeiture of bail or collateral deposited to secure the person's appearance
in court, a plea of guilty or nolo contendere accepted by the court, the
payment of a fine or court cost, or violation of a condition of release
without bail, regardless of whether or not the penalty is rebated, suspended
or probated.



   DISQUALIFICATION. Means any of the following:



      (1)   The suspension, revocation, or cancellation of a
person’s privileges to operate a commercial motor vehicle;



      (2)   Any withdrawal of a person’s privileges to operate a
commercial motor vehicle as the result of a violation of state or local law
relating to motor vehicle traffic control other than parking, vehicle weight,
or vehicle defect violations;



      (3)   A determination by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Administration that a person is not qualified to operate a commercial motor
vehicle under 49 C.F.R. § 391.



   DOMICILED. Having a true, fixed, principal, and permanent residence to
which an individual intends to return.



   DOWNGRADE. Any of the following, as applicable:



      (1)   A change in the commercial driver’s license, or
commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit, holder’s
self-certified status as described in R.C. § 4506.10(A)(1);



      (2)   A change to a lesser class of vehicle;



      (3)   Removal of commercial driver’s license privileges from
the individual’s driver’s license.



   DRIVE. To drive, operate or be in physical control of a motor vehicle.



   DRIVER. Any person who drives, operates or is in physical control of a
commercial motor vehicle or is required to have a commercial driver's license.



   DRIVER'S LICENSE. A license issued by the Bureau of Motor Vehicles that
authorizes an individual to drive.



   DRUG OF ABUSE. Any controlled substance, dangerous drug as defined in
R.C. § 4729.01, or over-the-counter medication that, when taken in
quantities exceeding the recommended dosage, can result in impairment of
judgment or reflexes.



   ELECTRONIC DEVICE. Includes a cellular telephone, a personal digital
assistant, a pager, a computer, and any other device used to input, write,
send, receive, or read text.



   ELIGIBLE UNIT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT. A village, township, or county that
has a population of not more than 3,000 persons according to the most recent
federal census.



   EMPLOYER. Any person, including the federal government, any state, and
a political subdivision of any state, that owns or leases a commercial motor
vehicle or assigns a person to drive such a motor vehicle.



   ENDORSEMENT. An authorization on a person's commercial driver's license
that is required to permit the person to operate a specified type of
commercial motor vehicle.



   FARM TRUCK. A truck controlled and operated by a farmer for use in the
transportation to or from a farm, for a distance of not more than 150 miles,
of products of the farm, including livestock and its products, poultry and
its products, floricultural and horticultural products, and in the
transportation to the farm, from a distance of not more than 150 miles, of
supplies for the farm, including tile, fence and every other thing or
commodity used in agricultural, floricultural, horticultural, livestock, and
poultry production, and livestock, poultry, and other animals and things used
for breeding, feeding, or other purposes connected with the operation of the
farm, when the truck is operated in accordance with this definition and is
not used in the operations of a motor carrier, as defined in R.C. § 4923.01.



   FATALITY. The death of a person as the result of a motor vehicle
accident occurring not more than 365 days prior to the date of death.



   FELONY. Any offense under federal or state law that is punishable by
death or imprisonment for a term exceeding one year and includes any offense
specifically classified as a felony under the law of this state, regardless
of the penalty that may be imposed.



   FOREIGN JURISDICTION. Any jurisdiction other than a state.



   GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING.  The value specified by the manufacturer
as the maximum loaded weight of a single or a combination vehicle. The gross
vehicle weight rating of a combination vehicle is the gross vehicle weight
rating of the power unit plus the gross vehicle weight rating of each towed
unit.



   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any material that has been designated as hazardous
under 49 U.S.C. § 5103 and is required to be placarded under 49 C.F.R. Part
172, Subpart F or any quantity of a material listed as a select agent or
toxin in 42 C.F.R. Part 73, as amended.



   IMMINENT HAZARD. The existence of a condition that presents a
substantial likelihood that death, serious illness, severe personal injury,
or a substantial endangerment to health, property, or the environment may
occur before the reasonably foreseeable completion date of a formal
proceeding begun to lessen the risk of death, illness, injury, or
endangerment.



   MEDICAL VARIANCE. One of the following received by a driver from the
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration that allows the driver to be
issued a medical certificate:



      (1)   An exemption letter permitting operation of a commercial
motor vehicle under 49 C.F.R. part 381, subpart C or 49 C.F.R. § 391.64;



      (2)   A skill performance evaluation certificate permitting
operation of a commercial motor vehicle pursuant to 49 C.F.R. § 391.49.



   MOBILE TELEPHONE. A mobile communication device that falls under or
uses any commercial mobile radio service as defined in 47 C.F.R. part 20,
except that mobile telephone does not include two-way or citizens band radio
services.



   MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer, or semitrailer
propelled or drawn by mechanical power used on highways, except that such
term does not include a vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer, or semitrailer
operated exclusively on a rail.



   OUT-OF-SERVICE ORDER.  A declaration by an authorized enforcement
officer of a federal, state, local, Canadian, or Mexican jurisdiction
declaring that the driver, commercial motor vehicle, or commercial motor
carrier operation is out of service as defined in 49 C.F.R. § 390.5.



   PEACE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01



   PORTABLE TANK. A liquid or gaseous packaging designed primarily to be
loaded on or temporarily attached to a vehicle and equipped with skids,
mountings, or accessories to facilitate handling of the tank by mechanical
means.



   PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01(E)(1)
and (E)(3).



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Includes every vehicle that is defined as a
recreational vehicle in R.C. § 4501.01 and is used exclusively for purposes
other than engaging in business for profit.



   RESIDENCE. Any person's residence determined in accordance with
standards prescribed in the rules adopted by the Registrar.



   SCHOOL BUS. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.



   SERIOUS TRAFFIC VIOLATION. Any of the following:



      (1)   A conviction arising from a single charge of operating a
commercial motor vehicle in violation of any provision of R.C. § 4506.03;



      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (2)(b) of this
definition, a violation while operating a commercial motor vehicle of a law
of this state, or any municipal ordinance or county or township resolution,
or any other substantially similar law of another state or political
subdivision of another state, prohibiting either of the following:



            1.   Texting while driving;



            2.   Using a handheld mobile telephone.



         (b)   It is not a serious traffic violation if the
person was texting or using a handheld mobile telephone to contact law
enforcement or other emergency services.



      (3)   A conviction arising from the operation of any motor
vehicle that involves any of the following:



         (a)   A single charge of any speed in excess of the
posted speed limit by 15 miles per hour or more;



         (b)   Violations of R.C. § 4511.20 or R.C. § 4511.201
or any substantially equivalent ordinance or resolution, or of any
substantially equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of
another state;



         (c)   Violation of a law of this state or an ordinance
or resolution relating to traffic control, other than a parking violation, or
of any substantially equivalent law of another state or political subdivision
of another state, that results in a fatal accident;



         (d)   Violation of R.C. § 4506.03 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or county or township resolution, or of any
substantially equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of
another state, that involves the operation of a commercial motor vehicle
without a valid commercial driver’s license with the proper class or
endorsement for the specific vehicle group being operated or for the
passengers or type of cargo being transported;



         (e)   Violation of R.C. § 4506.03 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or county or township resolution, or of any
substantially equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of
another state, that involves the operation of a commercial motor vehicle
without a valid commercial driver’s license being in the person’s
possession;



         (f)   Violation of R.C. § 4511.33 or R.C. § 4511.34,
or any municipal ordinance or county or township resolution substantially
equivalent to either of those sections, or any substantially equivalent law
of another state or political subdivision of another state;



         (g)   Violation of any other law of this state, any law
of another state, or any ordinance or resolution of a political subdivision
of this state or another state that meets both of the following requirements:



            1.   It relates to traffic control, other than a
parking violation;



            2.   It is determined to be a serious traffic
violation by the United States Secretary of Transportation and is designated
by the director as such by rule.



   STATE. A state of the United States and includes the District of
Columbia.



   TANK VEHICLE. Any commercial motor vehicle that is designed to
transport any liquid or gaseous materials within a tank or tanks that are
either permanently or temporarily attached to the vehicle or its chassis and
have an individual rated capacity of more than 119 gallons and an aggregate
rated capacity of 1,000 gallons or more. The term does not include a
commercial motor vehicle transporting an empty storage container tank that is
not designed for transportation, has a rated capacity of 1,000 gallons or
more, and is temporarily attached to a flatbed trailer.



   TESTER. Means a person or entity acting pursuant to a valid agreement
entered into pursuant to R.C. § 4506.09(B).



   TEXTING. Manually entering alphanumeric text into, or reading text
from, an electronic device. Texting includes short message service (SMS),
e-mail, instant messaging, a command or request to access a world wide web
page, pressing more than a single button to initiate or terminate a voice
communication using a mobile telephone, or engaging in any other form of
electronic text retrieval or entry, for present or future communication.
Texting does not include the following:



      (1)   Using voice commands to initiate, receive, or terminate
a voice communication using a mobile telephone;



      (2)   Inputting, selecting, or reading information on a global
positioning system or navigation system;



      (3)   Pressing a single button to initiate or terminate a
voice communication using a mobile telephone; or



      (4)   Using, for a purpose that is not otherwise prohibited by
law, a device capable of performing multiple functions, such as a fleet
management system, a dispatching device, a mobile telephone, a citizens band
radio, or a music player.



   TEXTING WHILE DRIVING. Texting while operating a commercial motor
vehicle, with the motor running, including while temporarily stationary
because of traffic, a traffic control device, or other momentary delays.
Texting while driving does not include operating a commercial motor vehicle
with or without the motor running when the driver has moved the vehicle to
the side of, or off, a highway and is stopped in a location where the vehicle
can safely remain stationary.



   UNITED STATES. Means the 50 states and the District of Columbia.



   UPGRADE. A change in the class of vehicles, endorsements, or
self-certified status as described in division R.C. § 4506.10(A)(1) that
expands the ability of a current commercial driver’s license holder to
operate commercial motor vehicles under this chapter or R.C. Chapter 4506.



   USE OF A HANDHELD MOBILE TELEPHONE. Means:



      (1)   Using at least one hand to hold a mobile telephone to
conduct a voice communication;



      (2)   Dialing or answering a mobile telephone by pressing more
than a single button; or



      (3)   Reaching for a mobile telephone in a manner that
requires a driver to maneuver so that the driver is no longer in a seated
driving position, or restrained by a seat belt that is installed in
accordance with 49 C.F.R. § 393.93 and adjusted in accordance with the
vehicle manufacturer’s instructions.



   VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.



(R.C. § 4506.01)



§ 71.26  USE OF ACTUAL GROSS WEIGHT IN LIEU OF RATING.



   For purposes of this subchapter, the actual gross weight of a vehicle
or combination of vehicles may be used in lieu of a gross vehicle weight
rating to determine whether a vehicle or combination of vehicles qualifies as
a commercial motor vehicle if the gross vehicle weight rating specified by
the manufacturer for the vehicle of combination of vehicles is not
determinable, or if the manufacturer of the vehicle has not specified a gross
vehicle weight rating.



(R.C. § 4506.011)



§ 71.27  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having in the
person's possession or otherwise under the person's control more than one
valid driver's license issued by this state, any other state, or by a foreign
jurisdiction;



      (2)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle on a highway in this
municipality in violation of an out- of-service order while the person's
driving privilege is suspended, revoked, or cancelled, or while the person is
subject to disqualification;



      (3)   Drive a motor vehicle on a highway in the municipality
under the authority of a commercial driver's license issued by another state
or a foreign jurisdiction, after having been a resident of this state for 30
days or longer;



      (4)   Knowingly give false information in any application or
certification required by R.C. § 4506.07.



   (B)   The municipality shall give every conviction occurring out of
this state and notice of which was received by the state Department of Public
Safety after December 31, 1989, full faith and credit and treat it for
sanctioning purposes under this chapter as though the conviction had occurred
in this state.



(R.C. § 4506.04(A), (B))



   (C)   No person shall drive any commercial motor vehicle for which
an endorsement is required under R.C. § 4506.12 unless the proper
endorsement appears on the person’s commercial driver’s license or
commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit. No person shall
drive a commercial motor vehicle in violation of a restriction established
under R.C. § 4506.12 that appears on the person’s commercial driver’s
license or commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit.



(R.C. § 4506.12(I))



   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A)(1), (2) or (3) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(4) of this section is
guilty of falsification, a misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition, the
provisions of R.C. § 4507.19 apply.



(R.C. § 4506.04(C))



      (3)   (a)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.



         (b)   The offenses established under division (C) of
this section are strict liability offenses and R.C. § 2901.20 does not
apply. The designation of these offenses as strict liability offenses shall
not be construed to imply that any other offense for which there is no
specified degree of culpability, whether in this section or another section
of this code or the Ohio Revised Code, is not a strict liability offense.



(R.C. § 4506.12(J))  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.28  PREREQUISITES TO OPERATION OF COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE.



   (A)   Except as provided in divisions (B) or (C) of this section,
the following shall apply:



      (1)   No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle on a
highway in this state unless the person holds, and has in the person’s
possession, any of the following:



         (a)   A valid commercial driver’s license with proper
endorsements for the motor vehicle being driven, issued by the Registrar of
Motor Vehicles or by another jurisdiction recognized by this state;



         (b)   A valid examiner’s commercial driving permit
issued under R.C. § 4506.13;



         (c)   A valid restricted commercial driver’s license
and waiver for farm-related service industries issued under R.C. § 4506.24;



         (d)   A valid commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit issued by the Registrar, provided that the person is
accompanied by an authorized state driver’s license examiner or tester or a
person who has been issued and has in the person’s immediate possession a
current, valid commercial driver’s license and who meets the requirements
of R.C. § 4506.06(B).



      (2)   No person’s commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit shall be upgraded, and no commercial driver’s license
shall be upgraded, renewed, or issued to a person until the person surrenders
to the registrar of motor vehicles all valid licenses and permits issued to
the person by this state or by another jurisdiction recognized by this state.
If the license or permit was issued by any other state or another
jurisdiction recognized by this state, the Registrar shall report the
surrender of a license or permit to the issuing authority, together with
information that a license or permit is now issued in this state. The
Registrar shall destroy any such license or permit that is not returned to
the issuing authority.



      (3)   No person who has been a resident of this state for 30
days or longer shall drive a commercial motor vehicle under the authority of
a commercial driver's license issued in another jurisdiction.



   (B)   Nothing in division (A) of this section applies to any
qualified person when engaged in the operation of any of the following:



      (1)   A farm truck;



      (2)   Fire equipment for a fire department, volunteer or
nonvolunteer fire company, fire district, or joint fire district;



      (3)   A public safety vehicle used to provide transportation
or emergency medical service for ill or injured persons;



      (4)   A recreational vehicle;



      (5)   A commercial motor vehicle within the boundaries of an
eligible unit of local government, if the person is employed by the eligible
unit of local government and is operating the commercial motor vehicle for
the purpose of removing snow or ice from a roadway by plowing, sanding, or
salting, but only if either the employee who holds a commercial driver’s
license issued under R.C. Chapter 4506 and ordinarily operates a commercial
motor vehicle for these purposes is unable to operate the vehicle, or the
employing eligible unit of local government determines that a snow or ice
emergency exists that requires additional assistance;



      (6)   A vehicle operated for military purposes by any member
or uniformed employee of the armed forces of the United States or their
reserve components, including the Ohio National Guard. This exception does
not apply to United States reserve technicians;



      (7)    A commercial motor vehicle that is operated for
nonbusiness purposes. “Operated for nonbusiness purposes” means that the
commercial motor vehicle is not used in commerce as “commerce” is defined
in 49 C.F.R. § 383.5, as amended, and is not regulated by the Public
Utilities Commission pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4905, 4921, or 4923;



      (8)   A motor vehicle that is designed primarily for the
transportation of goods and not persons, while that motor vehicle is being
used for the occasional transportation of personal property by individuals
not for compensation and not in the furtherance of a commercial enterprise;



      (9)   A police SWAT team vehicle;



      (10)   A police vehicle used to transport prisoners.



   (C)   Nothing contained in division (B)(5) of this section shall be
construed as preempting or superseding any law, rule or regulation of this
state concerning the safe operation of commercial motor vehicles.



(R.C. § 4506.03(A) - (C))



   (D)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a person may drive
a commercial motor vehicle on a highway in this municipality if all of the
following conditions are met:



      (1)   The person has a valid commercial driver's license or
commercial driver's license temporary instruction permit issued by any state
or jurisdiction in accordance with the minimum standards adopted by the
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration under the “Commercial Motor
Vehicle Safety Act of 1986,” 100 Stat. 3207-171, 49 U.S.C. App. 2701, for
issuance of commercial driver's licenses;



      (2)   The person’s commercial driver’s license or
temporary instruction permit is not suspended, revoked, or canceled, and the
person has the appropriate endorsements for the vehicle that is being driven;



      (3)   The person is not disqualified from driving a commercial
motor vehicle;



      (4)   The person is not subject to an out-of-service order;



      (5)   The person is medically certified as physically
qualified to operate a commercial motor vehicle in accordance with R.C.
Chapter 4506.



         (a)   A person who submitted a medical examiner’s
certificate to the Registrar in accordance with R.C. § 4506.10(A)(1) and
whose medical certification information is maintained in the commercial
driver’s license information system is not required to have the medical
examiner’s certificate in the person’s possession when on duty.



         (b)   A person whose medical certification information
is not maintained in the commercial driver’s license information system
shall have in the person’s possession when on duty the original or a copy
of the current medical examiner’s certificate that was submitted to the
Registrar. However, the person may operate a commercial motor vehicle with
such proof of medical certification for not more than 15 days after the date
the current medical examiner’s certificate was issued to the person.



         (c)   A person who has a medical variance shall have in
the person’s possession the original or copy of the medical variance
documentation at all times while on duty.



   (E)   No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle on a highway
in this municipality if the person does not meet the conditions specified in
division (D) of this section.



   (F)   Except as set forth in 49 C.F.R. §§ 390.3(f), 391.2, 391.62,
391.67, and 391.68, no person holding a commercial driver’s license
temporary instruction permit or a commercial driver’s license issued under
R.C. Chapter 4506 may drive a commercial motor vehicle in interstate commerce
until the person is at least 21 years of age.



(R.C. § 4506.05(A) - (C))



   (G)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (2)   The offenses established under divisions (D), (E) and
(F) of this section are strict liability offenses and R.C. § 2901.20 does
not apply. The designation of these offenses as strict liability offenses
shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for which there is no
specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability offense.



(R.C. §§ 4506.03(D), 4506.05(D))  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.29  PHYSICAL QUALIFICATION TO OPERATE COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLES.



   (A)   No person who holds a valid commercial driver's license shall
drive a commercial motor vehicle unless the person is physically qualified to
do so.



      (1)   Any person applying for a commercial driver’s license
or commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit, the renewal or
upgrade of a commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license
temporary instruction permit, or the transfer of a commercial driver’s
license from out of state shall self-certify to the Registrar for purposes of
49 C.F.R. § 383.71 one of the following in regard to the applicant’s
operation of a commercial motor vehicle, as applicable:



         (a)   1.   If the applicant operates or expects to
operate a commercial motor vehicle in interstate or foreign commerce and is
subject to and meets the requirements under 49 C.F.R. part 391, the applicant
shall self-certify that the applicant is non-excepted interstate and shall
provide the Registrar with the original or a copy of a medical examiner’s
certificate and each subsequently issued medical examiner’s certificate
prepared by a qualified medical examiner to maintain a medically certified
status on the applicant’s commercial driver licensing system driver record;



            2.   If the applicant operates or expects to
operate a commercial motor vehicle in interstate commerce, but engages in
transportation or operations excepted under 49 C.F.R. §§ 390.3(f), 391.2,
391.68, or 398.3 from all or parts of the qualification requirements of 49
C.F.R. part 391, the applicant shall self-certify that the applicant is
excepted interstate and is not required to obtain a medical examiner’s
certificate;



         (b)   1.   If the applicant operates only in
intrastate commerce and is subject to state driver qualification
requirements, the applicant shall self-certify that the applicant is
non-excepted intrastate;



            2.   If the applicant operates only in intrastate
commerce and is excepted from all or parts of the state driver qualification
requirements, the applicant shall self-certify that the applicant is excepted
intrastate.



      (2)   Notwithstanding the expiration date on a person’s
commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit, every commercial driver’s license or commercial
driver’s license temporary instruction permit holder shall provide the
Registrar with the certification required by this section on or after January
30, 2012, but prior to January 30, 2014.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.



(R.C. § 4506.10(A), (E))  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.30  CRIMINAL OFFENSES.



   (A)   No person who holds a commercial driver’s license or
commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit or who operates a
motor vehicle for which a commercial driver’s license or permit is required
shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having a
measurable or detectable amount of alcohol or of a controlled substance in
the person's blood, breath, or urine;



      (2)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of 0.04% or more by whole blood or breath;



      (3)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of .048% or more by blood serum or blood plasma;



      (4)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of .056% or more by urine;



      (5)   Drive a motor vehicle while under the influence of a
controlled substance;



      (6)   Drive a motor vehicle in violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or
a municipal OVI ordinance as defined in R.C. § 4511.181;



      (7)   Use a vehicle in the commission of a felony;



      (8)   Refuse to submit to a test under R.C. § 4506.17 or R.C.
§ 4511.191, or any substantially similar municipal ordinance;



      (9)   Operate a commercial motor vehicle while the person’s
commercial driver’s license or permit or other commercial driving
privileges are revoked, suspended, cancelled, or disqualified;



      (10)   Cause a fatality through the negligent operation of a
commercial motor vehicle, including but not limited to the offenses of
aggravated vehicular homicide, vehicular homicide, and vehicular manslaughter;



      (11)   Fail to stop after an accident in violation of R.C.
§§ 4549.02 to 4549.03, or any substantially similar municipal ordinance;



      (12)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle in violation of any
provision of R.C. §§  4511.61 through 4511.63 or any federal or local law
or ordinance pertaining to railroad-highway grade crossings;



      (13)   Use a motor vehicle in the commission of a felony
involving the manufacture, distribution, or dispensing of a controlled
substance as defined in R.C. § 3719.01 or the possession with intent to
manufacture, distribute, or dispense a controlled substance.



(R.C. § 4506.15(A))



   (B)   No person shall refuse to immediately surrender the person's
commercial driver's license or permit to a peace officer when required to do
so by R.C. § 4506.17.



(R.C. § 4506.17(H))



   (C)   (1)   Within the jurisdictional limits of the appointing
authority, any peace officer shall stop and detain any person found violating
division (A) of this section without obtaining a warrant. When there is
reasonable ground to believe that a violation of division (A) of this section
has been committed and a test or tests of the person’s whole blood, blood
plasma or blood serum, breath or urine is necessary, the peace officer shall
take the person to an appropriate place for testing. If a person refuses to
submit to a test after being warned as provided in R.C. § 4506.17(C), or
submits to a test that discloses the presence of a controlled substance or an
alcohol concentration of 0.04% or more by whole blood or breath, an alcohol
concentration of .048% or more by blood serum or blood plasma, or an alcohol
concentration of .056% or more by urine, the peace officer shall require that
the person immediately surrender the person’s commercial driver’s license
to the peace officer.



      (2)   As used in this division (C), JURISDICTIONAL LIMITS
means the limits within which a peace officer may arrest and detain a person
without a warrant under R.C. § 2935.03, except that the Superintendent and
the troopers of the State Highway Patrol may stop and detain, without
warrant, any person who, in the presence of the Superintendent or any
trooper, is engaged in a violation of any of the provisions of this
subchapter or R.C. Chapter 4506.



(R.C. § 4506.23)



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.



(R.C.§§ 4506.15(B), 4506.17(N))  Penalty, see § 71.99



Statutory reference:



   Alcohol or controlled substance testing, disqualification of drivers,
see R.C. § 4506.17



   Disqualification of drivers for violations, see R.C. § 4506.16



§ 71.31  APPLICATION OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The provisions of 49 C.F.R. part 383, subpart C (Notification
Requirements and Employer Responsibilities), as amended, shall apply to all
commercial drivers or persons who apply for employment as commercial drivers.
No person shall fail to make a report to the person's employer as required by
this section.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.



(R.C. § 4506.19) 



§ 71.32  EMPLOYMENT OF DRIVERS OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.



   (A)   Each employer shall require every applicant for employment as
a driver of a commercial vehicle to provide the applicant’s employment
history for the 10 years preceding the date the employment application is
submitted to the prospective employer. The following information shall be
submitted:



      (1)   A list of the names and addresses of the applicant’s
previous employers for which the applicant was the operator of a commercial
motor vehicle;



      (2)   The dates the applicant was employed by these employers;



      (3)   The reason for leaving each of these employers.



   (B)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize any driver
employed by the employer to drive a commercial motor vehicle during any
period in which any of the following apply:



      (1)   The driver's commercial driver's license is suspended,
revoked, or cancelled by any state or a foreign jurisdiction;



      (2)   The driver has lost the privilege to drive, or currently
is disqualified from driving, a commercial motor vehicle in any state or
foreign jurisdiction;



      (3)   The driver, the commercial motor vehicle the driver is
driving, or the motor carrier operation is subject to an out-of-service order
in any state or a foreign jurisdiction;



      (4)   The driver has more than one driver's license.



   (C)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to
operate a commercial motor vehicle in violation of R.C. § 4506.15.



   (D)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to
operate a commercial motor vehicle if the driver does not hold a valid,
current commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license
temporary instruction permit bearing the proper class or endorsements for the
vehicle. No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate
a commercial motor vehicle in violation of the restrictions on the driver’s
commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit.



   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A), (B) or (D) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty
of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 4506.20)



ANNUAL LICENSE TAX



§ 71.45  TAX ON OPERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES.



   (A)   Pursuant to the authority of R.C. § 4504.172, there is hereby
levied an annual license tax upon the operation of motor vehicles on the
public roads or highways.



   (B)   The tax shall be at the rate of $5.00 per motor vehicle on all
motor vehicles registered in the village.



   (C)   The tax shall be paid when the vehicle is annually registered.



(Ord. 87-7-5, passed 8-5-87)



§ 71.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no penalty
otherwise is provided in the section that contains the provision violated is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. §§ 4506.99, 4507.99)



Cross-reference:



   For misdemeanor penalty provisions, see § 70.99



CHAPTER 72:  TRAFFIC RULES



Section




General Provisions




   72.01   Lanes of travel upon roadways



   72.02   Driving through safety zone



   72.03   Vehicles traveling in opposite directions



   72.04   Rules governing overtaking and passing of vehicles



   72.05   Permission to overtake and pass on the right



   72.06   Driving to left of center line



   72.07   Prohibition against driving upon left side of roadway



   72.08   Hazardous zones



   72.09   One-way highways and rotary traffic islands



   72.10   Rules for driving in marked lanes



   72.11   Space between moving vehicles



   72.12   Divided roadways



   72.13   Rules for turns at intersections



   72.14   U-turns and turning in roadway prohibited



   72.15   Starting and backing vehicles



   72.16   Turn and stop signals



   72.17   Hand and arm signals




Right-of-Way




   72.20   Right-of-way at intersections



   72.21   Right-of-way when turning left



   72.22   Right-of-way at through highways; stop signs; yield signs



   72.23   Stop at sidewalk area; stop signs on private roads and
driveways



   72.24   Right-of-way on public highway



   72.25   Pedestrian on sidewalk has right-of-way



   72.26   Right-of-way of public safety vehicles



   72.27   Funeral procession has right-of-way



   72.28   Pedestrians yield right-of-way to public safety vehicle



   72.29   Pedestrian on crosswalk has right-of-way



   72.30   Right-of-way yielded to blind person



   72.31   Right-of-way yielded by pedestrian




Pedestrians




   72.35   Pedestrian movement in crosswalks



   72.36   Pedestrian walking along highway



   72.37   Prohibition against soliciting rides; riding on outside of
vehicle



   72.38   Pedestrian on bridge or railroad crossing



   72.39   Persons operating motorized wheelchairs



   72.40   Intoxicated or drugged pedestrian hazard on highway



   72.41   Operation of electric personal assistive mobility devices



   72.42   Operation of personal delivery device on sidewalks and
crosswalks




Grade Crossings




   72.45   Stop signs at grade crossings



   72.46   Driving vehicle across railroad grade crossing



   72.47   Vehicles required to stop at grade crossings



   72.48   Slow-moving vehicles or equipment crossing railroad tracks




Prohibitions




   72.55   Obstruction and interference affecting view and control of
driver



   72.56   Occupying travel trailer while in motion



   72.57   Driving upon closed highway prohibited



   72.58   Driving upon sidewalk area or paths exclusively for bicycles



   72.59   Obstructing passage of other vehicles



   72.60   Following an emergency or public vehicle prohibited;
approaching stationary public safety vehicle and certain other vehicles with
caution



   72.61   Driving over unprotected fire hose



   72.62   Placing injurious material on highway or depositing litter
from motor vehicle



   72.63   Transporting child not in child-restraint system prohibited



   72.64   Occupant restraining devices



   72.65   Use of engine brakes prohibited



   72.66   Operating motor vehicle while wearing earphones or earplugs



   72.67   Chauffeured limousines and livery services



   72.68   Operating traction engine upon improved highway



   72.69   Cracking exhaust noises; peeling out



   72.70   Shortcutting across private property



   72.71   Motor vehicle noise



   72.72   Texting while driving prohibited



   72.73   Use of electronic wireless communication devices by minors
or probationary drivers while driving prohibited




School Buses




   72.80   Regulations concerning school buses



   72.81   Violation of regulations; report; investigation; citation;
warning



   72.82   Restrictions on the operation of school buses




Traffic Rules63




   72.83   School bus inspection



   72.84   School bus not used for school purposes



   72.85   Licensing by Department of Public Safety



   72.86   Registration and identification of school buses



   72.87   School bus marking



   72.88   Flashing light signal lamps



   72.89   Occupant restraining device for operator



Statutory reference:



   Notice of arrest of certain commercial drivers, see R.C. § 5577.14



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 72.01  LANES OF TRAVEL UPON ROADWAYS.



   (A)   Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be
driven upon the right half of the roadway, except as follows:



      (1)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding
in the same direction, or when making a left turn under the rules governing
such movements;



      (2)   When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive
to the left of the center of the highway; provided, any person so doing shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon
the unobstructed portion of the highway within such distance as to constitute
an immediate hazard;



      (3)   When driving upon a roadway divided into three or more
marked lanes for traffic under the rules applicable thereon;



      (4)   When driving upon a roadway designated and posted with
signs for one-way traffic;



      (5)   When otherwise directed by a police officer or
traffic-control device.



   (B)   (1)   Upon all roadways any vehicle proceeding at less than
the prevailing and lawful speed of traffic at the time and place and under
the conditions then existing shall be driven in the right-hand lane then
available for traffic, and far enough to the right to allow passing by faster
vehicles if such passing is safe and reasonable, except under any of the
following circumstances:



         (a)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction;



         (b)   When preparing for a left turn;



         (c)   When the driver must necessarily drive in a lane
other than the right-hand lane to continue on the driver’s intended route.



      (2)   Nothing in division (B)(1) of this section requires a
driver of a slower vehicle to compromise the driver’s safety to allow
overtaking by a faster vehicle.



   (C)   Upon any roadway having four or more lanes for moving traffic
and providing for two-way movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to
the left of the center line of the roadway, except when authorized by
official traffic-control devices designating certain lanes to the left of the
center of the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use the
lanes, or except as permitted under division (A)(2) of this section. This
division shall not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of the center
line in making a left turn into or from an alley, private road, or driveway.



   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (E)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.25)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.02  DRIVING THROUGH SAFETY ZONE.



   (A)   No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a
safety zone.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.60)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.03  VEHICLES TRAVELING IN OPPOSITE DIRECTIONS.



   (A)   Operators of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall
pass each other to the right, and upon roadways having width for not more
than one line of traffic in each direction, each operator shall give to the
other one-half of the main traveled portion of the roadway or as nearly
one-half as is reasonably possible.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.26)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.04  RULES GOVERNING OVERTAKING AND PASSING OF VEHICLES.



   (A)   The following rules govern the overtaking and passing of
vehicles proceeding in the same direction:



      (1)   The operator of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction shall, except as provided in division (A)(3)
of this section, signal to the vehicle to be overtaken, shall pass to the
left thereof at a safe distance, and shall not again drive to the right side
of the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle. When a motor
vehicle overtakes and passes a bicycle, three feet or greater is considered a
safe passing distance.



      (2)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is
permitted, the operator of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right
in favor of the overtaking vehicle at the latter's audible signal, and the
operator shall not increase the speed of the operator's vehicle until
completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.



      (3)   The operator of a vehicle overtaking and passing another
vehicle proceeding in the same direction on a divided highway as defined in
R.C. § 4511.35, a limited access highway as defined in R.C. § 5511.02, or a
highway with four or more traffic lanes is not required to signal audibly to
the vehicle being overtaken and passed.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.27)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.05  PERMISSION TO OVERTAKE AND PASS ON THE RIGHT.



   (A)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass on the right of
another vehicle only under the following conditions:



      (1)   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a
left turn; or



      (2)   Upon a roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient
width for two or more lines of vehicles moving lawfully in the direction
being traveled by the overtaking vehicle.



   (B)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle
only under conditions permitting the movement in safety. The movement shall
not be made by driving off the roadway.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.28)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.06  DRIVING TO LEFT OF CENTER LINE.



   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven to the left of the center of the
roadway in overtaking and passing traffic proceeding in the same direction,
unless the left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a
sufficient distance ahead to permit the overtaking and passing to be
completely made without interfering with the safe operation of any traffic
approaching from the opposite direction or any traffic overtaken. In every
event, the overtaking vehicle must return to an authorized lane of travel as
soon as practicable, and in the event the passing movement involves the use
of a lane authorized for the traffic approaching from the opposite direction,
before coming within 200 feet of any approaching vehicle.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.29)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.07  PROHIBITION AGAINST DRIVING UPON LEFT SIDE OF ROADWAY.



   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven upon the left side of the roadway
under the following conditions:



      (1)   When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in
the highway, where the operator's view is obstructed within such a distance
as to create a hazard in the event traffic might approach from the opposite
direction;



      (2)   When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100
feet of any bridge, viaduct, or tunnel; or



      (3)   When approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any
intersection or railroad grade crossing.



   (B)   This section does not apply to vehicles upon a one-way
roadway, upon a roadway where traffic is lawfully directed to be driven to
the left side, or under the conditions described in R.C. § 4511.25(A)(2) or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.30)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.08  HAZARDOUS ZONES.



   (A)   The Department of Transportation may determine those portions
of any state highway where overtaking and passing other traffic or driving to
the left of the center or center line of the roadway would be especially
hazardous, and may, by appropriate signs or markings on the highway, indicate
the beginning and end of such zones. When signs or markings are in place and
clearly visible, every operator of a vehicle shall obey the directions of the
signs or markings, notwithstanding the distances set out in R.C. § 4511.30.



   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not apply when all of the
following apply:



      (1)   The slower vehicle is proceeding at less than half the
speed of the speed limit applicable to that location.



      (2)   The faster vehicle is capable of overtaking and passing
the slower vehicle without exceeding the speed limit.



      (3)   There is sufficient clear sight distance to the left of
the center or center line of the roadway to meet the overtaking and passing
provisions of R.C. § 4511.29, considering the speed of the slower vehicle.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.31)



   (E)   The village may determine those portions of village streets or
highways where overtaking and passing other traffic or driving to the left of
the center or center line of the roadway would be especially hazardous, and
may, by appropriate signs or markings on the streets or highways, indicate
the beginning and end of such zones.  When signs or markings are in place
and clearly visible, every operator of a vehicle shall obey the directions
thereof, notwithstanding the distances set out in R.C. § 4511.30.



(Ord. 1983-5, passed 5-16-83)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.09  ONE-WAY HIGHWAYS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS.



   (A)   (1)   Upon a roadway designated and posted with signs for
one-way traffic, a vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated.



      (2)   A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall
be driven only to the right of the rotary traffic island.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.32)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.10  RULES FOR DRIVING IN MARKED LANES.



   (A)   Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly
marked lanes for traffic, or wherever within the municipality traffic is
lawfully moving in two or more substantially continuous lines in the same
direction, the following rules apply:



      (1)   A vehicle shall be driven, as nearly as is practicable,
entirely within a single lane or line of traffic and shall not be moved from
the lane or line until the driver has first ascertained that the movement can
be made with safety.



      (2)   Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes and
provides for the two-way movement of traffic, a vehicle shall not be driven
in the center lane, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle where
the roadway is clearly visible and the center lane is clear of traffic within
a safe distance, or when preparing for a left turn, or where the center lane
is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the
vehicle is proceeding, and is posted with signs to give notice of such
allocation.



      (3)   Official signs may be erected directing specified
traffic to use a designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by
traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the center of the
roadway, or restricting the use of a particular lane to only buses during
certain hours or during all hours, and drivers of vehicles shall obey the
directions of such signs.



      (4)   Official traffic-control devices may be installed
prohibiting the changing of lanes on sections of roadway, and drivers of
vehicles shall obey the directions of every such device.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.33)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.11  SPACE BETWEEN MOVING VEHICLES.



   (A)   (1)   The operator of a motor vehicle shall not follow
another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due
regard for the speed of the vehicle and the traffic upon and the condition of
the highway.



      (2)   The driver of any truck, or motor vehicle drawing
another vehicle, when traveling upon a roadway outside a business or
residence district, shall maintain a sufficient space, whenever conditions
permit, between the vehicle and another vehicle ahead so an overtaking motor
vehicle may enter and occupy the space without danger. This division does not
prevent overtaking and passing nor does it apply to any lane specially
designated for use by trucks.



      (3)   Motor vehicles being driven upon any roadway outside of
a business or residence district in a caravan or motorcade shall maintain a
sufficient space between the vehicles so an overtaking vehicle may enter and
occupy the space without danger. This division shall not apply to funeral
processions.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.34)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.12  DIVIDED ROADWAYS.



   (A)   Whenever any highway has been divided into two roadways by an
intervening space, or by a physical barrier, or a clearly indicated dividing
section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall be
driven only upon the right-hand roadway, and no vehicle shall be driven over,
across, or within any dividing space, barrier, or section, except through an
opening, crossover, or intersection established by public authority. This
section does not prohibit the occupancy of the dividing space, barrier, or
section for the purpose of an emergency stop, or in compliance with an order
of a police officer.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.35)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.13  RULES FOR TURNS AT INTERSECTIONS.



   (A)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection
shall be governed by the following rules:



      (1)   Approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made
as close as practicable to the right- hand curb or edge of the roadway.



      (2)   At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move
in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for
a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway
nearest the center line thereof and by passing to the right of the center
line where it enters the intersection, and, after entering the intersection,
the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of
the center line of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left
turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the
center of the intersection.



      (3)   At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one
direction on one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending
to turn left at any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the
extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction
of travel of the vehicle, and, after entering the intersection, the left turn
shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in
the left hand lane of the roadway being entered lawfully available to traffic
moving in that lane.



   (B)   The Department of Transportation and local authorities may
cause markers, buttons, or signs to be placed within or adjacent to
intersections, and thereby require and direct that a different course from
that specified in this section be traveled by vehicles turning at an
intersection, and when markers, buttons, or signs are so placed, no operator
of a vehicle shall turn the vehicle at an intersection other than as directed
and required by the markers, buttons, or signs.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.36)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.14  U-TURNS AND TURNING IN ROADWAY PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Except as provided in R.C. § 4511.13 and division (B) of this
section, no vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite
direction upon any curve, or upon the approach to or near the crest of a
grade, if such vehicle cannot be seen within 500 feet by the driver of any
other vehicle approaching from either direction.



   (B)   The driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle,
when responding to an emergency call, may turn the vehicle so as to proceed
in the opposite direction. This division applies only when the emergency
vehicle or public safety vehicle is responding to an emergency call, is
equipped with and displaying at least one flashing, rotating, or oscillating
light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet
to the front of the vehicle, and when the driver of the vehicle is giving an
audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle, or bell. This division does not
relieve the driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the
duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon
the highway.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.37)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.15  STARTING AND BACKING VEHICLES.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped,
standing, or parked until the movement can be made with reasonable safety.



      (2)   Before backing, operators of vehicles shall give ample
warning, and while backing they shall exercise vigilance not to injure person
or property on the street or highway.



      (3)   No person shall back a motor vehicle on a freeway,
except:



         (a)   In a rest area;



         (b)   In the performance of public works or official
duties;



         (c)   As a result of an emergency caused by an accident
or breakdown of a motor vehicle.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.38)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.16  TURN AND STOP SIGNALS.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall turn a vehicle or move right or left
upon a highway unless and until the person has exercised due care to
ascertain that the movement can be made with reasonable safety, nor without
giving an appropriate signal in the manner hereinafter provided.



      (2)    When required, a signal of intention to turn or move
right or left shall be given continuously during not less than the last 100
feet traveled by the vehicle before turning, except that in the case of a
person operating a bicycle or electric bicycle, the signal shall be made not
less than one time but is not required to be continuous. A bicycle or
electric bicycle operator is not required to make a signal if the bicycle is
in a designated turn lane, and a signal shall not be given when the
operator’s hands are needed for the safe operation of the bicycle or
electric bicycle.



      (3)   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a
vehicle without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided
herein to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear, when there is
opportunity to give a signal.



      (4)   Any stop or turn signal required by this section shall
be given either by means of the hand and arm, or by signal lights that
clearly indicate to both approaching and following traffic the intention to
turn or move right or left, except that any motor vehicle in use on a highway
shall be equipped with, and the required signal shall be given by, signal
lights when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to
the left outside limit of the body, cab or load of such motor vehicle exceeds
24 inches, or when the distance from the center of the top of the steering
post to the rear limit of the body or load thereof exceeds 14 feet, whether a
single vehicle or a combination of vehicles.



      (5)   The signal lights required by this section shall not be
flashed on one side only on a disabled vehicle, flashed as a courtesy or
“do pass” signal to operators of other vehicles approaching from the
rear, nor be flashed on one side only of a parked vehicle except as may be
necessary for compliance with this section.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.39)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.17  HAND AND ARM SIGNALS.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, all
signals required by the provisions of this traffic code, when given by hand
and arm, shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following
manner, and the signals shall indicate as follows:



      (1)   Left turn, hand and arm extended horizontally;



      (2)   Right turn, hand and arm extended upward;



      (3)   Stop or decrease speed, hand and arm extended downward.



   (B)    As an alternative to division (A)(2) of this section, a
person operating a bicycle or electric bicycle may give a right turn signal
by extending the right hand and arm horizontally and to the right side of the
bicycle or electric bicycle.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.40)  Penalty, see § 70.99



RIGHT-OF-WAY



§ 72.20  RIGHT-OF-WAY AT INTERSECTIONS.



   (A)   When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection from
different streets or highways at approximately the same time, the driver of
the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the
right.



   (B)   The right-of-way rule declared in division (A) of this section
is modified at through highways and otherwise as stated in this traffic code
or R.C. Chapter 4511.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.41)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.21  RIGHT-OF-WAY WHEN TURNING LEFT.



   (A)   The operator of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within
an intersection or into an alley, private road, or driveway shall yield the
right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is
within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate
hazard.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.42)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.22  RIGHT-OF-WAY AT THROUGH HIGHWAYS; STOP SIGNS; YIELD SIGNS.



   (A)   Except when directed to proceed by a law enforcement officer,
every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop at a clearly
marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side
of the intersection, or, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting
roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway before entering it. After having stopped, the driver
shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or
approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an immediate
hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the intersection
or junction of roadways.



   (B)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall slow
down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions, and if required for
safety to stop, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then
at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering it. After
slowing, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the
intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the
intersection or junction of roadways. Whenever a driver is involved in a
collision with a vehicle in the intersection or junction of roadways, after
driving past a yield sign without stopping, the collision shall be prima
facie evidence of the driver's failure to yield the right-of- way.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.43)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.23  STOP AT SIDEWALK AREA; STOP SIGNS ON PRIVATE ROADS AND DRIVEWAYS.



   (A)   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, building,
private road, or driveway within a business or residence district shall stop
the vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk
area extending across the alley, building entrance, road, or driveway, or in
the event there is no sidewalk area, shall stop at the point nearest the
street to be entered where the driver has a view of approaching traffic
thereon.



(R.C. § 4511.431(A))



   (B)   The owner of a private road or driveway located in a private
residential area containing 20 or more dwelling units may erect stop signs at
places where the road or driveway intersects with another private road or
driveway in the residential area, in compliance with all of the following
requirements:



      (1)   The stop sign is sufficiently legible to be seen by an
ordinarily observant person and meets the specifications of and is placed in
accordance with the manual adopted by the Department of Transportation
pursuant to R.C. § 4511.09;



      (2)   The owner has posted a sign at the entrance of the
private road or driveway that is in plain view and clearly informs persons
entering the road or driveway that they are entering private property, stop
signs have been posted and must be obeyed, and the signs are enforceable by
law enforcement officers under state law. The sign required by this division,
where appropriate, may be incorporated with the sign required by R.C. §
4511.211(A)(2), or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



   (C)   The provisions of R.C. § 4511.43(A) and R.C. § 4511.46, or
any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, shall be deemed to apply to
the driver of a vehicle on a private road or driveway where a stop sign is
placed in accordance with division (B) of this section and to a pedestrian
crossing such a road or driveway at an intersection where a stop sign is in
place.



   (D)   When a stop sign is placed in accordance with division (B) of
this section, any law enforcement officer may apprehend a person found
violating the stop sign and may stop and charge the person with violating the
stop sign.



   (E)   As used in this section, and for the purpose of applying R.C.
§ 4511.43(A) and R.C. § 4511.46, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, to conduct under this section:



      INTERSECTION means:



         (a)   The area embraced within the prolongation or
connection of the lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary
lines of the roadways of two private roads or driveways which join one
another at, or approximately at, right angles, or the area within which
vehicles traveling upon different private roads or driveways joining at any
other angle may come in conflict.



         (b)   Where a private road or driveway includes two
roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of two roadways of such
private roads or driveways shall be regarded as a separate intersection.



      ROADWAY means that portion of a private road or driveway
improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, except the berm
or shoulder. If a private road or driveway includes two or more separate
roadways, the term ROADWAY means any such roadway separately but not all such
roadways collectively.



      OWNER and PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL AREA CONTAINING 20 OR MORE DWELLING
UNITS have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4511.211.



(R.C.§ 4511.432(A) - (C), (E))



   (F)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (G)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. §§ 4511.431(B), 4511.432(D))  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.24  RIGHT-OF-WAY ON PUBLIC HIGHWAY.



   (A)   The operator of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway
from any place other than another roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all
traffic approaching on the roadway to be entered or crossed.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.44)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.25  PEDESTRIAN ON SIDEWALK HAS RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   (A)   The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to any
pedestrian on a sidewalk.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.441)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.26  RIGHT-OF-WAY OF PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLES.



   (A)   Upon the approach of a public safety vehicle or coroner's
vehicle, equipped with at least one flashing, rotating, or oscillating light
visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to
the front of the vehicle, and the driver is giving an audible signal by
siren, exhaust whistle, or bell, no driver of any other vehicle shall fail to
yield the right-of-way, immediately drive if practical to a position parallel
to, and as close as possible to, the right edge or curb of the highway clear
of any intersection, and stop and remain in that position until the public
safety vehicle or coroner's vehicle has passed, except when otherwise
directed by a police officer.



   (B)   This section does not relieve the driver of a public safety
vehicle or coroner's vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the
safety of all persons and property upon the highway.



   (C)   This section applies to a coroner's vehicle only when the
vehicle is operated in accordance with R.C. § 4513.171, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance. As used in this section, CORONER'S VEHICLE
means a vehicle used by a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner's investigator
that is equipped with a flashing, oscillating or rotating red or blue light
and a siren, exhaust whistle or bell capable of giving an audible signal.



   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division or division (E),
whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree on a first offense. On a second offense within one year
after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree, and, on each subsequent offense within one year after the first
offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.



(R.C. § 4511.45)



   (E)   (1)   When the failure of a motor vehicle operator to yield
the right-of-way to a public safety vehicle as required by division (A) of
this section impedes the ability of the public safety vehicle to respond to
an emergency, any emergency personnel in the public safety vehicle may report
the license plate number and a general description of the vehicle and the
operator of the vehicle to the law enforcement agency exercising jurisdiction
over the area where the alleged violation occurred.



      (2)   (a)   Upon receipt of a report under division (E)(1)
of this section, the law enforcement agency may conduct an investigation to
attempt to determine or confirm the identity of the operator of the vehicle
at the time of the alleged violation.



         (b)   If the identity of the operator at the time of an
alleged violation of division (A) of this section is established, the law
enforcement agency has probable cause to issue either a written warning or a
citation for that violation, and the agency shall issue a written warning or
a citation to the operator.



         (c)   If the identity of the operator of the vehicle at
the time of the alleged violation cannot be established, the law enforcement
agency may issue a written warning to the person who owned the vehicle at the
time of the alleged violation. However, in the case of a leased or rented
vehicle, the law enforcement agency shall issue the written warning to the
person who leased or rented the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation.



      (3)   (a)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section
based on a report filed under division (E)(1) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor and shall be fined $150.



         (b)   If a person who is issued a citation for a
violation of division (A) of this section based on a report filed under
division (E)(1) of this section does not enter a written plea of guilty and
does not waive the person’s right to contest the citation but instead
appears in person in the proper court to answer the charge, the trier of fact
cannot find beyond a reasonable doubt that the person committed that
violation unless the emergency personnel who filed the report appears in
person in the court and testifies.



      (4)   As used in this division (E):



         LICENSE PLATE. Includes any temporary license placard
issued under R.C. § 4503.182 or similar law of another jurisdiction.



         PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE. Does not include an unmarked public
safety vehicle or a vehicle used by a public law enforcement officer or other
person sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state or a
vehicle used by the motor carrier enforcement unit for the enforcement of
orders and rules of the public utilities commission.



(R.C. § 4511.454)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.27  FUNERAL PROCESSION HAS RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   (A)   As used in this section, FUNERAL PROCESSION means two or more
vehicles accompanying the cremated remains or the body of a deceased person
in the daytime when each of the vehicles has its headlights lighted and is
displaying a purple and white or an orange and white pennant attached to each
vehicle in such a manner as to be clearly visible to traffic approaching from
any direction.



   (B)   Excepting public safety vehicles proceeding in accordance with
R.C. § 4511.45 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or when
directed otherwise by a police officer, pedestrians and the operators of all
vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to each vehicle that is a part of a
funeral procession. Whenever the lead vehicle in a funeral procession
lawfully enters an intersection, the remainder of the vehicles in the
procession may continue to follow the lead vehicle through the intersection,
notwithstanding any traffic-control devices or right-of-way provisions of the
Revised Code, provided that the operator of each vehicle exercises due care
to avoid colliding with any other vehicle or pedestrian.



   (C)   No person shall operate any vehicle as a part of a funeral
procession without having the headlights of the vehicle lighted and without
displaying a purple and white or an orange and white pennant in such a manner
as to be clearly visible to traffic approaching from any direction.



   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (E)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.451)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.28  PEDESTRIANS YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY TO PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE.



   (A)   Upon the immediate approach of a public safety vehicle, as
stated in R.C. § 4511.45 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
every pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to the public safety vehicle.



   (B)   This section shall not relieve the driver of a public safety
vehicle from the duty to exercise due care to avoid colliding with any
pedestrian.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.452)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.29  PEDESTRIAN ON CROSSWALK HAS RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   (A)   When traffic-control signals are not in place, not in
operation, or are not clearly assigning the right-of-way, the driver of a
vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to
so yield, or if required by R.C. § 4511.132 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk
when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is
traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite
half of the roadway as to be in danger.



   (B)   No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of
safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close as to
constitute an immediate hazard.



   (C)   Division (A) of this section does not apply under the
conditions stated in R.C. § 4511.48(B), or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.



   (D)   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at
any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass the stopped vehicle.



   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (F)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.46)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.30  RIGHT-OF-WAY YIELDED TO BLIND PERSON.



   (A)   (1)   As used in this section BLIND PERSON or BLIND
PEDESTRIAN means a person having not more than 20/200 visual acuity in the
better eye with correcting lenses, or visual acuity greater than 20/200, but
with a limitation in the fields of vision such that the widest diameter of
the visual field subtends an angle no greater than 20°.



      (2)   The driver of every vehicle shall yield the right-of-way
to every blind pedestrian guided by a guide dog, or carrying a cane which is
predominantly white or metallic in color, with or without a red tip.



   (B)   No person, other than a blind person, while on any public
highway, street, alley, or other public thoroughfare, shall carry a white or
metallic cane, with or without a red tip.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.47)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.31  RIGHT-OF-WAY YIELDED BY PEDESTRIAN.



   (A)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than
within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.



   (B)   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a
pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall
yield the right-of-way to all traffic upon the roadway.



   (C)   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control
signals are in operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in
a marked crosswalk.



   (D)   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally
unless authorized by official traffic- control devices; and when authorized
to cross diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the
official traffic-control devices pertaining to such crossing movements.



   (E)   This section does not relieve the operator of a vehicle from
exercising due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway.



   (F)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.48)  Penalty, see § 70.99



PEDESTRIANS



§ 72.35  PEDESTRIAN MOVEMENT IN CROSSWALKS.



   (A)   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right
half of crosswalks.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.49)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.36  PEDESTRIAN WALKING ALONG HIGHWAY.



   (A)   Where a sidewalk is provided and its use is practicable, it
shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent
roadway.



   (B)   Where a sidewalk is not available, any pedestrian walking
along and upon a highway shall walk only on a shoulder, as far as practicable
from the edge of the roadway.



   (C)   Where neither a sidewalk nor a shoulder is available, any
pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall walk as near as practicable
to an outside edge of the roadway, and, if on a two-way roadway, shall walk
only on the left side of the roadway.



   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. §§ 4511.13 and 4511.46,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, any pedestrian upon a
roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.



   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.50)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.37  PROHIBITION AGAINST SOLICITING RIDES; RIDING ON OUTSIDE OF VEHICLE.



   (A)   No person while on a roadway outside a safety zone shall
solicit a ride from the driver of any vehicle.



   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) of this
section, no person shall stand on a highway for the purpose of soliciting
employment, business, or contributions from the occupant of any vehicle.



      (2)   The Legislative Authority, by ordinance, may authorize
the issuance of a permit to a charitable organization to allow a person
acting on behalf of the organization to solicit charitable contributions from
the occupant of a vehicle by standing on a highway, other than a freeway as
provided in R.C. § 4511.051(A)(1), that is under the jurisdiction of the
municipality. The permit shall be valid for only one period of time, which
shall be specified in the permit, in any calendar year. The Legislative
Authority also may specify the locations where contributions may be solicited
and may impose any other restrictions on or requirements regarding the manner
in which the solicitations are to be conducted that the Legislative Authority
considers advisable.



      (3)   As used in subsection (2) of this division, CHARITABLE
ORGANIZATION means an organization that has received from the Internal
Revenue Service a currently valid ruling or determination letter recognizing
the tax-exempt status of the organization pursuant to Internal Revenue Code
§ 501(c)(3).



   (C)   No person shall hang onto or ride on the outside of any motor
vehicle while it is moving upon a roadway, except mechanics or test engineers
making repairs or adjustments, or workers performing specialized highway or
street maintenance or construction under authority of a public agency.



   (D)   No operator shall knowingly permit any person to hang onto or
ride on the outside of any motor vehicle while it is moving upon a roadway,
except mechanics or test engineers making repairs or adjustments, or workers
performing specialized highway or street maintenance or construction under
authority of a public agency.



   (E)   No driver of a truck, trailer, or semitrailer shall knowingly
permit any person who has not attained the age of 16 years to ride in the
unenclosed or unroofed cargo storage area of the driver's vehicle if the
vehicle is traveling faster than 25 miles per hour, unless either of the
following applies:



      (1)   The cargo storage area of the vehicle is equipped with a
properly secured seat to which is attached a seat safety belt that is in
compliance with federal standards for an occupant restraining device as
defined in R.C. § 4513.263(A)(2), the seat and seat safety belt were
installed at the time the vehicle was originally assembled, and the person
riding in the cargo storage area is in the seat and is wearing the seat
safety belt; or



      (2)   An emergency exists that threatens the life of the
driver or the person being transported in the cargo storage area of the
truck, trailer, or semitrailer.



   (F)   No driver of a truck, trailer, or semitrailer shall permit any
person, except for those workers performing specialized highway or street
maintenance or construction under authority of a public agency, to ride in
the cargo storage area or on a tailgate of the driver's vehicle while the
tailgate is unlatched.



   (G)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division,
whoever violates any provision of divisions (A) to (D) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates any provision of divisions
(A) to (D) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been
convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever
violates any provision of divisions (A) to (D) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (E) or (F) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4511.51)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.38  PEDESTRIAN ON BRIDGE OR RAILROAD CROSSING.



   (A)   No pedestrian shall enter or remain upon any bridge or
approach thereto beyond the bridge signal, gate, or barrier after a bridge
operation signal indication has been given.



   (B)   No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over, or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing or bridge while the
gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.511)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.39  PERSONS OPERATING MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIRS.



   Every person operating a motorized wheelchair shall have all of the
rights and duties applicable to a pedestrian that are contained in this
chapter, except those provisions which by their nature can have no
application.



(R.C. § 4511.491)



§ 72.40  INTOXICATED OR DRUGGED PEDESTRIAN HAZARD ON HIGHWAY.



   (A)   A pedestrian who is under the influence of alcohol, any drug
of abuse, or any combination of them to a degree that renders the pedestrian
a hazard shall not walk or be upon a highway.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.481)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.41  OPERATION OF ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICES.



   (A)   (1)   Electric personal assistive mobility devices may be
operated on the public streets, highways, sidewalks, and paths and portions
of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles in accordance with
this section.



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, those
sections of this Traffic Code that by their nature are applicable to an
electric personal assistive mobility device apply to the device and the
person operating it whenever it is operated upon any public street, highway,
sidewalk, or path or upon any portion of a roadway set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles.



      (3)   The municipality may regulate or prohibit the operation
of electric personal assistive mobility devices on public streets, highways,
sidewalks, and paths, or portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use
of bicycles, under its jurisdiction.



   (B)   No operator of an electric personal assistive mobility device
shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Fail to yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians and
human-powered vehicles at all times;



      (2)   Fail to give an audible signal before overtaking and
passing a pedestrian;



      (3)   Operate the device at night unless the device or its
operator is equipped with or wearing both of the following:



         (a)   A lamp pointing to the front that emits a white
light visible from a distance of not less than 500 feet;



         (b)   A red reflector facing the rear that is visible
from all distances from 100 feet to 600 feet when directly in front of lawful
lower beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle;



      (4)   Operate the device on any portion of a street or highway
that has an established speed limit of 55 miles per hour or more;



      (5)   Operate the device upon any path set aside for the
exclusive use of pedestrians or other specialized use when an appropriate
sign giving notice of the specialized use is posted on the path;



      (6)   If under 18 years of age, operate the device unless
wearing a protective helmet on the person's head with the chin strap properly
fastened;



      (7)   If under 16 years of age, operate the device unless,
during the operation, the person is under the direct visual and audible
supervision of another person who is 18 years of age or older and is
responsible for the immediate care of the person under 16 years of age.



   (C)   No person who is under 14 years of age shall operate an
electric personal assistive mobility device.



   (D)   No person shall distribute or sell an electric personal
assistive mobility device unless the device is accompanied by a written
statement that is substantially equivalent to the following: “WARNING: TO
REDUCE THE RISK OF SERIOUS INJURY, USE ONLY WHILE WEARING FULL PROTECTIVE
EQUIPMENT – HELMET, WRIST GUARDS, ELBOW PADS, AND KNEE PADS.”



   (E)   Nothing in this section affects or shall be construed to
affect any rule of the Director of Natural Resources or a board of park
district commissioners governing the operation of vehicles on lands under the
control of the Director or board, as applicable.



   (F)   Penalty.



      (1)   Whoever violates division (B) or (C) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be punished as follows:



         (a)   The offender shall be fined $10;



         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (B) or (C) of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, the court, in
addition to imposing the fine required under division (F)(1)(a) of this
section, shall do one of the following:



            1.   Order the impoundment for not less than one
day but not more than 30 days of the electric personal assistive mobility
device that was involved in the current violation of that division. The court
shall order the device to be impounded at a safe indoor location designated
by the court and may assess storage fees of not more than $5 per day;
provided the total storage, processing, and release fees assessed against the
offender or the device in connection with the device's impoundment or
subsequent release shall not exceed $50.



            2.    If the court does not issue an impoundment
order pursuant to division (F)(1)(b)1. of this section, issue an order
prohibiting the offender from operating any electric personal assistive
mobility device on the public streets, highways, sidewalks, and paths and
portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles for not less
than one day but not more than 30 days.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty
of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4511.512) 



   (G)   As used in this Code, ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY
DEVICE means a self-balancing two non-tandem wheeled device that is designed
to transport only one person, has an electric propulsion system of an average
of 750 watts, and when ridden on a paved level surface by an operator who
weighs 170 pounds has a maximum speed of less than 20 miles per hour.



(R.C. § 4501.01(TT))  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.42  OPERATION OF PERSONAL DELIVERY DEVICE ON SIDEWALKS AND CROSSWALKS.



   (A)   As used in this section:



      ELIGIBLE ENTITY. Means a corporation, partnership, association,
firm, sole proprietorship, or other entity engaged in business.



      PERSONAL DELIVERY DEVICE. Means an electrically powered device to
which all of the following apply:



         (a)   The device is intended primarily to transport
property on sidewalks and crosswalks.



         (b)   The device weighs less than 90 pounds excluding
any property being carried in the device.



         (c)   The device has a maximum speed of ten miles per
hour.



         (d)   The device is equipped with technology that
enables the operation of the device with active control or monitoring by a
person, without active control or monitoring by a person, or both with or
without active control or monitoring by a person.



      PERSONAL DELIVERY DEVICE OPERATOR. Means an agent of an eligible
entity who exercises direct physical control over, or monitoring of, the
navigation and operation of a personal delivery device. The phrase does not
include, with respect to a delivery or other service rendered by a personal
delivery device, the person who requests the delivery or service. The phrase
also does not include a person who only arranges for and dispatches a
personal delivery device for a delivery or other service.



   (B)   An eligible entity may operate a personal delivery device on
sidewalks and crosswalks so long as all of the following requirements are met:



      (1)   The personal delivery device is operated in accordance
with all regulations, if any, established by each local authority within
which the personal delivery device is operated.



      (2)   A personal delivery device operator is actively
controlling or monitoring the navigation and operation of the personal
delivery device.



      (3)   The eligible entity maintains an insurance policy that
includes general liability coverage of not less than $100,000 for damages
arising from the operation of the personal delivery device by the eligible
entity and any agent of the eligible entity.



      (4)   The device is equipped with all of the following:



         (a)   A marker that clearly identifies the name and
contact information of the eligible entity operating the personal delivery
device and a unique identification number;



         (b)   A braking system that enables the personal
delivery device to come to a controlled stop;



         (c)   If the personal delivery device is being operated
between sunset and sunrise, a light on both the front and rear of the
personal delivery device that is visible in clear weather from a distance of
at least 500 feet to the front and rear of the personal delivery device when
directly in front of low beams of headlights on a motor vehicle.



   (C)   No personal delivery device operator shall allow a personal
delivery device to do any of the following:



      (1)   Fail to comply with traffic or pedestrian control
devices and signals;



      (2)   Unreasonably interfere with pedestrians or traffic;



      (3)   Transport any hazardous material that would require a
permit issued by the Public Utilities Commission;



      (4)   Operate on a street or highway, except when crossing the
street or highway within a crosswalk.



   (D)   A personal delivery device has all of the rights and
obligations applicable to a pedestrian under the same circumstances, except
that a personal delivery device shall yield the right-of-way to human
pedestrians on sidewalks and crosswalks.



   (E)   (1)   No person shall operate a personal delivery device
unless the person is authorized to do so under this section and complies with
the requirements of this section.



      (2)   An eligible entity is responsible for both of the
following:



         (a)   Any violation of this section that is committed by
a personal delivery device operator; and



         (b)   Any other circumstance, including a technological
malfunction, in which a personal delivery device operates in a manner
prohibited by divisions (C)(1) to (C)(4) of this section.



(R.C. § 4511.513)  Penalty, see § 70.99



GRADE CROSSINGS



§ 72.45  STOP SIGNS AT GRADE CROSSINGS.



   (A)   As used in this section, ACTIVE GRADE CROSSING WARNING DEVICE
means signs, signals, gates, or other protective devices erected or installed
at a public highway-railway crossing at common grade and activated by an
electrical circuit.



   (B)   The Department of Transportation and local authorities, with
the approval of the Department, may designate dangerous highway crossings
over railroad tracks and erect stop signs thereat.



   (C)   (1)   The Department and local authorities shall erect stop
signs at a railroad highway grade crossing in either of the following
circumstances:



         (a)   New warning devices that are not active grade
crossing warning devices are being installed at the grade crossing, and
railroad crossbucks were the only warning devices at the grade crossing prior
to the installation of the new warning devices.



         (b)   The grade crossing is constructed after July 1,
2013 and only warning devices that are not active grade crossing warning
devices are installed at the grade crossing.



      (2)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not apply to a
railroad highway grade crossing that the Director of Transportation has
exempted from that division because of traffic flow or other considerations
or factors.



   (D)   When stop signs are erected pursuant to division (B) or (C) of
this section, the operator of any vehicle shall stop within 50, but not less
than 15, feet from the nearest rail of the railroad tracks and shall exercise
due care before proceeding across such grade crossing.



   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates division (D) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If,
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If,
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (F)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.61)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.46  DRIVING VEHICLE ACROSS RAILROAD GRADE CROSSING.



   (A)   (1)   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a
railroad grade crossing, the person shall stop within 50 feet but not less
than 15 feet from the nearest rail of the railroad if any of the following
circumstances exist at the crossing:



         (a)   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal
device gives warning of the immediate approach of a train.



         (b)   A crossing gate is lowered.



         (c)   A flagperson gives or continues to give a signal
of the approach or passage of a train.



         (d)   There is insufficient space on the other side of
the railroad grade crossing to accommodate the vehicle the person is
operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles, pedestrians or
railroad trains, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to
proceed.



         (e)   An approaching train is emitting an audible signal
or is plainly visible, and is in hazardous proximity to the crossing.



         (f)   There is insufficient undercarriage clearance to
safely negotiate the crossing.



      (2)   A person who is driving a vehicle and who approaches a
railroad grade crossing shall not proceed as long as any of the circumstances
described in divisions (A)(1)(a) through (A)(1)(f) of this section exist at
the crossing.



   (B)   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around, or under
any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while the gate or barrier
is closed, or is being opened or closed unless the person is signaled by a
law enforcement officer or flagperson that it is permissible to do so.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 4511.62)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.47  VEHICLES REQUIRED TO STOP AT GRADE CROSSINGS.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, the
operator of any bus, any school vehicle, or any vehicle transporting material
required to be placarded under 49 CFR Parts 100-185, before crossing at grade
any track of a railroad, shall stop the vehicle, and while so stopped, shall
listen through an open door or open window, and look in both directions along
the track for any approaching train and for signals indicating the approach
of a train, and shall proceed only upon exercising due care after stopping,
looking, and listening as required by this section. Upon proceeding, the
operator of such a vehicle shall cross only in a gear that will ensure there
will be no necessity for changing gears while traversing the crossing, and
shall not shift gears while crossing the tracks.



   (B)   This section does not apply at grade crossings when any local
authority has filed an application with the Public Utilities Commission
requesting the approval of an exempt crossing, and the Public Utilities
Commission has authorized and approved an exempt crossing as provided in R.C.
§ 4511.63(B).



   (C)   As used in this section:



      BUS. Means any vehicle originally designed by its manufacturer to
transport 16 or more passengers, including the driver, or carries 16 or more
passengers, including the driver.



      EXEMPT CROSSING. Means a highway rail grade crossing authorized
and approved by the Public Utilities Commission under R.C. § 4511.63(B) at
which vehicles may cross without making the stop otherwise required by this
section.



      SCHOOL VEHICLE. Means any vehicle used for the transportation of
pupils to and from a school or school-related function if the vehicle is
owned or operated by, or operated under contract with, a public or nonpublic
school.



   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations
of this section or R.C. §§ 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.762, 4511.764,
4511.77, or 4511.79, or a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to any of those sections, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 4511.63)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.48  SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES OR EQUIPMENT CROSSING RAILROAD TRACKS.



   (A)   No person shall operate or move any crawler-type tractor,
steam shovel, derrick, roller, or any equipment or structure having a normal
operating speed of six or less miles per hour or a vertical body or load
clearance of less than nine inches above the level surface of a roadway, upon
or across any tracks at a railroad grade crossing without first complying
with divisions (A)(1) and (2) of this section.



      (1)   Before making any such crossing, the person operating or
moving any such vehicle or equipment shall first stop the same, and while
stopped, the person shall listen and look in both directions along the track
for any approaching train and for signals indicating the approach of a train,
and shall proceed only upon exercising due care.



      (2)   No such crossing shall be made when warning is given by
automatic signal, crossing gates, or a flagperson, or otherwise of the
immediate approach of a railroad train or car.



   (B)   If the normal sustained speed of the vehicle, equipment, or
structure is not more than three miles per hour, the person owning,
operating, or moving the same shall also give notice of the intended crossing
to a station agent or superintendent of the railroad, and a reasonable time
shall be given to the railroad to provide proper protection for the crossing.
Where the vehicles or equipment are being used in constructing or repairing a
section of highway lying on both sides of a railroad grade crossing, and in
this construction or repair it is necessary to repeatedly move the vehicles
or equipment over the crossing, one daily notice specifying when the work
will start and stating the hours during which it will be prosecuted is
sufficient.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.64)  Penalty, see § 70.99



PROHIBITIONS



§ 72.55  OBSTRUCTION AND INTERFERENCE AFFECTING VIEW AND CONTROL OF DRIVER.



   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when
there are in the front seat such number of persons, as to obstruct the view
of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle, or to interfere with the
driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.



   (B)   No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in a position as to
interfere with the driver's view ahead or to the sides, or to interfere with
the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.



   (C)   No person shall open the door of a vehicle on the side
available to moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so,
and can be done without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor
shall any person leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to
moving traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload
passengers.



   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.70)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.56  OCCUPYING TRAVEL TRAILER WHILE IN MOTION.



   (A)   No person shall occupy any travel trailer or manufactured or
mobile home while it is being used as a conveyance upon a street or highway.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.701)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.57  DRIVING UPON CLOSED HIGHWAY PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall drive upon, along, or across a street or
highway, or any part of a street or highway that has been closed in the
process of its construction, reconstruction, or repair, and posted with
appropriate signs by the authority having jurisdiction to close the highway.



(R.C. § 4511.71(A))



   (B)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle on or onto a public
street or highway that is temporarily covered by a rise in water level,
including groundwater or an overflow of water, and that is clearly marked by
a sign that specifies that the road is closed due to the rise in water level
and that any person who uses the closed portion of the road may be fined up
to $2,000.



      (2)   A person who is issued a citation for a violation of
division (B)(1) of this section is not permitted to enter a written plea of
guilty and waive the person’s right to contest the citation in court, but
instead must appear in person in the proper court to answer the charge.



(R.C. § 4511.714(A), (B))



    (C)   (1)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this
division, whoever violates division (A) of  this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor
vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates division (A) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates division (A) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



         (b)   If the offender commits the offense while
distracted and the distracting activity is a contributing factor to the
commission of the offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine
established under § 70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.71(B))



      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section
is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



         (b)   In addition to the financial sanctions authorized
or required under R.C. § 2929.28 and to any costs otherwise authorized or
required under any provision of law, the court imposing the sentence upon an
offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of division (B)
of this section shall order the offender to reimburse one or more rescuers
for the cost any such rescuer incurred in rescuing the person, excluding any
cost of transporting the rescued person to a hospital or other facility for
treatment of injuries, up to a cumulative maximum of $2,000. If more than one
rescuer was involved in the emergency response, the court shall allocate the
reimbursement proportionately, according to the cost each rescuer incurred. A
financial sanction imposed under this section is a judgment in favor of the
rescuer and, subject to a determination of indigency under R.C. §
2929.28(B), a rescuer may collect the financial sanction in the same manner
as provided in R.C. § 2929.28.



(R.C. § 4511.714(C))



   (D)   As used in this section:



      EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE ORGANIZATION. Has the same meanings as
in R.C. § 9.60.



      FIREFIGHTING AGENCY. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 9.60.



      PRIVATE FIRE COMPANY. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 9.60.



      RESCUER. Means a state agency, political subdivision,
firefighting agency, private fire company, or emergency medical service
organization.



(R.C. § 4511.714(D))  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.58  DRIVING UPON SIDEWALK AREA OR PATHS EXCLUSIVELY FOR BICYCLES.



   (A)   (1)    No person shall drive any vehicle, other than a
bicycle or an electric bicycle if the motor is not engaged, upon a sidewalk
or sidewalk area, except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary
driveway.



      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as
prohibiting local authorities from regulating the operation of bicycles or
electric bicycles, except that no local authority may require that bicycles
or electric bicycles be operated on sidewalks.



(R.C. § 4511.711(A))



   (B)   (1)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, snowmobile,
or all-purpose vehicle upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles, when an appropriate sign giving notice of such use is posted on the
path.



      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect any
rule of the Director of Natural Resources governing the operation of motor
vehicles, snowmobiles, all-purpose vehicles, and bicycles on lands under the
Director's jurisdiction.



(R.C. § 4511.713(A))



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. §§ 4511.711(B), 4511.713(B))  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.59  OBSTRUCTING PASSAGE OF OTHER VEHICLES.



   (A)   No driver shall enter an intersection or marked crosswalk, or
drive onto any railroad grade crossing, unless there is sufficient space on
the other side of the intersection, crosswalk, or grade crossing to
accommodate the vehicle the driver is operating without obstructing the
passage of other vehicles, pedestrians, or railroad trains, notwithstanding
any traffic-control signal indication to proceed.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.712)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.60  FOLLOWING AN EMERGENCY OR PUBLIC VEHICLE PROHIBITED; APPROACHING
STATIONARY PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE AND CERTAIN OTHER VEHICLES WITH CAUTION.



   (A)   Following an emergency or public vehicle prohibited. The
driver of any vehicle, other than an emergency vehicle or public safety
vehicle on official business, shall not follow any emergency vehicle or
public safety vehicle traveling in response to an alarm closer than 500 feet,
or drive into or park the vehicle within the block where the fire apparatus
has stopped in answer to a fire alarm, unless directed to do so by a police
officer or a firefighter.



(R.C. § 4511.72(A))



   (B)   Approaching stationary public safety vehicle with caution.



      (1)   The driver of a motor vehicle, upon approaching a
stationary public safety vehicle, emergency vehicle, road service vehicle,
waste collection vehicle, vehicle used by the Public Utilities Commission to
conduct motor vehicle inspections in accordance with R.C. §§ 4923.04 and
4923.06, or a highway maintenance vehicle that is displaying the appropriate
visual signals by means of flashing, oscillating, or rotating lights, as
prescribed in R.C. § 4513.17, shall do either of the following:



         (a)   If the driver of the motor vehicle is traveling on
a highway that consists of at least two lanes that carry traffic in the same
direction of travel as that of the driver's motor vehicle, the driver shall
proceed with due caution and, if possible and with due regard to the road,
weather, and traffic conditions, shall change lanes into a lane that is not
adjacent to that of the stationary public safety vehicle, emergency vehicle,
road service vehicle, waste collection vehicle, vehicle used by the Public
Utilities Commission to conduct motor vehicle inspections in accordance with
R.C. §§ 4923.04 and 4923.06, or a highway maintenance vehicle.



         (b)   If the driver is not traveling on a highway of a
type described in division (B)(1)(a) of this section, or if the driver is
traveling on a highway of that type but it is not possible to change lanes or
if to do so would be unsafe, the driver shall proceed with due caution,
reduce the speed of the motor vehicle, and maintain a safe speed for the
road, weather, and traffic conditions.



      (2)   This division (B) does not relieve the driver of a
public safety vehicle, emergency vehicle, road service vehicle, waste
collection vehicle, vehicle used by the Public Utilities Commission to
conduct motor vehicle inspections in accordance with R.C. §§ 4923.04 and
4923.06, or a highway maintenance vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.



      (3)   No person shall fail to drive a motor vehicle in
compliance with divisions (B)(1)(a) or (B)(1)(b) of this section when so
required by division (B) of this section.



(R.C. § 4511.213(A) - (C), (E))



   (C)   Penalty.



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



      (2)   Notwithstanding § 130.99 or R.C. § 2929.28, upon a
finding that a person operated a motor vehicle in violation of division
(B)(3) of this section, the court, in addition to all other penalties
provided by law, shall impose a fine of two times the usual amount imposed
for the violation.



      (3)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and
the distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. §§ 4511.213(D), 4511.72(B)) 



   (D)   The offense established under division (B) of this section is
a strict liability offense and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The
designation of this offense as a strict liability offense shall not be
construed to imply that any other offense, for which there is no specified
degree of culpability, is not a strict liability offense.



(R.C. §§ 4511.213(D), 4511.72(B))  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.61  DRIVING OVER UNPROTECTED FIRE HOSE.



   (A)   No vehicle shall, without the consent of the fire department
official in command, be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department
that is laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire or
alarm of fire.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.73)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.62  PLACING INJURIOUS MATERIAL ON HIGHWAY OR DEPOSITING LITTER FROM
MOTOR VEHICLE.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall place or knowingly drop upon any part
of a highway, lane, road, street, or alley any tacks, bottles, wire, glass,
nails, or other articles which may damage or injure any person, vehicle, or
animal traveling along or upon the highway, except such substances that may
be placed upon the roadway by proper authority for the repair or construction
thereof.



      (2)   Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown
upon any highway any destructive or injurious material shall immediately
remove the same.



      (3)   Any person authorized to remove a wrecked or damaged
vehicle from a highway shall remove any glass or other injurious substance
dropped upon the highway from such vehicle.



      (4)   No person shall place any obstruction in or upon a
highway without proper authority.



   (B)   No person, with intent to cause physical harm to a person or a
vehicle, shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a highway, lane,
road, street, or alley any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails, or other
articles which may damage or injure any person, vehicle, or animal traveling
along or upon such highway, except such substances that may be placed upon
the roadway by proper authority for the repair or construction thereof.



(R.C. § 4511.74(A), (B))



   (C)   No operator or occupant of a motor vehicle shall, regardless
of intent, throw, drop, discard, or deposit litter from any motor vehicle in
operation upon any street, road, or highway, except into a litter receptacle
in a manner that prevents its being carried away or deposited by the elements.



   (D)   No operator of a motor vehicle in operation upon any street,
road, or highway shall allow litter to be thrown, dropped, discarded, or
deposited from the motor vehicle, except into a litter receptacle in a manner
that prevents its being carried away or deposited by the elements.



   (E)   As used in this section, LITTER means garbage, trash, waste,
rubbish, ashes, cans, bottles, wire, paper, cartons, boxes, automobile parts,
furniture, glass, or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature.



(R.C. § 4511.82(A), (B), (D))



   (F)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division,
whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the
offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle
or traffic offenses, whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 4511.74(C)) 



      (3)   Whoever violates division (C) or (D) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4511.82(C))  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.63  TRANSPORTING CHILD NOT IN CHILD RESTRAINT SYSTEM PROHIBITED.



   (A)   When any child who is in either or both of the following
categories is being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or
public safety vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4511.01, that is required by the
United States Department of Transportation to be equipped with seat belts at
the time of manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle shall
have the child properly secured in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions in a child restraint system that meets federal motor vehicle
safety standards:



      (1)   A child who is less than four years of age;



      (2)   A child who weighs less than 40 pounds.



   (B)   When any child who is in either or both of the following
categories is being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab,
that is owned, leased, or otherwise under the control of a nursery school, or
day-care center, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child
properly secured in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions in a
child restraint system that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards:



      (1)   A child who is less than four years of age;



      (2)   A child who weighs less than 40 pounds.



   (C)   When any child who is less than eight years of age and less
than four feet nine inches in height, who is not required by division (A) or
(B) of this section to be secured in a child restraint system, is being
transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety vehicle
as defined in R.C. § 4511.01 or a vehicle that is regulated under R.C. §
5104.015, that is required by the United States Department of Transportation
to be equipped with seat belts at the time of manufacture or assembly, the
operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child properly secured in
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions on a booster seat that
meets federal motor vehicle safety standards.



   (D)   When any child who is at least eight years of age but not
older than 15 years of age, and who is not otherwise required by division
(A), (B), or (C) of this section to be secured in a child restraint system or
booster seat, is being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab
or public safety vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4511.01, that is required by
the United States Department of Transportation to be equipped with seat belts
at the time of manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle
shall have the child properly restrained either in accordance with the
manufacturer’s instructions in a child restraint system that meets federal
motor vehicle safety standards or in an occupant restraining device as
defined in R.C. § 4513.263.



   (E)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause an operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of division (C) or (D) of this section has
been or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket,
citation or summons for a violation of division (C) or (D) of this section or
causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation
of division (C) or (D) of this section, and absent another violation of law,
a law enforcement officer’s view of the interior or visual inspection of a
motor vehicle being operated on any street or highway may not be used for the
purpose of determining whether a violation of division (C) or (D) of this
section has been or is being committed.



   (F)   The Director of Public Safety shall adopt such rules as are
necessary to carry out this section.



   (G)   The failure of an operator of a motor vehicle to secure a
child in a child restraint system, a booster seat or in an occupant
restraining device as required in this section is not negligence imputable to
the child, is not admissible as evidence in any civil action involving the
rights of the child against any other person allegedly liable for injuries to
the child, is not to be used as a basis for a criminal prosecution of the
operator of the motor vehicle other than a prosecution for a violation of
this section, and is not admissible as evidence in any criminal action
involving the operator of the motor vehicle other than a prosecution for a
violation of this section.



   (H)   This section does not apply when an emergency exists that
threatens the life of any person operating or occupying a motor vehicle that
is being used to transport a child who otherwise would be required to be
restrained under this section. This section does not apply to a person
operating a motor vehicle who has an affidavit signed by a physician licensed
to practice in this state under R.C. Chapter 4731 or a chiropractor licensed
to practice in this state under R.C. Chapter 4734 that states that the child
who otherwise would be required to be restrained under this section has a
physical impairment that makes use of a child restraint system, booster seat
or an occupant restraining device impossible or impractical, provided that
the person operating the vehicle has safely and appropriately restrained the
child in accordance with any recommendations of the physician or chiropractor
as noted on the affidavit.



   (I)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any
person to carry with the person the birth certificate of a child to prove the
age of the child, but the production of a valid birth certificate for a child
showing that the child was not of an age to which this section applies is a
defense against any ticket, citation or summons issued for violating this
section.



   (J)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A), (B), (C), or (D) of
this section shall be punished as follows, provided that the failure of an
operator of a motor vehicle to secure more than one child in a child
restraint system, booster seat or occupant restraining device as required by
this section that occurred at the same time, on the same day and at the same
location is deemed to be a single violation of this section:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (J)(1)(b)
of this section, the offender is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be
fined not less than $25 nor more than $75.



         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (A), (B), (C), or (D) of this
section or of a state law or municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent any of those divisions, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.



      (2)   All fines imposed pursuant to division (J)(1) of this
section shall be forwarded to the State Treasurer for deposit in the Child
Highway Safety Fund created by R.C. § 4511.81(I).



(R.C. § 4511.81(A)-(H), (K), (L))  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.64  OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICES.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      AUTOMOBILE. Any commercial tractor, passenger car, commercial
car, or truck that is required to be factory-equipped with an occupant
restraining device for the operator or any passenger by regulations adopted
by the United States Secretary of Transportation pursuant to the “National
Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966,” 80 Stat. 719, 15 U.S.C. §
1392.



      COMMERCIAL TRACTOR, PASSENGER CAR, and COMMERCIAL CAR have the
same meanings as in R.C. § 4501.01.



      OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICE. A seat safety belt, shoulder belt,
harness, or other safety device for restraining a person who is an operator
of or passenger in an automobile and that satisfies the minimum federal
vehicle safety standards established by the United States Department of
Transportation.



      PASSENGER. Any person in an automobile, other than its operator,
who is occupying a seating position for which an occupant restraining device
is provided.



      TORT ACTION. A civil action for damages for injury, death, or
loss to person or property. TORT ACTION includes a product liability claim,
as defined in R.C. § 2307.71, and as asbestos claim, as defined in R.C. §
2307.91, but does not include a civil action for damages for breach of
contract or another agreement between persons.



      VEHICLE and MOTOR VEHICLE. As used in the definitions of the
terms set forth above, VEHICLE and MOTOR VEHICLE have the same meanings as in
R.C. § 4511.01.



   (B)   Prohibited acts. No person shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless he
or she is wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted
occupant restraining device, or operate a school bus that has an occupant
restraining device installed for use in its operator's seat unless he or she
is wearing all of the available elements of the device, as properly adjusted.



      (2)   Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless
each passenger in the automobile who is subject to the requirement set forth
in division (B)(3) of this section is wearing all of the available elements
of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device.



      (3)   Occupy, as a passenger, a seating position on the front
seat of an automobile being operated on any street or highway unless he or
she is wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant
restraining device.



      (4)   Operate a taxicab on any street or highway unless all
factory-equipped occupant restraining devices in the taxicab are maintained
in usable form.



   (C)   Exceptions. Division (B)(3) of this section does not apply to
a person who is required by R.C. § 4511.81 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance to be secured in a child restraint device or booster
seat.  Division (B)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is an
employee of the United States Postal Service or of a newspaper home delivery
service, during any period in which the person is engaged in the operation of
an automobile to deliver mail or newspapers to addressees. Divisions (B)(1)
and (3) of this section do not apply to a person who has an affidavit signed
by a physician licensed to practice in this state under R.C. Chapter 4731 or
a chiropractor licensed to practice in this state under R.C. Chapter 4734
that states that the person has a physical impairment that makes use of an
occupant restraining device impossible or impractical.



   (D)   Officers not permitted to stop cars to determine violation.
Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law enforcement
officer shall cause an operator of an automobile being operated on any street
or highway to stop the automobile for the sole purpose of determining whether
a violation of division (B) of this section has been or is being committed or
for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or summons for the
violation or for causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a
person for the violation. No law enforcement officer shall view the interior
or visually inspect any automobile being operated on any street or highway
for the sole purpose of determining whether the violation has been or is
being committed.



   (E)   Use of fines for educational program. All fines collected for
violations of division (B) of this section shall be forwarded to the State
Treasurer for deposit in the funds as set forth in R.C. § 4513.263(E).



   (F)   Limitations on evidence used for prosecution.



      (1)   Subject to division (F)(2) of this section, the failure
of a person to wear all of the available elements of a properly adjusted
occupant restraining device in violation of division (B)(1) or (B)(3) of this
section or the failure of a person to ensure that each minor who is a
passenger of an automobile being operated by that person is wearing all of
the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device in
violation of division (B)(2) of this section shall not be considered or used
by the trier of fact in a tort action as evidence of negligence or
contributory negligence. But, the trier of fact may determine based on
evidence admitted consistent with the Ohio Rules of Evidence that the failure
contributed to the harm alleged in the tort action and may diminish a
recovery of compensatory damages that represents non-economic loss, as
defined in R.C. § 2307.011, in a tort action that could have been recovered
but for the plaintiff’s failure to wear all of the available elements of a
properly adjusted occupant restraining device. Evidence of that failure shall
not be used as a basis for a criminal prosecution of the person other than a
prosecution for a violation of this section; and shall not be admissible as
evidence in a criminal action involving the person other than a prosecution
for a violation of this section.



      (2)   If, at the time of an accident involving a passenger car
equipped with occupant restraining devices, any occupant of the passenger car
who sustained injury or death was not wearing an available occupant
restraining device, was not wearing all of the available elements of such a
device, or was not wearing such a device as properly adjusted, then,
consistent with the Rules of Evidence, the fact that the occupant was not
wearing the available occupant restraining device, was not wearing all of the
available elements of such a device, or was not wearing such a device as
properly adjusted is admissible in evidence in relation to any claim for
relief in a tort action to the extent that the claim for relief satisfies all
of the following:



         (a)   It seeks to recover damages for injury or death to
the occupant;



         (b)   The defendant in question is the manufacturer,
designer, distributor, or seller of the passenger car;



         (c)   The claim for relief against the defendant in
question is that the injury or death sustained by the occupant was enhanced
or aggravated by some design defect in the passenger car or that the
passenger car was not crashworthy.



   (G)   Penalty.



      (1)   Whoever violates division (B)(1) of this section shall
be fined $30.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (B)(2) shall be subject to the
penalty set forth in § 70.99(B).



      (3)   Whoever violates division (B)(3) of this section shall
be fined $20.



      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates division (B)(4) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
violation of division (B)(4) of this section, whoever violates division
(B)(4) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4513.263)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Cross-reference:



   Child restraint systems, see § 72.63



   Installation and sale of seat safety belts, see § 74.33



   School bus operators, restraining devices, see § 72.89



§ 72.65  USE OF ENGINE BRAKES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   The non-emergency use of engine brakes within the municipality
is prohibited.



   (B)   As used in this section, ENGINE BRAKES shall be defined to
include, but is not limited to, Jake Brakes, Jacobs Brakes, C Brakes,
PacBrakes, TekBrakes, and any other type of engine retarders commonly
utilized within the trucking industry.



   (C)   This section does not apply to emergency vehicles operated by
fire, police, or military units.



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



§ 72.66  OPERATING MOTOR VEHICLE WHILE WEARING EARPHONES OR EARPLUGS.



   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle while wearing
earphones over, or earplugs in, both ears. As used in this section, EARPHONES
means any headset, radio, tape player, or other similar device that provides
the listener with radio programs, music, or other recorded information
through a device attached to the head and that covers all or a portion of
both ears. EARPHONES does not include speakers or other listening devices
that are built into protective headgear.



   (B)   This section does not apply to:



      (1)   Any person wearing a hearing aid;



      (2)   Law enforcement personnel while on duty;



      (3)   Fire department personnel and emergency medical service
personnel while on duty;



      (4)   Any person operating equipment for use in the
maintenance or repair of any highway;



      (5)   Any person engaged in the operation of refuse collection
equipment.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within
one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.84)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.67  CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINES AND LIVERY SERVICES.



   (A)   The operator of a chauffeured limousine shall accept
passengers only on the basis of prearranged contracts, as defined in R.C. §
4501.01, and shall not cruise in search of patronage unless the limousine is
in compliance with any statute or ordinance governing the operation of
taxicabs or other similar vehicles for hire.



   (B)   The operator of a chauffeured limousine may provide
transportation to passengers who arrange for the transportation through an
intermediary, including a digital dispatching service. Notwithstanding any
law to the contrary, when providing transportation arranged through an
intermediary, the operator of a chauffeured limousine may establish the fare
and method of fare calculation, so long as the method of fare calculation is
provided to the passenger upon request.



   (C)   No person shall advertise or hold himself or herself out as
doing business as a limousine service or livery service or other similar
designation unless each vehicle used by the person to provide the service is
registered in accordance with R.C. § 4503.24 and is in compliance with R.C.
§ 4509.80.



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.



(R.C. § 4511.85)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Chauffeured limousine, motor vehicle licensing, see R.C. § 4503.24



   Proof of financial responsibility, see R.C. § 4509.80



§ 72.68  OPERATING TRACTION ENGINE UPON IMPROVED HIGHWAYS.



   (A)   No person shall drive over the improved highways of this
municipality a traction engine or tractor with tires or wheels equipped with
ice picks, spuds, spikes, chains or other projections of any kind extending
beyond the cleats, and no person shall tow or in any way pull another vehicle
over the improved highways of this municipality which towed or pulled vehicle
has tires or wheels equipped with ice picks, spuds, spikes, chains or other
projections of any kind. TRACTION ENGINE or TRACTOR, as used in this section,
applies to all self-propelling engines equipped with metal-tired wheels
operated or propelled by any form of engine, motor or mechanical power.



   (B)   This municipality shall not adopt, enforce, or maintain any
ordinance, rule or regulation contrary to or inconsistent with division (A),
nor shall this municipality require any license tax upon or registration fee
for any traction engine, tractor, or trailer, or any permit or license to
operate. Operators of traction engines or tractors shall have the same rights
upon the public streets and highways as the drivers of any other vehicles,
unless some other safe and convenient way is provided, and no public road
open to traffic shall be closed to traction engines or tractors.



(R.C. § 5589.08)



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 5589.99(B))



§ 72.69  CRACKING EXHAUST NOISES; PEELING OUT.



   No person shall operate any motor vehicle, except when necessary for
safe operation, or in compliance with law, in such a manner that the vehicle
is so rapidly accelerated or started from a stopped position, or in the
shifting of gears while in motion, that the exhaust system emits a loud,
cracking or chattering noise unusual to its normal operation, or that the
rubber tires of such vehicle squeal or leave tire marks on the roadway,
commonly known as “peeling out”.



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.70  SHORTCUTTING ACROSS PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   No operator of a motor vehicle shall enter upon private property for
the sole purpose of driving across such property, between abutting streets or
other public ways thereof. The failure to stop on such property in connection
with or in furtherance of the enterprise or activities being conducted on the
property shall constitute prima facie evidence of the violation.



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.71  MOTOR VEHICLE NOISE.



   (A)   It is unlawful to use any motor vehicle with or without
appurtenances attached thereto so as to create loud or unnecessary rating,
grinding, rattling or other noise.  This shall include the use of any
vehicle when such use causes excessive noise as a result of a defective or
modified exhaust system, or as a result of unnecessary rapid acceleration,
deceleration, or revving.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor
and is subject to a fine up to $100.



(Ord. 01-3-2, passed 4-17-01)



§ 72.72  TEXTING WHILE DRIVING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall drive a motor vehicle on any street, highway,
or property open to the public for vehicular traffic while using a handheld
electronic wireless communications device to write, send, or read a
text-based communication.



   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any of the
following:



      (1)   A person using a handheld electronic wireless
communications device in that manner for emergency purposes, including an
emergency contact with a law enforcement agency, hospital or health care
provider, fire department, or other similar emergency agency or entity;



      (2)   A person driving a public safety vehicle who uses a
handheld electronic wireless communications device in that manner in the
course of the person’s duties;



      (3)   A person using a handheld electronic wireless
communications device in that manner whose motor vehicle is in a stationary
position and who is outside a lane of travel;



      (4)   A person reading, selecting, or entering a name or
telephone number in a handheld electronic wireless communications device for
the purpose of making or receiving a telephone call;



      (5)   A person receiving wireless messages on a device
regarding the operation or navigation of a motor vehicle; safety-related
information, including emergency, traffic, or weather alerts; or data used
primarily by the motor vehicle;



      (6)   A person receiving wireless messages via radio waves;



      (7)   A person using a device for navigation purposes;



      (8)   A person conducting wireless interpersonal communication
with a device that does not require manually entering letters, numbers, or
symbols or reading text messages, except to activate, deactivate, or initiate
the device or a feature or function of the device;



      (9)   A person operating a commercial truck while using a
mobile data terminal that transmits and receives data;



      (10)   A person using a handheld electronic wireless
communications device in conjunction with a voice-operated or hands-free
device feature or function of the vehicle.



   (C)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause an operator of an automobile being operated
on any street or highway to stop the automobile for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of division (A) of this section has been or
is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or
summons for a violation of that nature or causing the arrest of or commencing
a prosecution of a person for a violation of that nature, and no law
enforcement officer shall view the interior or visually inspect any
automobile being operated on any street or highway for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of that nature has been or is being committed.



   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.



   (E)   A prosecution for a violation of this section does not
preclude a prosecution for a violation of R.C. § 4511.204 based on the same
conduct. However, if an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of this section and is also convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of R.C. § 4511.204 based on the same conduct, the two offenses are
allied offenses of similar import under R.C. § 2941.25.



   (F)   As used in this section:



      ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Includes any of the
following:



         (a)   A wireless telephone;



         (b)   A text-messaging device;



         (c)   A personal digital assistant;



         (d)   A computer, including a laptop computer and a
computer tablet;



         (e)   Any other substantially similar wireless device
that is designed or used to communicate text.



      VOICE-OPERATED OR HANDS-FREE DEVICE. A device that allows the
user to vocally compose or send, or to listen to a text-based communication
without the use of either hand except to activate or deactivate a feature or
function.



      WRITE, SEND, OR READ A TEXT-BASED COMMUNICATION. To manually
write or send, or read a text-based communication using an electronic
wireless communications device, including manually writing or sending, or
reading communications referred to as text messages, instant messages, or
electronic mail.



(R.C. § 4511.204)



Statutory reference:



   No preemption for local regulations imposing greater penalties, see
R.C. § 4511.204(E)



§ 72.73  USE OF ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATION DEVICES BY MINORS OR
PROBATIONARY DRIVERS WHILE DRIVING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No holder of a temporary instruction permit who has not
attained the age of 18 years and no holder of a probationary driver’s
license shall drive a motor vehicle on any street, highway, or property used
by the public for purposes of vehicular traffic or parking while using in any
manner an electronic wireless communications device.



   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to either of the
following:



      (1)   A person using an electronic wireless communications
device for emergency purposes, including an emergency contact with a law
enforcement agency, hospital or health care provider, fire department, or
other similar emergency agency or entity;



      (2)   A person using an electronic wireless communications
device whose motor vehicle is in a stationary position and the motor vehicle
is outside a lane of travel;



      (3)   A person using a navigation device in a voice-operated
or hands-free manner who does not manipulate the device while driving.



   (C)   (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(2) of this
section, whoever violates division (A) of this section shall be fined $150.
In addition, the court shall impose a class seven suspension of the
offender’s driver’s license or permit for a definite period of 60 days.



      (2)   If the person previously has been adjudicated a
delinquent child or a juvenile traffic offender for a violation of this
section, whoever violates this section shall be fined $300. In addition, the
court shall impose a class seven suspension of the person’s driver’s
license or permit for a definite period of one year.



   (D)   The filing of a sworn complaint against a person for a
violation of this section does not preclude the filing of a sworn complaint
for a violation of R.C. § 4511.205 for the same conduct. However, if a
person is adjudicated a delinquent child or a juvenile traffic offender for a
violation of this section and is also adjudicated a delinquent child or a
juvenile traffic offender for a violation of R.C. § 4511.205 for the same
conduct, the two offenses are allied offenses of similar import under R.C. §
2941.25.



   (E)   As used in this section, ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS
DEVICE includes any of the following:



      (1)   A wireless telephone;



      (2)   A personal digital assistant;



      (3)   A computer, including a laptop computer and a computer
tablet;



      (4)   A text-messaging device;



      (5)   Any other substantially similar electronic wireless
device that is designed or used to communicate via voice, image, or written
word.



(R.C. § 4511.205)



SCHOOL BUSES



§ 72.80  REGULATIONS CONCERNING SCHOOL BUSES.



   (A)   The driver of a vehicle, upon meeting or overtaking from
either direction any school bus stopped for the purpose of receiving or
discharging any school child, person attending programs offered by community
boards of mental health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or
child attending a program offered by a head start agency, shall stop at least
ten feet from the front or rear of the school bus and shall not proceed until
such school bus resumes motion, or until signaled by the school bus driver to
proceed. It is no defense to a charge under this division that the school bus
involved failed to display or be equipped with an automatically extended stop
warning sign as required by division (B) of this section.



   (B)   Every school bus shall be equipped with amber and red visual
signals meeting the requirements of R.C. § 4511.771 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, and an automatically extended stop warning
sign of a type approved by the state Board of Education, which shall be
actuated by the driver of the bus whenever but only whenever the bus is
stopped or stopping on the roadway for the purpose of receiving or
discharging school children, persons attending programs offered by community
boards of mental health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or
children attending programs offered by head start agencies. A school bus
driver shall not actuate the visual signals or the stop warning sign in
designated school bus loading areas where the bus is entirely off the roadway
or at school buildings when children or persons attending programs offered by
community boards of mental health and county boards of developmental
disabilities are loading or unloading at curbside or at buildings when
children attending programs offered by head start agencies are loading or
unloading at curbside. The visual signals and stop warning sign shall be
synchronized or otherwise operated as required by rule of the Board.



   (C)   Where a highway has been divided into four or more traffic
lanes, a driver of a vehicle need not stop for a school bus approaching from
the opposite direction which has stopped for the purpose of receiving or
discharging any school child, persons attending programs offered by community
boards of mental health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or
children attending programs offered by head start agencies. The driver of any
vehicle overtaking the school bus shall comply with division (A) above.



   (D)   School buses operating on divided highways or on highways with
four or more traffic lanes shall receive and discharge all school children,
persons attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and
county boards of developmental disabilities, and children attending programs
offered by head start agencies on their residence side of the highway.



   (E)   No school bus driver shall start the driver's bus until after
any child, person attending programs offered by community boards of mental
health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or child attending a
program offered by a head start agency who may have alighted therefrom has
reached a place of safety on the child's or person's residence side of the
road.



   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section may be
fined an amount not to exceed $500.  A person who is issued a citation for a
violation of division (A) of this section is not permitted to enter a written
plea of guilty and waive the person's right to contest the citation in a
trial but instead must appear in person in the proper court to answer the
charge.



      (2)   In addition to and independent of any other penalty
provided by law, the court or mayor may impose upon an offender who violates
this section a class seven suspension of the offender's driver's license,
commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C.
§ 4510.02(A)(7).  When a license is suspended under this section, the court
or mayor shall cause the offender to deliver the license to the court, and
the court or clerk of the court immediately shall forward the license to the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles, together with notice of the court's action.



   (G)   As used in this section:



      HEAD START AGENCY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3301.32.



      SCHOOL BUS. As used in relation to children who attend a program
offered by a head start agency, means a bus that is owned and operated by a
head start agency, is equipped with an automatically extended stop warning
sign of a type approved by the State Board of Education, is painted the color
and displays the markings described in R.C. § 4511.77, and is equipped with
amber and red visual signals meeting the requirements of R.C. § 4511.77,
irrespective of whether or not the bus has 15 or more children aboard at any
time. The term does not include a van owned and operated by a head start
agency, irrespective of its color, lights or markings.



(R.C. § 4511.75)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.81  VIOLATION OF REGULATIONS; REPORT; INVESTIGATION; CITATION; WARNING.



   (A)   As used in this section, LICENSE PLATE includes, but is not
limited to, any temporary license placard issued under R.C. § 4503.182 or
similar law of another jurisdiction.



   (B)   When the operator of a school bus believes that a motorist has
violated R.C. § 4511.75(A) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the operator shall report the license plate number and general
description of the vehicle and of the operator of the vehicle to the law
enforcement agency exercising jurisdiction over the area where the alleged
violation occurred. The information contained in the report relating to the
license plate number and to the general description of the vehicle and the
operator of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation may be supplied
by any person with first-hand knowledge of the information. Information of
which the operator of the school bus has first-hand knowledge also may be
corroborated by any other person.



   (C)   Upon receipt of the report of the alleged violation of R.C. §
4511.75(A) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the law
enforcement agency shall conduct an investigation to attempt to determine the
identity of the operator of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation.
If the identity of the operator at the time of the alleged violation is
established, the reporting of the license plate number of the vehicle shall
establish probable cause for the law enforcement agency to issue a citation
for the violation of R.C. § 4511.75(A) or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance. However, if the identity of the operator of the vehicle
at the time of the alleged violation cannot be established, the law
enforcement agency shall issue a warning to the owner of the vehicle at the
time of the alleged violation, except in the case of a leased or rented
vehicle when the warning shall be issued to the lessee at the time of the
alleged violation.



(R.C. § 4511.751) 



§ 72.82  RESTRICTIONS ON THE OPERATION OF SCHOOL BUSES.



   (A)   No person shall operate a vehicle used for pupil
transportation within this municipality in violation of the rules of the
Department of Education of the Department of Public Safety. No person, being
the owner thereof, or having the supervisory responsibility therefor, shall
permit the operation of a vehicle used for pupil transportation within this
municipality in violation of the rules of the Department of Education or the
Department of Public Safety.



   (B)   As used in this section, VEHICLE USED FOR PUPIL TRANSPORTATION
means any vehicle that is identified as such by the Department of Education
by rule and that is subject to O.A.C. Chapter 3301-83.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations
of this section or R.C. § 4511.76, or R.C. §§ 4511.63, 4511.761, 4511.762,
4511.764, 4511.77, or 4511.79 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to any of those sections, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 4511.76(C), (E), (F))  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.83  SCHOOL BUS INSPECTION.



   (A)   No person shall operate, nor shall any person being the owner
thereof, or having supervisory responsibility therefor, permit the operation
of, a school bus within this municipality, unless there is displayed thereon
the decals issued by the state highway patrol bearing the proper date of
inspection for the calendar year for which the inspection decals were issued.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations
of this section or R.C. § 4511.761, or R.C. §§ 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.762,
4511.764, 4511.77, or 4511.79 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to any of those sections, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



   (C)   Whenever a person is found guilty in a court of record of a
violation of this section, the trial judge, in addition to or independent of
all other penalties provided by law, may suspend for any period of time not
exceeding three years, or cancel the license of any person, partnership,
association, or corporation, issued under R.C. § 4511.763.



(R.C. § 4511.761)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.84  SCHOOL BUS NOT USED FOR SCHOOL PURPOSES.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, no person
who is the owner of a bus that previously was registered as a school bus that
is used or is to be used exclusively for purposes other than the
transportation of children shall operate the bus or permit it to be operated
within this municipality unless the bus has been painted a color different
from that prescribed for school buses by R.C. § 4511.77 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance and painted in such a way that the words
“stop” and “school bus” are obliterated.



   (B)   Any church bus that previously was registered as a school bus
and is registered under R.C. § 4503.07 may retain the paint color prescribed
for school buses by R.C. § 4511.77 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance if the bus complies with all of the following:



      (1)   The words “school bus” required by R.C. § 4511.77
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance are covered or obliterated
and the bus is marked on the front and rear with the words “church bus”
painted in black lettering not less than ten inches in height.



      (2)   The automatically extending stop warning sign required
by R.C. § 4511.75 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance is
removed and the word “stop” required by R.C. § 4511.77 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance is covered or obliterated.



      (3)   The flashing red and amber lights required by R.C. §
4511.771 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance are covered or
removed.



      (4)   The inspection decal required by R.C. § 4511.761 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance is covered or removed.



      (5)   The identification number assigned under R.C. §
4511.764 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance and marked in
black lettering on the front and rear of the bus is covered or obliterated.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations
of this section or R.C. § 4511.762, or R.C. §§ 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761,
4511.764, 4511.77, or 4511.79 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to any of those sections, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



   (D)   Whenever a person is found guilty in a court of record of a
violation of this section, the trial judge, in addition to or independent of
all other penalties provided by law, may suspend for any period of time not
exceeding three years, or cancel the license of any person, partnership,
association, or corporation, issued under R.C. § 4511.763.



(R.C. § 4511.762)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.85  LICENSING BY DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY.



   (A)   No person, partnership, association, or corporation shall
transport pupils to or from school on a school bus or enter into a contract
with a board of education of any school district for the transportation of
pupils on a school bus without being licensed by the Department of Public
Safety.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within
one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.763)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.86  REGISTRATION AND IDENTIFICATION OF SCHOOL BUSES.



   (A)   No person shall operate, nor shall any person being the owner
thereof or having supervisory responsibility therefor, permit the operation
of a school bus within this municipality unless there is displayed thereon an
identifying number in accordance with R.C. § 4511.764.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations
of R.C. §§ 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.762, 4511.77, or 4511.79 or a
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of those
sections, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.



(R.C. § 4511.764)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.87  SCHOOL BUS MARKING.



   (A)   No person shall operate, nor shall any person being the owner
thereof or having supervisory responsibility therefor permit the operation
of, a school bus within this municipality unless it is painted national
school bus yellow and is marked on both front and rear with the words
“school bus” in black lettering not less than eight inches in height and
on the rear of the bus with the word “stop” in black lettering not less
than ten inches in height.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations
of this section or R.C. § 4511.77, or R.C. §§ 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761,
4511.762, 4511.764, or 4511.79 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to any of those sections, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



   (C)   Whenever a person is found guilty in a court of record of a
violation of this section, the trial judge, in addition to or independent of
all other penalties provided by law, may suspend, for any period of time not
exceeding three years, or cancel the license of any person, partnership,
association, or corporation issued under R.C. § 4511.763.



(R.C. § 4511.77)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.88  FLASHING LIGHT SIGNAL LAMPS.



   (A)   Every school bus shall, in addition to any other equipment and
distinctive markings required pursuant to R.C. §§ 4511.76, 4511.761,
4511.764 and 4511.77, and any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances,
be equipped with signal lamps mounted as high as practicable, which shall
display to the front two alternately flashing red lights and two alternately
flashing amber lights located at the same level and to the rear two
alternately flashing red lights and alternately flashing amber lights located
at the same level, and these lights shall be visible at 500 feet in normal
sunlight. The alternately flashing red lights shall be spaced as widely as
practicable, and the alternately flashing amber lights shall be located next
to them.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within
one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.771)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.89  OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICE FOR OPERATOR.



   (A)   On and after May 6, 1986, no person, school board, or
governmental entity shall purchase, lease, or rent a new school bus unless
the school bus has an occupant restraining device, as defined in R.C. §
4513.263, installed for use in its operator's seat.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4511.772)  Penalty, see § 70.99



CHAPTER 73:  MOTOR VEHICLE CRIMES



Section




General Provisions




   73.01   Driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs



   73.011   Implied consent



   73.012   Physical control of vehicle while under the influence



   73.02   Driving commercial vehicle with impaired alertness or
ability; use of drugs



   73.03   Immobilizing or disabling device violation




Reckless Operation




   73.05   Reckless operation of vehicles



   73.06   Reckless operation off streets and highways; competitive
operation



   73.07   Operator to be in reasonable control




Speed Regulations




   73.10   Speed limits



   73.11   Slow speed or stopping



   73.12   Emergency vehicles excepted from speed limitation



   73.13   Street racing defined; prohibited on public highways



   73.14   Speed regulations on bridges



   73.141   Operation restricted for mini-trucks and low-speed,
under-speed, or utility vehicles




Resisting Officer




   73.15   Prohibition against resisting officer



   73.16   Presenting false name or information to officer




Stopping After Accident




   73.20   Failure to stop after accident



   73.21   Stopping after accident on other than public roads or
highways



   73.22   Accident involving damage to realty



   73.23   Failure to report accident



Statutory reference:



   Notice of arrest of certain commercial drivers, see R.C. § 5577.14



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 73.01  DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL OR DRUGS.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate any vehicle within this
municipality, if, at the time of the operation, any of the following apply:



         (a)   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a
drug of abuse, or a combination of them.



         (b)   The person has a concentration of 0.08% or more
but less than 0.17% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person's
whole blood.



         (c)   The person has a concentration of 0.096% or more
but less than 0.204% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person's
blood serum or plasma.



         (d)   The person has a concentration of 0.08 grams or
more but less than 0.17 grams by weight of alcohol per 210 liters of the
person's breath.



         (e)   The person has a concentration of 0.11 grams or
more but less than 0.238 grams by weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of
the person's urine.



         (f)   The person has a concentration of 0.17% or more by
weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person's whole blood.



         (g)   The person has a concentration of 0.204% or more
by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person's blood serum or plasma.



         (h)   The person has a concentration of 0.17 grams or
more by weight of alcohol per 210 liters of the person's breath.



         (i)   The person has a concentration of 0.238 grams or
more by weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person's urine.



         (j)   Except as provided in division (K) of this
section, the person has a concentration of any of the following controlled
substances or metabolites of a controlled substance in the person’s whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds any of the
following:



            1.   The person has a concentration of amphetamine
in the person’s urine of at least 500 nanograms of amphetamine per
milliliter of the person’s urine or has a concentration of amphetamine in
the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 100 nanograms
of amphetamine per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma.



            2.   The person has a concentration of cocaine in
the person’s urine of at least 150 nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of
the person’s urine or has a concentration of cocaine in the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms of cocaine per
milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.



            3.   The person has a concentration of cocaine
metabolite in the person’s urine of at least 150 nanograms of cocaine
metabolite per milliliter of the person’s urine or has a concentration of
cocaine metabolite in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of
at least 50 nanograms of cocaine metabolite per milliliter of the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma.



            4.   The person has a concentration of heroin in
the person’s urine of at least 2,000 nanograms of heroin per milliliter of
the person’s urine or has a concentration of heroin in the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms of heroin per
milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.



            5.   The person has a concentration of heroin
metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) in the person’s urine of at least 10
nanograms of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the
person’s urine or has a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl
morphine) in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least
10 nanograms of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of
the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.



            6.   The person has a concentration of L.S.D. in
the person’s urine of at least 25 nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the
person’s urine or a concentration of L.S.D. in the person’s whole blood
or blood serum or plasma of at least 10 nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of
the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.



            7.   The person has a concentration of marihuana
in the person’s urine of at least 10 nanograms of marihuana per milliliter
of the person’s urine or has a concentration of marihuana in the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 2 nanograms of marihuana per
milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.



            8.   Either of the following applies:



               A.   The person is under the influence of
alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them, and the person has a
concentration of marihuana metabolite in the person’s urine of at least 15
nanograms of marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person’s urine or
has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma of at least 5 nanograms of marihuana metabolite per
milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.



               B.   The person has a concentration of
marihuana metabolite in the person’s urine of at least 35 nanograms of
marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person’s urine or has a
concentration of marihuana metabolite in the person’s whole blood or blood
serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms of marihuana metabolite per
milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.



            9.   The person has a concentration of
methamphetamine in the person’s urine of at least 500 nanograms of
methamphetamine per milliliter of the person’s urine or has a concentration
of methamphetamine in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of
at least 100 nanograms of methamphetamine per milliliter of the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma.



            10.   The person has a concentration of
phencyclidine in the person’s urine of at least 25 nanograms of
phencyclidine per milliliter of the person’s urine or has a concentration
of phencyclidine in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at
least 10 nanograms of phencyclidine per milliliter of the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma.



            11.   The State Board of Pharmacy has adopted a
rule pursuant to R.C. § 4729.041 that specifies the amount of salvia
divinorum and the amount of salvinorin A that constitute concentrations of
salvia divinorum and salvinorin A in a person’s urine, in a person’s
whole blood, or in a person’s blood serum or plasma at or above which the
person is impaired for purposes of operating any vehicle within this state,
the rule is in effect, and the person has a concentration of salvia divinorum
or salvinorin A of at least that amount so specified by rule in the
person’s urine, in the person’s whole blood, or in the person’s blood
serum or plasma.



      (2)   No person who, within 20 years of the conduct described
in division (A)(2)(a) of this section, previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a violation of this division or a substantially equivalent
state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of division (A)(1) or (B) of
this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
or any other equivalent offense shall do both of the following:



         (a)   Operate any vehicle within this municipality while
under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them;



         (b)   Subsequent to being arrested for operating the
vehicle as described in division (A)(2)(a) of this section, being asked by a
law enforcement officer to submit to a chemical test or tests under R.C. §
4511.191 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and being
advised by the officer in accordance with R.C. § 4511.192 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance of the consequences of the
person’s refusal or submission to the test or tests, refuse to submit to
the test or tests.



   (B)   No person under 21 years of age shall operate any vehicle
within this municipality, if, at the time of the operation, any of the
following apply:



      (1)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.02% but
less than 0.08% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person's whole
blood.



      (2)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.03% but
less than 0.096% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person's blood
serum or plasma.



      (3)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.02 grams
but less than 0.08 grams by weight of alcohol per 210 liters of the person's
breath.



      (4)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.028 grams
but less than 0.11 grams by weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the
person's urine.



   (C)   In any proceeding arising out of one incident, a person may be
charged with a violation of division (A)(1)(a) or (A)(2) and a violation of
division (B)(1), (2), or (3) of this section, but the person may not be
convicted of more than one violation of these divisions.



   (D)   (1)   (a)   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile
court proceeding for a violation of division (A)(1)(a) of this section or for
an equivalent offense that is vehicle-related, the result of any test of any
blood or urine withdrawn and analyzed at any health care provider, as defined
in R.C. § 2317.02, may be admitted with expert testimony to be considered
with any other relevant and competent evidence in determining the guilt or
innocence of the defendant.



         (b)   In any criminal prosecution for a violation of
division (A) or (B) of this section or for an equivalent offense that is
vehicle-related, the court may admit evidence on the concentration of
alcohol, drugs of abuse, controlled substances, metabolites of a controlled
substance, or a combination of them in the defendant's whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, breath, urine, or other bodily substance at the time of the
alleged violation as shown by chemical analysis of the substance withdrawn
within three hours of the time of the alleged violation. The three-hour time
limit specified in this division regarding the admission of evidence does not
extend or affect the two-hour time limit specified in R.C. § 4511.192(A) as
the maximum period of time during which a person may consent to a chemical
test or tests as described in that section. The court may admit evidence on
the concentration of alcohol, drugs of abuse, or a combination of them as
described in this division when a person submits to a blood test at the
request of a law enforcement officer under R.C. § 4511.191 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or a blood or urine sample is
obtained pursuant to a search warrant. Only a physician, a registered nurse,
an emergency medical technician-intermediate, an emergency medical
technician-paramedic, or a qualified technician, chemist, or phlebotomist
shall withdraw a blood sample for the purpose of determining the alcohol,
drug, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled substance, or
combination content of the whole blood, blood serum, or blood plasma. This
limitation does not apply to the taking of breath or urine specimens. A
person authorized to withdraw blood under this division may refuse to
withdraw blood under this division, if in that person's opinion, the physical
welfare of the person would be endangered by the withdrawing of blood. The
bodily substance withdrawn under this division (D)(1)(b) shall be analyzed in
accordance with methods approved by the Director of Health by an individual
possessing a valid permit issued by the Director pursuant to R.C. § 3701.143.



         (c)   As used in division (D)(1)(b) of this section,
EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-INTERMEDIATE and EMERGENCY MEDICAL
TECHNICIAN-PARAMEDIC have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4765.01.



      (2)   In a criminal prosecution for a violation of division
(A) of this section or for an equivalent offense that is vehicle-related, if
there was at the time the bodily substance was withdrawn a concentration of
less than the applicable concentration of alcohol specified in divisions
(A)(1)(b), (A)(1)(c), (A)(1)(d) and (A)(1)(e) of this section or less than
the applicable concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed
metabolite of a controlled substance specified for a violation of division
(A)(1)(j) of this section, that fact may be considered with other competent
evidence in determining the guilt or innocence of the defendant. This
division does not limit or affect a criminal prosecution for a violation of
division (B) of this section.



      (3)   Upon the request of the person who was tested, the
results of the chemical test shall be made available to the person or the
person's attorney, immediately upon the completion of the chemical test
analysis. If the chemical test was obtained pursuant to division (D)(1)(b) of
this section, the person tested may have a physician, a registered nurse, or
a qualified technician, chemist, or phlebotomist of the person's own choosing
administer a chemical test or tests, at the person's expense, in addition to
any administered at the request of a law enforcement officer.  If the person
was under arrest as described in R.C. § 4511.191(A)(5), the arresting
officer shall advise the person at the time of the arrest that the person may
have an independent chemical test taken at the person’s own expense. If the
person was under arrest other than described in R.C. § 4511.191(A)(5), the
form to be read to the person to be tested, as required under § 73.011,
shall state that the person may have an independent test performed at the
person's expense. The failure or inability to obtain an additional chemical
test by a person shall not preclude the admission of evidence relating to the
chemical test or tests taken at the request of a law enforcement officer.



      (4)   (a)   As used in division (D)(4)(b) and (c) of this
section, NATIONAL HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SAFETY ADMINISTRATION means the National
Highway Traffic Safety Administration established as an administration of the
United States Department of Transportation under 96 Stat. 2415 (1983), 49
U.S.C. § 105.



         (b)   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court
proceeding for a violation of division (A) or (B) of this section, of a
municipal ordinance relating to operating a vehicle while under the influence
of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or alcohol and a drug of abuse, or of a
municipal ordinance relating to operating a vehicle with a prohibited
concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a
controlled substance in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or
urine, if a law enforcement officer has administered a field sobriety test to
the operator of the vehicle involved in the violation and if it is shown by
clear and convincing evidence that the officer administered the test in
substantial compliance with the testing standards for any reliable, credible,
and generally accepted field sobriety tests that were in effect at the time
the tests were administered, including, but not limited to, any testing
standards then in effect that were set by the National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration, all of the following apply:



            1.   The officer may testify concerning the
results of the field sobriety test so administered.



            2.   The prosecution may introduce the results of
the field sobriety test so administered as evidence in any proceedings in the
criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding.



            3.   If testimony is presented or evidence is
introduced under division (D)(4)(b)1. or 2. of this section and if the
testimony or evidence is admissible under the Rules of Evidence, the court
shall admit the testimony or evidence and the trier of fact shall give it
whatever weight the trier of fact considers to be appropriate.



         (c)   Division (D)(4)(b) of this section does not limit
or preclude a court, in its determination of whether the arrest of a person
was supported by probable cause or its determination of any other matter in a
criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding of a type described in that
division, from considering evidence or testimony that is not otherwise
disallowed by division (D)(4)(b) of this section.



   (E)   (1)   Subject to division (E)(3) of this section, in any
criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a violation of division
(A)(1)(b), (A)(1)(c), (A)(1)(d), (A)(1)(e), (A)(1)(f), (A)(1)(g), (A)(1)(h),
(A)(1)(i), or (A)(1)(j) or (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3), or (B)(4) of this section
or for an equivalent offense that is substantially equivalent to any of those
divisions, a laboratory report from any laboratory personnel issued a permit
by the Department of Health authorizing an analysis as described in this
division that contains an analysis of the whole blood, blood serum or plasma,
breath, urine, or other bodily substance tested and that contains all of the
information specified in this division shall be admitted as prima facie
evidence of the information and statements that the report contains. The
laboratory report shall contain all of the following:



         (a)   The signature, under oath, of any person who
performed the analysis;



         (b)   Any findings as to the identity and quantity of
alcohol, a drug of abuse, a controlled substance, a metabolite of a
controlled substance, or a combination of them that was found;



         (c)   A copy of a notarized statement by the laboratory
director of a designee of the director that contains the name of each
certified analyst or test performer involved with the report, the analyst's
or test performer's employment relationship with the laboratory that issued
the report, and a notation that performing an analysis of the type involved
is part of the analyst's or test performer's regular duties;



         (d)   An outline of the analyst's or test performer's
education, training, and experience in performing the type of analysis
involved and a certification that the laboratory satisfies appropriate
quality control standards in general and, in this particular analysis, under
rules of the Department of Health.



      (2)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law regarding the
admission of evidence, a report of the type described in division (E)(1) of
this section is not admissible against the defendant to whom it pertains in
any proceeding, other than a preliminary hearing or a grand jury proceeding,
unless the prosecutor has served a copy of the report on the defendant's
attorney or, if the defendant has no attorney, on the defendant.



      (3)   A report of the type described in division (E)(1) of
this section shall not be prima facie evidence of the contents, identity, or
amount of any substance if, within seven days after the defendant to whom the
report pertains or the defendant's attorney receives a copy of the report,
the defendant or the defendant's attorney demands the testimony of the person
who signed the report. The judge in the case may extend the seven-day time
limit in the interest of justice.



   (F)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, any
physician, registered nurse, emergency medical technician-intermediate,
emergency medical technician-paramedic, or qualified technician, chemist, or
phlebotomist who withdraws blood from a person pursuant to this section or
R.C. § 4511.19, 4511.191 or 4511.192, and any hospital, first-aid station,
or clinic at which blood is withdrawn from a person pursuant to this section
or R.C. § 4511.19, 4511.191 or 4511.192, is immune from criminal liability
and civil liability based upon a claim of assault and battery or any other
claim that is not a claim of malpractice, for any act performed in
withdrawing blood from the person. The immunity provided in this division
also extends to an emergency medical service organization that employs an
emergency medical technician-intermediate or emergency medical
technician-paramedic who withdraws blood under this section. The immunity
provided in this division is not available to a person who withdraws blood if
the person engages in willful or wanton misconduct.



      (2)   As used in division (F)(1), EMERGENCY MEDICAL
TECHNICIAN-INTERMEDIATE and EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-PARAMEDIC have the
same meanings as in R.C. § 4765.01.



   (G)   (1)   Whoever violates any provisions of divisions
(A)(1)(a) through (A)(1)(i) or (A)(2) of this section is guilty of operating
a vehicle under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination
of them. Whoever violates division (A)(1)(j) of this section is guilty of
operating a vehicle while under the influence of a listed controlled
substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance. The court shall
sentence the offender for either offense under R.C. Chapter 2929, except as
otherwise authorized or required by divisions (G)(1)(a) through (G)(1)(e) of
this section:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division(G)(1)(b),
(c), (d), or (e) of this section, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree, and the court shall sentence the offender to all of the
penalties and sanctions provided in R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(a)(i) to (iv).



         (b)   Except as otherwise provided in division (G)(1)(e)
of this section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense, previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of division (A) or
(B) of this section or one other equivalent offense is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all
of the penalties and sanctions provided in R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(b)(i) to (v).



         (c)   Except as otherwise provided in division (G)(1)(e)
of this section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense, previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of division (A) or
(B) of this section or other equivalent offenses is guilty of a misdemeanor.
The court shall sentence the offender to all of the penalties and sanctions
provided in R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(c)(i) to (vi).



         (d)   Except as otherwise provided in division (G)(1)(e)
of this section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense, previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of
division (A) or (B) of this section or other equivalent offenses or an
offender who, within 20 years of the offense, previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to five or more violations of that nature is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



         (e)   An offender who previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) that was a felony,
regardless of when the violation and the conviction or guilty plea occurred,
is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (2)   An offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of division (A) of this section and who subsequently seeks
reinstatement of the driver's or occupational driver's license or permit or
nonresident operating privilege suspended under this section or R.C. §
4511.19 as a result of the conviction or guilty plea shall pay a
reinstatement fee as provided in R.C. § 4511.191(F)(2).



      (3)   (a)   If an offender is sentenced to a jail term
under R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(b)(i) or (ii) or (G)(1)(c)(i) or (ii) and if,
within 60 days of sentencing of the offender, the court issues a written
finding on the record that, due to the unavailability of space at the jail
where the offender is required to serve the term, the offender will not be
able to begin serving that term within the 60-day period following the date
of sentencing, the court may impose an alternative sentence as specified in
R.C. § 4511.19(G)(3) that includes a term of house arrest with electronic
monitoring, with continuous alcohol monitoring, or with both electronic
monitoring and continuous alcohol monitoring.



         (b)   As an alternative to the mandatory jail terms as
required by R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1), the court may sentence the offender as
provided in R.C. § 4511.19(G)(3).



      (4)   If an offender’s driver’s or occupational driver’s
license or permit or nonresident operating privilege is suspended under
division (G) of this section or R.C. § 4511.19(G) and if R.C. § 4510.13
permits the court to grant limited driving privileges, the court may grant
the limited driving privileges in accordance with that section. If division
(A)(7) of that section requires the court impose as a condition of the
privileges that the offender must display on the vehicle that is driven
subject to the privileges restricted license plates that are issued under
R.C. § 4503.231, except as provided in division (B) of that section, the
court shall impose that condition as one of the conditions of the limited
driving privileges granted to the offender, except as provided in R.C. §
4503.231(B).



      (5)   Fines imposed under this section for a violation of
division (A) of this section shall be distributed as provided in R.C. §
4511.19(G)(5).



      (6)   If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to an order
of criminal forfeiture under division (G)(1)(c), (d), or (e) of this section
is assigned or transferred and R.C. § 4503.234(B)(2) or (3) applies, in
addition to or independent of any other penalty established by law, the court
may fine the offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications
of the National Automobile Dealers Association. The proceeds of any fine so
imposed shall be distributed in accordance with division (C)(2) of that
section.



      (7)   In all cases in which an offender is sentenced under
division (G) of this section, the offender shall provide the court with proof
of financial responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender
fails to provide that proof of financial responsibility, the court, in
addition to any other penalties provided by law, may order restitution
pursuant to § 130.99(G) or R.C. § 2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not
exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision
that was the direct and proximate result of the offender’s operation of the
vehicle before, during, or after committing the offense for which the
offender is sentenced under division (G) of this section.



      (8)   A court may order an offender to reimburse a law
enforcement agency for any costs incurred by the agency with respect to a
chemical test or tests administered to the offender if all of the following
apply:



         (a)   The offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of division (A) of this section.



         (b)   The test or tests were of the offender’s whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine.



         (c)   The test or tests indicated that the offender had
a prohibited concentration of a controlled substance or a metabolite of a
controlled substance in the offender’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma,
or urine at the time of the offense.



      (9)   As used in division (G) of this section, ELECTRONIC
MONITORING has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.



   (H)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
operating a motor vehicle after underage alcohol consumption and shall be
punished as follows:



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (H)(2) of this
section, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. In
addition to any other sanction imposed for the offense, the court shall
impose a class six suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial
driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or
nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. §
4510.02(A)(6). The court may grant limited driving privileges relative to the
suspension under R.C. §§ 4510.021 and 4510.13. The court may grant
unlimited driving privileges with an ignition interlock device relative to
the suspension and may reduce the period of suspension as authorized under
R.C. § 4510.022. If the court grants unlimited driving privileges under R.C.
§ 4510.022, the court shall suspend any jail term imposed under division
(H)(1) of this section as required under that section.



      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations
of division (A) or (B) of this section or other equivalent offense or
offenses, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.  In
addition to any other sanction imposed for the offense, the court shall
impose a class four suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial
driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or
nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C.
4510.02(A)(4). The court may grant limited driving privileges relative to the
suspension under R.C. §§ 4510.021 and 4510.13.



      (3)   If the offender also is convicted of or also pleads
guilty to a specification of the type described in R.C. § 2941.1414 and if
the court imposes a jail term for the violation of division (B) of this
section, the court shall impose upon the offender an additional definite jail
term pursuant to R.C. § 2929.24(E).



      (4)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of
financial responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails
to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any
other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to
§ 130.99(G) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any
economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and
proximate result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during,
or after committing the violation of division (B) of this section.



   (I)   (1)   No court shall sentence an offender to an alcohol
treatment program under this section unless the treatment program complies
with the minimum standards for alcohol treatment programs adopted under R.C.
Chapter 5119 by the Director of Mental Health and Addiction Services.



      (2)   An offender who stays in a drivers' intervention program
or in an alcohol treatment program under an order issued under this section
shall pay the cost of the stay in the program. However, if the court
determines that an offender who stays in an alcohol treatment program under
an order issued under this section is unable to pay the cost of the stay in
the program, the court may order that the cost be paid from the court's
indigent drivers' alcohol treatment fund.



   (J)   If a person whose driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit or nonresident operating privilege is suspended under this section or
R.C. § 4511.19 files an appeal regarding any aspect of the person's trial or
sentence, the appeal itself does not stay the operation of the suspension.



   (K)   Division (A)(1)(j) of this section does not apply to a person
who operates a vehicle while the person has a concentration of a listed
controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance in the
person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine that equals or
exceeds the amount specified in that division, if both of the following apply:



      (1)   The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to
a prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to
prescribe drugs.



      (2)   The person injected, ingested, or inhaled the controlled
substance in accordance with the health professional’s directions.



   (L)   The prohibited concentrations of a controlled substance or a
metabolite of a controlled substance listed in division (A)(1)(j) of this
section also apply in a prosecution of a violation of R.C. § 2923.16(D) in
the same manner as if the offender is being prosecuted for a prohibited
concentration of alcohol.



   (M)   All terms defined in R.C. § 4510.01 apply to this section. If
the meaning of a term defined in R.C. § 4510.01 conflicts with the meaning
of the same term as defined in R.C. § 4501.01 or 4511.01, the term as
defined in R.C. § 4510.01 applies to this section.



(R.C. § 4511.19(A) - (M))



   (N)   As used in this section, § 73.011 and § 73.012:



      COMMUNITY RESIDENTIAL SANCTION, CONTINUOUS ALCOHOL MONITORING,
JAIL, MANDATORY PRISON TERM, MANDATORY TERM OF LOCAL INCARCERATION, PRISON
TERM, and SANCTION have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2929.01.



      DRUG OF ABUSE has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4506.01.



      EQUIVALENT OFFENSE means any of the following:



         (a)   A violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B);



         (b)   A violation of a municipal OVI ordinance;



         (c)   A violation of R.C. § 2903.04 in a case in which
the offender was subject to the sanctions described in division (D) of that
section;



         (d)   A violation of R.C. § 2903.06(A)(1) or R.C. §
2903.08 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to either
of those divisions;



         (e)   A violation of R.C. § 2903.06(A)(2), (A)(3), or
(A)(4), R.C. § 2903.08(A)(2), or former R.C. § 2903.07, or a municipal
ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of those divisions or that
former section, in a case in which a judge or jury as the trier of fact found
that the offender was under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a
combination of them;



         (f)   A violation of R.C. § 1547.11(A) or (B);



         (g)   A violation of a municipal ordinance prohibiting a
person from operating or being in physical control of any vessel underway or
from manipulating any water skis, aquaplane or similar device on the waters
of this state while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a
combination of them or prohibiting a person from operating or being in
physical control of any vessel underway or from manipulating any water skis,
aquaplane or similar device on the waters of this state with a prohibited
concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a
controlled substance in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or
urine;



         (h)   A violation of an existing or former municipal
ordinance, law of another state, or law of the United States that is
substantially equivalent to R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B) or R.C. § 1547.11(A)
or (B);



         (i)   A violation of a former law of this state that was
substantially equivalent to R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B) or R.C. § 1547.11(A)
or (B).



      EQUIVALENT OFFENSE THAT IS VEHICLE-RELATED.  An equivalent
offense that is any of the following:



         (a)   A violation described in division (a), (b), (c),
(d) or (e) of the definition for EQUIVALENT OFFENSE provided in this division
(N);



         (b)   A violation of an existing or former municipal
ordinance, law of another state, or law of the United States that is
substantially equivalent to R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B);



         (c)   A violation of a former law of this state that was
substantially equivalent to R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B).



      MANDATORY JAIL TERM means the mandatory term in jail of 3, 6, 10,
20, 30, or 60 days that must be imposed under R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(a),
(G)(1)(b), or (G)(1)(c) upon an offender convicted of a violation of division
(A) of that section and in relation to which all of the following apply:



         (a)   Except as specifically authorized under R.C. §
4511.19, the term must be served in a jail.



         (b)   Except as specifically authorized under R.C. §
4511.19, the term cannot be suspended, reduced, or otherwise modified
pursuant to R.C. §§ 2929.21 through 2929.28 or any other provision of the
Ohio Revised Code.



      MUNICIPAL OVI ORDINANCE and MUNICIPAL OVI OFFENSE mean any
municipal ordinance prohibiting a person from operating a vehicle while under
the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them or
prohibiting a person from operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration
of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance
in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine.



(R.C. § 4511.181)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Cross-reference:



   Endangering children, see § 135.14



   Power to suspend driver's license, see § 33.05



Statutory reference:



   Mandatory suspension periods; immobilizing or disabling device;
restricted license, see R.C. § 4510.13



   Trial judge to suspend driver's license, see R.C. § 4510.05



§ 73.011  IMPLIED CONSENT.



   (A)   (1)   As used in this section:



         ALCOHOL MONITORING DEVICE.  Means any device that provides
for continuous alcohol monitoring, any ignition interlock device, any
immobilizing or disabling device other than an ignition interlock device that
is constantly available to monitor the concentration of alcohol in a person's
system, or any other device that provides for the automatic testing and
periodic reporting of alcohol consumption by a person and that a court orders
a person to use as a sanction imposed as a result of the person's conviction
of or plea of guilty to an offense.



         COMMUNITY ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER. Has the same meaning
as in R.C. § 5119.01.



         PHYSICAL CONTROL has the same meaning as in R.C. §
4511.194.



      (2)   Any person who operates a vehicle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for vehicular travel or parking
within this municipality or who is in physical control of a vehicle shall be
deemed to have given consent to a chemical test or tests of the person’s
whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine to determine the
alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled
substance, or combination content of the person’s whole blood, blood serum
or plasma, breath, or urine if arrested for a violation of § 73.01(A) or
(B), § 73.012, R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), R.C. § 4511.194 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or any other municipal OVI
ordinance.



      (3)   The chemical test or tests under division (A)(2) of this
section shall be administered at the request of a law enforcement officer
having reasonable grounds to believe the person was operating or in physical
control of a vehicle in violation of a division, section, or ordinance
identified in division (A)(2) of this section. The law enforcement agency by
which the officer is employed shall designate which of the tests shall be
administered.



      (4)   Any person who is dead or unconscious, or who otherwise
is in a condition rendering the person incapable of refusal, shall be deemed
to have consented as provided in division (A)(2) of this section, and the
test or tests may be administered, subject to R.C. §§ 313.12 to 313.16.



      (5)   (a)   If a law enforcement officer arrests a person
for a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), R.C. § 4511.194 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or a municipal O.V.I. ordinance
and if the person if convicted would be required to be sentenced under R.C.
§ 4511.19(G)(1)(c), (G)(1)(d) or (G)(1)(e), the law enforcement officer
shall request the person to submit, and the person shall submit, to a
chemical test or tests of the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma,
breath, or urine for the purpose of determining the alcohol, drug of abuse,
controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled substance, or combination
content of the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or
urine. A law enforcement officer who makes a request pursuant to this
division that a person submit to a chemical test or tests is not required to
advise the person of the consequences of submitting to, or refusing to submit
to, the test or tests and is not required to give the person the form
described in division (C) of this section, but the officer shall advise the
person at the time of the arrest that if the person refuses to take a
chemical test the officer may employ whatever reasonable means are necessary
to ensure that the person submits to a chemical test of the person's whole
blood or blood serum or plasma. The officer shall also advise the person at
the time of the arrest that the person may have an independent chemical test
taken at the person’s own expense. Divisions (A)(3) and (A)(4) of this
section apply to the administration of a chemical test or tests pursuant to
this division.



         (b)   If a person refuses to submit to a chemical test
upon a request made pursuant to division (A)(5)(a) of this section, the law
enforcement officer who made the request may employ whatever reasonable means
are necessary to ensure that the person submits to a chemical test of the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma. A law enforcement officer
who acts pursuant to this division to ensure that a person submits to a
chemical test of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma is
immune from criminal and civil liability based upon a claim for assault and
battery or any other claim for the acts, unless the officer so acted with
malicious purpose, in bad faith, or in a wanton or reckless manner.



(R.C. § 4511.191(A)) 



   (B)    Except as provided in division (A)(5) of this section, the
arresting law enforcement officer shall give advice in accordance with this
section to any person under arrest for a violation of § 73.01(A) or (B), §
73.012, R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, or any other municipal OVI ordinance. The
officer shall give that advice in a written form that contains the
information described in division (C) of this section and shall read the
advice to the person. The form shall contain a statement that the form was
shown to the person under arrest and read to the person by the arresting
officer. One or more persons shall witness the arresting officer’s reading
of the form, and the witnesses shall certify to this fact by signing the
form. The person must submit to the chemical test or tests, subsequent to the
request of the arresting officer, within two hours of the time of the alleged
violation and, if the person does not submit to the test or tests within that
two-hour time limit, the failure to submit automatically constitutes a
refusal to submit to the test or tests.



   (C)   Except as provided in division (A)(5) of this section, if a
person is under arrest as described in division (B) of this section, before
the person may be requested to submit to a chemical test or tests to
determine the alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance, metabolite of a
controlled substance, or combination content of the person's whole blood,
blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine, the arresting officer shall read the
following form to the person:



“You now are under arrest for (specifically state the offense under state
law or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance for which the person
was arrested – operating a vehicle under the influence of alcohol, a drug,
or a combination of them; operating a vehicle while under the influence of a
listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance;
operating a vehicle after underage alcohol consumption; or having physical
control of a vehicle while under the influence).



“If you refuse to take any chemical test required by law, your Ohio driving
privileges will be suspended immediately, and you will have to pay a fee to
have the privileges reinstated. If you have a prior conviction of OVI, OVUAC,
or operating a vehicle while under the influence of a listed controlled
substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance under state or
municipal law within the preceding 20 years, you are now under arrest for
state OVI, and, if you refuse to take a chemical test, you will face
increased penalties if you subsequently are convicted of the state OVI.



“(Read this part unless the person is under arrest for solely having
physical control of a vehicle while under the influence.) If you take any
chemical test required by law and are found to be at or over the prohibited
amount of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled
substance in your whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine as set
by law, your Ohio driving privileges will be suspended immediately, and you
will have to pay a fee to have the privileges reinstated.



“If you take a chemical test, you may have an independent chemical test
taken at your own expense.”



   (D)    If the arresting law enforcement officer does not ask a
person under arrest as described in division (B) of this section or division
(A)(5) of this section to submit to a chemical test or tests under R.C. §
4511.191 or this section, the arresting officer shall seize the Ohio or
out-of-state driver's or commercial driver's license or permit of the person
and immediately forward it to the court in which the arrested person is to
appear on the charge. If the arrested person is not in possession of the
person's license or permit or it is not in the person's vehicle, the officer
shall order the person to surrender it to the law enforcement agency that
employs the officer within 24 hours after the arrest, and, upon the
surrender, the agency immediately shall forward the license or permit to the
court in which the person is to appear on the charge. Upon receipt of the
license or permit, the court shall retain it pending the arrested person's
initial appearance and any action taken under R.C. § 4511.196.



   (E)   (1)   If a law enforcement officer asks a person under
arrest as described in division (A)(5) of this section to submit to a
chemical test or tests under that division and the test results indicate a
prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite
of a controlled substance in the person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma,
breath, or urine at the time of the alleged offense, or if a law enforcement
officer asks a person under arrest as described in division (B) of this
section to submit to a chemical test or tests under R.C. § 4511.191 or this
section, if the officer advises the person in accordance with this section of
the consequences of the person’s refusal or submission, and if either the
person refuses to submit to the test or tests or, unless the arrest was for a
violation of § 73.012, R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the person submits to the test or tests and the test
results indicate a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled
substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the person’s whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine at the time of the alleged
offense, the arresting officer shall do all of the following:



         (a)   On behalf of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles,
notify the person that, independent of any penalties or sanctions imposed
upon the person, the person's Ohio driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit or nonresident operating privilege is suspended immediately, that the
suspension will last at least until the person's initial appearance on the
charge, which will be held within five days after the date of the person's
arrest or the issuance of a citation to the person, and that the person may
appeal the suspension at the initial appearance or during the period of time
ending 30 days after that initial appearance;



         (b)   Seize the driver's or commercial driver's license
or permit of the person and immediately forward it to the Registrar. If the
arrested person is not in possession of the person's license or permit or it
is not in the person's vehicle, the officer shall order the person to
surrender it to the law enforcement agency that employs the officer within 24
hours after the person is given notice of the suspension, and, upon the
surrender, the officer's employing agency immediately shall forward the
license or permit to the Registrar;



         (c)   Verify the person's current residence and, if it
differs from that on the person's driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit, notify the Registrar of the change;



         (d)   Send to the Registrar, within 48 hours after the
arrest of the person, a sworn report that includes all of the following
statements:



            1.   That the officer had reasonable grounds to
believe that, at the time of the arrest, the arrested person was operating a
vehicle in violation of R.C. 4511.19(A) or (B) or a municipal OVI ordinance
or for being in physical control of a stationary vehicle in violation of R.C.
§ 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent similar municipal ordinance;



            2.   That the person was arrested and charged with
a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), R.C. § 4511.194 or a similar
equivalent municipal ordinance, or a municipal OVI ordinance;



            3.    Unless division (E)(1)(d)5. of this section
applies, that the officer asked the person to take the designated chemical
test or tests, advised the person in accordance with this section of the
consequences of submitting to, or refusing to take, the test or tests, and
gave the person the form described in division (C) of this section;



            4.   Unless division (E)(1)(d)5. of this section
applies, that either the person refused to submit to the chemical test or
tests or, unless the arrest was for a violation of R.C. § 4511.194 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the person submitted to the
chemical test or tests and the test results indicate a prohibited
concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a
controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma,
breath, or urine at the time of the alleged offense.



            5.   If the person was under arrest as described
in division (A)(5) of this section and the chemical test or tests were
performed in accordance with that division, that the person was under arrest
as described in that division, that the chemical test or tests were performed
in accordance with that division, and that test results indicated a
prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite
of a controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or
plasma, breath, or urine at the time of the alleged offense.



      (2)   Division (E)(1) of this section does not apply to a
person who is arrested for a violation of § 73.012, R.C. § 4511.194 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, who is asked by a law
enforcement officer to submit to a chemical test or tests under this section,
and who submits to the test or tests, regardless of the amount of alcohol, a
controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance that the test
results indicate is present in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or
plasma, breath, or urine.



   (F)   The arresting officer shall give the officer's sworn report
that is completed under this section to the arrested person at the time of
the arrest, or the Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall send the report to the
person by regular first class mail as soon as possible after receipt of the
report, but not later than 14 days after receipt of it. An arresting officer
may give an unsworn report to the arrested person at the time of the arrest
provided the report is complete when given to the arrested person and
subsequently is sworn to by the arresting officer. As soon as possible, but
not later than 48 hours after the arrest of the person, the arresting officer
shall send a copy of the sworn report to the court in which the arrested
person is to appear on the charge for which the person was arrested.



   (G)   The sworn report of an arresting officer completed under this
section is prima facie proof of the information and statements that it
contains. It shall be admitted and considered as prima facie proof of the
information and statements that it contains in any appeal under R.C. §
4511.197 relative to any suspension of a person's driver's or commercial
driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege that results
from the arrest covered by the report.



(R.C. § 4511.192)



   (H)   (1)   A suspension of a person's driver's or commercial
driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege under this
section for the time described in R.C. § 4511.191(B) or (C) is effective
immediately from the time at which the arresting officer serves the notice of
suspension upon the arrested person. Any subsequent finding that the person
is not guilty of the charge that resulted in the person's being requested to
take the chemical test or tests under division (A) of this section does not
affect the suspension.



      (2)   If a person arrested for operating a vehicle in
violation of § 73.01(A) or (B), R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), or any other
municipal OVI ordinance, or for being in physical control of a vehicle in
violation of § 73.012 or R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, regardless of whether the person's driver's or
commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege is
or is not suspended under R.C. § 4511.191(B) or (C) or R.C. Chapter 4510,
the person's initial appearance on the charge resulting from the arrest shall
be held within five days of the persons' arrest or the issuance of the
citation to him or her, subject to any continuance granted by the court
pursuant to R.C. § 4511.197 regarding the issues specified in that section.



(R.C. § 4511.191(D))  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Disposition of fines, immobilization of vehicle and impoundment of
license plates, criminal forfeiture for municipal ordinance conviction, see
R.C. § 4511.193



   Effect of refusal to submit to test, seizure of license, suspension
periods, appeal procedures, occupational driving privileges, and indigent
drivers alcohol treatment funds, see R.C. § 4511.191(C) - (N)



   Judicial pretrial suspension, initial appearance, see R.C. § 4511.196



   Seizure of vehicles upon arrest, see R.C. § 4511.195



§ 73.012  PHYSICAL CONTROL OF VEHICLE WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE.



   (A)   As used in this section, PHYSICAL CONTROL means being in the
driver's position of the front seat of a vehicle and having possession of the
vehicle's ignition key or other ignition device.



   (B)   No person shall be in physical control of a vehicle if, at the
time of the physical control, any of the following apply:



      (1)   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of
abuse, or a combination of them.



      (2)   The person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma,
breath, or urine contains at least the concentration of alcohol specified in
§ 73.01(A)(1)(b), (A)(1)(c), (A)(1)(d), or (A)(1)(e).



      (3)   Except as provided in division (E) of this section, the
person has a concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed
metabolite of a controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds the concentration specified
in § 73.01(A)(1)(j).



   (C)   (1)   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court
proceeding for a violation of this section, if a law enforcement officer has
administered a field sobriety test to the person in physical control of the
vehicle involved in the violation and if it is shown by clear and convincing
evidence that the officer administered the test in substantial compliance
with the testing standards for any reliable, credible, and generally
acceptable field sobriety tests that were in effect at the time the tests
were administered, including but not limited to any testing standards then in
effect what were set by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration,
all of the following apply:



         (a)   The officer may testify concerning the results of
the field sobriety test so administered.



         (b)   The prosecution may introduce the results of the
field sobriety test so administered as evidence in any proceedings in the
criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding.



         (c)   If testimony is presented or evidence is
introduced under division (C)(1)(a) or (b) of this section and if the
testimony or evidence is admissible under the Rules of Evidence, the court
shall admit the testimony or evidence, and the trier of fact shall give it
whatever weight the trier of fact considers to be appropriate.



      (2)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not limit or
preclude a court, in its determination of whether the arrest of a person was
supported by probable cause or its determination of any other matter in a
criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding of a type described in that
division, from considering evidence or testimony that is not otherwise
disallowed by division (C)(1) of this section.



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of having physical
control of a vehicle while under the influence, a misdemeanor of the first
degree. In addition to other sanctions imposed, the court may impose on the
offender a class seven suspension of the offender's driver's license,
commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C.
§ 4510.02(A)(7).



   (E)   Division (B)(3) of this section does not apply to a person who
is in physical control of a vehicle while the person has a concentration of a
listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance
in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine that equals or
exceeds the amount specified in § 73.01(A)(1)(j) if both of the following
apply:



      (1)   The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to
a prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to
prescribe drugs.



      (2)   The person injected, ingested, or inhaled the controlled
substance in accordance with the health professional’s directions.



(R.C. § 4511.194)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.02  DRIVING COMMERCIAL VEHICLE WITH IMPAIRED ALERTNESS OR ABILITY; USE
OF DRUGS.



   (A)   No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle, as defined
in R.C. § 4506.01, or a commercial car or commercial tractor, as defined in
R.C. § 4501.01, while the person's ability or alertness is so impaired by
fatigue, illness, or other causes that it is unsafe for the person to drive
such vehicle. No driver shall use any drug which would adversely affect the
driver's ability or alertness.



   (B)   No owner, as defined in R.C. § 4501.01, of a commercial motor
vehicle, commercial car or commercial tractor, or a person employing or
otherwise directing the driver of such vehicle, shall require or knowingly
permit a driver in any such condition described in division (A) of this
section to drive such vehicle upon any street or highway.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations
of this section or R.C. § 4511.79, or R.C. §§ 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761,
4511.762, 4511.764, or 4511.77 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to any of those sections, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 4511.79)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.03  IMMOBILIZING OR DISABLING DEVICE VIOLATION.



   (A)   (1)   No offender who has been granted limited or unlimited
driving privileges, during any period that the offender is required to
operate only a motor vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling
device, shall request or permit any other person to breathe into the device
if it is an ignition interlock device or another type of device that monitors
the concentration of alcohol in a person’s breath or to otherwise start the
motor vehicle equipped with the device, for the purpose of providing the
offender with an operable motor vehicle.



      (2)   No person shall breathe into an immobilizing or
disabling device that is an ignition interlock device or another type of
device that monitors the concentration of alcohol in a person’s breath or
otherwise start a motor vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling
device, for the purpose of providing an operable motor vehicle to another
person who has been granted limited or unlimited driving privileges under the
condition that the person operate only a motor vehicle equipped with an
immobilizing or disabling device.



      (3)   No unauthorized person shall tamper with or circumvent
the operation of an immobilizing or disabling device.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of an immobilizing or
disabling device violation, a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 4510.44)



RECKLESS OPERATION



§ 73.05  RECKLESS OPERATION OF VEHICLES.



   (A)   No person shall operate a vehicle on any street or highway in
willful or wanton disregard of the safety of persons or property.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.20)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.06  RECKLESS OPERATION OFF STREETS AND HIGHWAYS; COMPETITIVE OPERATION.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle on any public or
private property other than streets or highways in willful or wanton
disregard of the safety of persons or property.



      (2)   This section does not apply to the competitive operation
of vehicles on public or private property when the owner of such property
knowingly permits such operation thereon.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.201)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.07  OPERATOR TO BE IN REASONABLE CONTROL.



   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, agricultural tractor,
or agricultural tractor that is towing, pulling, or otherwise drawing a unit
of farm machinery on any street, highway, or property open to the public for
vehicular traffic without being in reasonable control of the vehicle,
agricultural tractor, or unit of farm machinery.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a motor
vehicle or agricultural tractor without being in control of it, a minor
misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4511.202)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SPEED REGULATIONS



§ 73.10  SPEED LIMITS.



   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a speed greater or
less than is reasonable or proper, having due regard for the traffic,
surface, and width of the street or highway and any other conditions, and no
person shall drive any motor vehicle in and upon any street or highway at a
greater speed than will permit him or her to bring it to a stop within the
assured clear distance ahead.



   (B)    It is prima facie lawful, in the absence of a lower limit
declared or established pursuant to this section by the Director of
Transportation or local authorities, for the operator of a motor vehicle to
operate the same at a speed not exceeding the following:



      (1)   (a)   Twenty miles per hour in school zones during
school recess and while children are going to or leaving school during the
opening or closing hours, and when 20 miles per hour school speed limit signs
are erected, except that on controlled-access highways and expressways, if
the right-of-way line fence has been erected without pedestrian opening, the
speed shall be governed by division (B)(4) of this section, and on freeways,
if the right-of-way line fence has been erected without pedestrian opening,
the speed shall be governed by divisions (B)(10) and (B)(11) of this section.
The end of every school zone may be marked by a sign indicating the end of
the zone. Nothing in this section or in the Manual and Specifications for a
Uniform System of Traffic-Control Devices shall be construed to require
school zones to be indicated by signs equipped with flashing or other lights,
or giving other special notice of the hours in which the school zone speed
limit is in effect.



         (b)   As used in this section, SCHOOL means any school
chartered under R.C. § 3301.16 and any nonchartered school that during the
preceding year filed with the Department of Education in compliance with
O.A.C. § 3301-35-08, a copy of the school's report for the parents of the
school's pupils certifying that the school meets state minimum standards for
nonchartered, nontax-supported schools and presents evidence of this filing
to the jurisdiction from which it is requesting the establishment of a school
zone. SCHOOL also includes a special elementary school that in writing
requests the County Engineer to create a school zone at the location of the
school. Upon receipt of such written request, the County Engineer shall
create a school zone at that location by erecting appropriate signs.



         (c)   As used in this section, SCHOOL ZONE means that
portion of a street or highway passing a school fronting upon the street or
highway that is encompassed by projecting the school property lines to the
fronting street or highway, and also includes that portion of a state
highway. Upon request from local authorities for streets and highways under
their jurisdiction and that portion of a state highway under the jurisdiction
of the Director of Transportation or a request from a County Engineer in the
case of a school zone for a special elementary school, the Director may
extend the traditional school zone boundaries. The distances in divisions
(B)(1)(c)1. through 3. below shall not exceed 300 feet per approach per
direction, and are bounded by whichever of the following distances or
combination thereof the Director approves as most appropriate:



            1.   The distance encompassed by projecting the
school building lines normal to the fronting highway and extending a distance
of 300 feet on each approach direction;



            2.   The distance encompassed by projecting the
school property lines intersecting the fronting highway and extending a
distance of 300 feet on each approach direction;



            3.   The distance encompassed by the special
marking of the pavement for a principal school pupil crosswalk plus a
distance of 300 feet on each approach direction of the highway.



         (d)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to
invalidate the Director's initial action on August 9, 1976, establishing all
school zones at the traditional school zone boundaries defined by projecting
school property lines, except when those boundaries are extended as provided
in divisions (B)(1)(a) and (B)(1)(c) of this section.



         (e)   As used in this division, CROSSWALK has the
meaning given that term in R.C. § 4511.01(LL)(2).



         (f)   The Director may, upon request by resolution of
the Legislative Authority and upon submission by the municipality of such
engineering, traffic, and other information as the Director considers
necessary, designate a school zone on any portion of a state route lying
within the municipality that includes a crosswalk customarily used by
children going to or leaving a school during recess and opening and closing
hours, whenever the distance, as measured in a straight line, from the school
property line nearest the crosswalk to the nearest point of a crosswalk is no
more than 1,320 feet. Such a school zone shall include the distance
encompassed by the crosswalk and extending 300 feet in each appropriate
direction of the state route.



         (g)   As used in this section, SPECIAL ELEMENTARY SCHOOL
means a school that meets all of the following:



            1.   It is not chartered and does not receive tax
revenue from any source.



            2.   It does not educate children beyond the
eighth grade.



            3.   It is located outside the limits of a
municipal corporation.



            4.   A majority of the total number of students
enrolled at the school are not related by blood.



            5.   The principal or other person in charge of
the special elementary school annually sends a report to the superintendent
of the school district in which the special elementary school is located
indicating the total number of students enrolled at the school, but otherwise
the principal or other person in charge does not report any other information
or data to the superintendent.



      (2)   Twenty-five miles per hour in all other portions of the
municipality, except on state routes outside business districts, through
highways outside business districts, and alleys;



      (3)   Thirty-five miles per hour on all state routes or
through highways within the municipality outside business districts, except
as provided in divisions (B)(4) and (B)(6) of this section;



      (4)   Fifty miles per hour on controlled-access highways and
expressways within the municipality;



      (5)   Fifty-five miles per hour on highways outside the
municipality, other than highways within island jurisdictions as provided in
division (B)(8) of this section, highways as provided in divisions (B)(9) and
(B)(10) of this section, and highways, expressways and freeways as provided
in divisions (B)(13), (B)(14), (B)(15) and (B)(17) of this section;



      (6)   Fifty miles per hour on state routes within the
municipality outside urban districts unless a lower prima facie speed is
established as further provided in this section;



      (7)   Fifteen miles per hour on all alleys within the
municipality;



      (8)   Thirty-five miles per hour on highways outside the
municipality that are within an island jurisdiction;



      (9)   Thirty-five miles per hour on through highways, except
state routes, that are outside municipal corporations and that are within a
national park with boundaries extending through two or more counties;



      (10)   Sixty miles per hour on two-lane state routes outside
municipal corporations as established by the Director under R.C. §
4511.21(H)(2);



      (11)   Fifty-five miles per hour at all times on freeways with
paved shoulders inside the municipality, other than freeways as provided in
divisions (B)(15) and (B)(17) of this section;



      (12)   Fifty-five miles per hour at all times on freeways
outside the municipality, other than freeways as provided in divisions
(B)(15) and (B)(17) of this section;



      (13)   Sixty miles per hour for operators of any motor vehicle
at all times on all portions of rural divided highways;



      (14)   Sixty-five miles per hour for operators of any motor
vehicle at all times on all rural expressways without traffic control signals;



      (15)   Seventy miles per hour for operators of any motor
vehicle at all times on all rural freeways;



      (16)   Fifty-five miles per hour for operators of any motor
vehicle at all times on all portions of freeways in congested areas as
determined by the Director and that are part of the interstate system and are
located within a municipal corporation or within an interstate freeway
outerbelt;



      (17)   Sixty-five miles per hour for operators of any motor
vehicle at all times on all portions of freeways in urban areas as determined
by the Director and that are part of the interstate system and are part of an
interstate freeway outerbelt.



   (C)   It is prima facie unlawful for any person to exceed any of the
speed limitations in divisions (B)(1)(a), (B)(2), (B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(6),
(B)(7), (B)(8) and (B)(9) of this section or any declared or established by
the Director or local authorities and it is unlawful for any person to exceed
any of the speed limitations in division (D) of this section. No person shall
be convicted of more than one violation of this section for the same conduct,
although violations of more than one provision of this section may be charged
in the alternative in a single affidavit.



   (D)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon a street or
highway as follows:



      (1)   At a speed exceeding 55 miles per hour, except upon a
two-lane state route as provided in division (B)(10) of this section and upon
a highway, expressway or freeway as provided in divisions (B)(13), (B)(14),
(B)(15) and (B)(17) of this section;



      (2)   At a speed exceeding 60 miles per hour upon a two-lane
state route as provided in division (B)(10) of this section and upon a
highway as provided in division (B)(13) of this section;



      (3)   At a speed exceeding 65 miles per hour upon an
expressway as provided in division (B)(14) of this section or upon a freeway
as provided in division (B)(17) of this section, except upon a freeway as
provided in division (B)(15) of this section;



      (4)   At a speed exceeding 70 miles per hour upon a freeway as
provided in division (B)(15) of this section;



      (5)   At a speed exceeding the posted speed limit upon a
highway, expressway or freeway for which the Director has determined and
declared a speed limit pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(I)(2) or (L)(2).



   (E)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(E), in every charge of violating
this section, the affidavit and warrant shall specify the time, place and
speed at which the defendant is alleged to have driven, and in charges made
in reliance upon division (C) of this section also the speed which division
(B)(1)(a), (B)(2), (B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(6), (B)(7), (B)(8) or (B)(9) of, or a
limit declared or established pursuant to, this section or R.C. § 4511.21
declares is prima facie lawful at the time and place of such alleged
violation, except that in affidavits where a person is alleged to have driven
at a greater speed than will permit the person to bring the vehicle to stop
within the assured clear distance ahead, the affidavit and warrant need not
specify the speed at which the defendant is alleged to have driven.



   (F)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(F), when a speed in excess of both
a prima facie limitation and a limitation in division (D) of this section is
alleged, the defendant shall be charged in a single affidavit, alleging a
single act, with a violation indicated of both division (B)(1)(a), (B)(2),
(B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(6), (B)(7), (B)(8) or (B)(9) of this section, or of a
limit declared or established pursuant to this section or R.C. § 4511.21 by
the Director or local authorities, and of the limitation in division (D) of
this section. If the court finds a violation of division (B)(1)(a), (B)(2),
(B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(6), (B)(7), (B)(8) or (B)(9) of, or a limit declared or
established pursuant to, this section or R.C. § 4511.21 has occurred, it
shall enter a judgment of conviction under such division and dismiss the
charge under division (D) of this section. If it finds no violation of
division (B)(1)(a), (B)(2), (B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(6), (B)(7), (B)(8), or (B)(9)
of, or a limit declared or established pursuant to, this section or R.C. §
4511.21, it shall then consider whether the evidence supports a conviction
under division (D) of this section.



   (G)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(G), points shall be assessed for a
violation of a limitation under division (D) of this section in accordance
with R.C. § 4510.036.



(R.C. § 4511.21(A) - (G)) 



   (H)   Whenever, in accordance with R.C. § 4511.21(H) through (N),
the maximum prima facie speed limitations as established herein have been
altered, either higher or lower, and the appropriate signs giving notice have
been erected as required, operators of motor vehicles shall be governed by
the speed limitations set forth on such signs. It is prima facie unlawful for
any person to exceed the speed limits posted upon such signs.



   (I)   As used in this section:



      COMMERCIAL BUS means a motor vehicle designed for carrying more
than nine passengers and used for the transportation of persons for
compensation.



      INTERSTATE SYSTEM has the same meaning as in 23 U.S.C. § 101.



      NONCOMMERCIAL BUS includes but is not limited to a school bus, or
a motor vehicle operated solely for the transportation of persons associated
with a charitable or nonprofit organization.



      OUTERBELT. A portion of a freeway that is part of the interstate
system and is located in the outer vicinity of a major municipal corporation
or group of municipal corporations, as designated by the Director.



      RURAL. Outside urbanized areas, as designated in accordance with
23 U.S.C. § 101, and outside of a business or urban district.



(R.C. § 4511.21(O))



   (J)   Speed limits for private roads and driveways.



      (1)   The owner of a private road or driveway located in a
private residential area containing 20 or more dwelling units may establish a
speed limit on the road or driveway by complying with all of the following
requirements:



         (a)   The speed limit is not less than 25 miles per hour
and is indicated by a sign that is in a proper position, is sufficiently
legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person, and meets the
specifications for the basic speed limit sign included in the manual adopted
by the Department of Transportation pursuant to R.C. § 4511.09;



         (b)   The owner has posted a sign at the entrance of the
private road or driveway that is in plain view and clearly informs persons
entering the road or driveway that they are entering private property, a
speed limit has been established for the road or driveway, and the speed
limit is enforceable by law enforcement officers under state law.



      (2)   No person shall operate a vehicle upon a private road or
driveway as provided in division (J)(1) of this section at a speed exceeding
any speed limit established and posted pursuant to division (J)(1).



      (3)   When a speed limit is established and posted in
accordance with division (J)(1) of this section, a law enforcement officer
may apprehend a person violating the speed limit of the residential area by
utilizing any of the means described in R.C. § 4511.091 or by any other
accepted method of determining the speed of a motor vehicle and may stop and
charge the person with exceeding the speed limit.



      (4)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.211(D), points shall be
assessed for violation of a speed limit established and posted in accordance
with division (J)(1) of this section in accordance with R.C. § 4510.036.



      (5)   As used in this division (J):



         OWNER. Includes but is not limited to a person who holds
title to the real property in fee simple, a condominium owners' association,
a property owners' association, a board of directors or trustees of a private
community, and a nonprofit corporation governing a private community.



         PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL AREA CONTAINING 20 OR MORE DWELLING
UNITS. Does not include a Chautauqua assembly as defined in R.C. § 4511.90.



(R.C. § 4511.211(A) - (E)) 



   (K)   Penalties.



      (1)   Divisions (A) through (I).



         (a)   A violation of any provision of divisions (A)
through (I) of this section is one of the following:



            1.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions
(K)(1)(a)2., (a)3., (b), and (c) of this section, a minor misdemeanor;



            2.   If, within one year of the offense, the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations
of any provision of divisions (A) through (I) of this section, R.C. §
4511.21, or any provision of any other municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to any provision of that section, a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree;



            3.   If, within one year of the offense, the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more
violations of any provision of divisions (A) through (I) of this section,
R.C. § 4511.21, or any provision of any other municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to any provision of that section, a misdemeanor of
the third degree.



         (b)   If the offender has not previously been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to a violation of any provision of division (A) through
(I) of this section, R.C. § 4511.21, or any other municipal ordinance that
is substantially equivalent to any provision of that section, and operated a
motor vehicle faster than 35 miles an hour in a business district of the
municipality, faster than 50 miles an hour in other portions of the
municipality, or faster than 35 miles an hour in a school zone during recess
or while children are going to or leaving school during the school's opening
or closing hours, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



         (c)   Notwithstanding division (K)(1)(a) of this
section, if the offender operated a motor vehicle in a construction zone
where a sign was then posted in accordance with R.C. § 4511.98, the court,
in addition to all other penalties provided by law, shall impose upon the
offender a fine of two times the usual amount imposed for the violation. No
court shall impose a fine of two times the usual amount imposed for the
violation upon an offender if the offender alleges, in an affidavit filed
with the court prior to the offender's sentencing, that the offender is
indigent and is unable to pay the fine imposed pursuant to this division and
if the court determines that the offender is an indigent person and unable to
pay the fine.



(R.C. § 4511.21(P))



         (d)   If the offender commits the offense while
distracted and the distracting activity is a contributing factor to the
commission of the offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine
established under § 70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.21(P))



      (2)   Division (J). 



         (a)   A violation of division (J)(2) of this section is
one of the following:



            1.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions
(K)(2)(a)2. and (K)(2)(a)3. of this section, a minor misdemeanor;



            2.   If, within one year of the offense, the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations
of division (J)(2) of this section, R.C. § 4511.211(B), or any other
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to that division, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree;



            3.   If, within one year of the offense, the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more
violations of division (J)(2) of this section, R.C. § 4511.211(B), or any
other municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to that division,
a misdemeanor of the third degree.



         (b)   If the offender commits the offense while
distracted and the distracting activity is a contributing factor to the
commission of the offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine
established under § 70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.211(F))  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Alteration of speed limits with approval of Director, see R.C. §
4511.21(H) - (N)



   Arrest pending warrant when radar, electrical or mechanical timing
device used to determine violation, see R.C. § 4511.091



§ 73.11  SLOW SPEED OR STOPPING.



   (A)   No person shall stop or operate a vehicle at such an
unreasonably slow speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable
movement of traffic, except when stopping or reduced speed is necessary for
safe operation or to comply with law.



   (B)   Whenever the Director of Transportation or local authorities
determine on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that slow
speeds on any part of a controlled-access highway, expressway, or freeway
consistently impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, the
Director or such local authority may declare a minimum speed limit below
which no person shall operate a motor vehicle, except when necessary for safe
operation or in compliance with the law. No minimum speed limit established
hereunder shall be less than 30 miles per hour, greater than 50 miles per
hour, nor effective until the provisions of R.C. § 4511.21 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, relating to appropriate signs,
have been fulfilled and local authorities have obtained the approval of the
Director.



   (C)   In a case involving a violation of this section, the trier of
fact, in determining whether the vehicle was being operated at an
unreasonably slow speed, shall consider the capabilities of the vehicle and
its operator.



   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (E)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.22)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.12  EMERGENCY VEHICLES EXCEPTED FROM SPEED LIMITATION.



   The prima facie speed limitations set forth in R.C. § 4511.21 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance do not apply to emergency
vehicles or public safety vehicles when they are responding to emergency
calls and are equipped with and displaying at least one flashing, rotating,
or oscillating light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a
distance of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle, and when the drivers
thereof sound audible signals by bell, siren, or exhaust whistle. This
section does not relieve the driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety
vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons
using the street or highway.



(R.C. § 4511.24)



§ 73.13  STREET RACING DEFINED; PROHIBITED ON PUBLIC HIGHWAYS.



   (A)   As used in this section, STREET RACING means the operation of
two or more vehicles from a point side by side at accelerating speeds in a
competitive attempt to outdistance each other, or the operation of one or
more vehicles over a common selected course, from the same point to the same
point, wherein timing is made of the participating vehicles involving
competitive accelerations or speeds. Persons rendering assistance in any
manner to such competitive use of vehicles shall be equally charged as the
participants. The operation of two or more vehicles side by side either at
speeds in excess of prima facie lawful speeds established by R.C. §
4511.21(B)(1)(a) through (B)(9) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, or rapidly accelerating from a common starting point to a speed in
excess of such prima facie lawful speeds shall be prima facie evidence of
street racing.



   (B)   No person shall participate in street racing upon any public
road, street, or highway in this municipality.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of street racing, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition to any other sanctions, the
court shall suspend the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident
operating privileges for not less than 30 days or more than three years. No
judge shall suspend the first 30 days of any suspension of an offender's
license, permit, or privilege imposed under this division.



(R.C. § 4511.251)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.14  SPEED REGULATIONS ON BRIDGES.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle over any bridge or
other elevated structure constituting a part of a highway at a speed which is
greater than the maximum speed that can be maintained with safety to such
bridge or structure, when such structure is posted with signs as provided in
this section.



      (2)   The Department of Transportation upon request from any
local authority shall, or upon its own initiative may, conduct an
investigation of any bridge or other elevated structure constituting a part
of a highway, and if it finds that such structure cannot with safety
withstand traffic traveling at the speed otherwise permissible under this
Traffic Code, the Department shall determine and declare the maximum speed of
traffic which such structure can withstand, and shall cause or permit
suitable signs stating such maximum speed to be erected and maintained at a
distance of a least 100 feet before each end of the structure.



      (3)   Upon the trial of any person charged with a violation of
this section, proof of such determination of the maximum speed by the
Department and the existence of such signs shall constitute prima facie
evidence of the maximum speed which can be maintained with safety to such
bridge or structure.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If within one year of
the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.23)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.141  OPERATION RESTRICTED FOR MINI-TRUCKS AND LOW-SPEED, UNDER-SPEED,
OR UTILITY VEHICLES.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate a low-speed vehicle upon any
street or highway having an established speed limit greater than 35 miles per
hour.



      (2)   No person shall operate an under-speed or utility
vehicle or a mini-truck upon any street or highway except as follows:



         (a)   Upon a street or highway having an established
speed limit not greater than 35 miles per hour and only upon such streets or
highways where the municipality has granted permission for such operation in
accordance with division (E) of this section;



         (b)   A state park or political subdivision employee or
volunteer operating a utility vehicle exclusively within the boundaries of
state parks or political subdivision parks for the operation or maintenance
of state or political subdivision park facilities.



      (3)   No person shall operate a motor-driven cycle or motor
scooter upon any street or highway having an established speed limit greater
than 45 miles per hour.



   (B)   This section does not prohibit either of the following:



      (1)   A person operating a low-speed, under-speed, or utility
vehicle or a mini-truck from proceeding across an intersection of a street or
highway having a speed limit greater than 35 miles per hour;



      (2)   A person operating a motor-driven cycle or motor scooter
from proceeding across an intersection of a street or highway having a speed
limit greater than 45 miles per hour.



   (C)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the municipality from
adopting more stringent local ordinances, resolutions, or regulations
governing the operation of a low-speed vehicle or a mini-truck, or a
motor-driven cycle or motor scooter.



   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.214)



   (E)   By ordinance or resolution, the municipality may authorize the
operation of under-speed or utility vehicles or mini-trucks on a public
street or highway under its jurisdiction. The municipality shall do all of
the following:



      (1)   Limit the operation of those vehicles to streets and
highways having an established speed limit not greater than 35 miles per hour;



      (2)   Require the vehicle owner who wishes to operate an
under-speed or utility vehicle or a mini-truck on the public streets or
highways to submit the vehicle to an inspection conducted by a local law
enforcement agency that complies with inspection requirements established by
the Department of Public Safety under R.C. § 4513.02;



      (3)   Permit the operation on public streets or highways of
only those vehicles that successfully pass the required vehicle inspection,
are registered in accordance with R.C. Chapter 4503, and are titled in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 4505;



      (4)   Notify the Director of Public Safety, in a manner the
Director determines, of the authorization for the operation of under-speed or
utility vehicles or mini-trucks.



   (F)   The municipality may establish additional requirements for the
operation of under-speed or utility vehicles or mini-trucks on its streets
and highways.



(R.C. § 4511.215)



   (G)   Notwithstanding divisions (A) through (F) of this section, a
person may operate a utility vehicle on any public roads or right-of-way,
other than a freeway, when traveling from one farm field to another for
agricultural purposes if the vehicle is displaying a triangular slow-moving
vehicle emblem as described in R.C. § 4513.11.



(R.C. § 4511.216)



   (H)   (1)   Except as provided in this division (H) and divisions
(E) and (F) of this section, no person shall operate a mini-truck within this
municipality.



      (2)   A person may operate a mini-truck on a farm for
agricultural purposes only when the owner of the farm qualifies for the
current agricultural use valuation tax credit. A mini-truck may be operated
by or on behalf of such a farm owner on public roads and rights-of-way only
when traveling from one farm field to another.



      (3)   A person may operate a mini-truck on property owned or
leased by a dealer who sells mini-trucks at retail.



      (4)   Whoever violates this division (H) shall be penalized as
provided in division (D) of this section.



(R.C. § 4519.401)



RESISTING OFFICER



§ 73.15  PROHIBITION AGAINST RESISTING OFFICER.



   (A)   No person shall resist, hinder, obstruct, or abuse any
sheriff, constable, or other official while that official is attempting to
arrest offenders under any provision of this Title. No person shall interfere
with any person charged under any provision of this Title with the
enforcement of the law relative to public highways.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.36) 



   (C)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the
hindrance, obstruction, resistance, or interference alleged consisted of
constitutionally protected speech only.



§ 73.16  PRESENTING FALSE NAME OR INFORMATION TO OFFICER.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly present, display, or orally
communicate a false name, social security number, or date of birth to a law
enforcement officer who is in the process of issuing to the person a traffic
ticket or complaint.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.



(R.C. § 4513.361) 



STOPPING AFTER ACCIDENT



§ 73.20  FAILURE TO STOP AFTER ACCIDENT.



   (A)   (1)   In the case of a motor vehicle accident or collision
with persons or property on a public road or highway, the operator of the
motor vehicle, having knowledge of the accident or collision, immediately
shall stop the operator’s motor vehicle at the scene of the accident or
collision. The operator shall remain at the scene of the accident or
collision until the operator has given the operator’s name and address and,
if the operator is not the owner, the name and address of the owner of that
motor vehicle, together with the registered number of that motor vehicle, to
all of the following:



         (a)   Any person injured in the accident or collision;



         (b)   The operator, occupant, owner, or attendant of any
motor vehicle damaged in the accident or collision;



         (c)   The police officer at the scene of the accident or
collision.



      (2)   In the event an injured person is unable to comprehend
and record the information required to be given under division (A)(1) of this
section, the other operator involved in the accident or collision shall
notify the nearest police authority concerning the location of the accident
or collision, and the operator’s name, address, and the registered number
of the motor vehicle the operator was operating. The operator shall remain at
the scene of the accident or collision until a police officer arrives, unless
removed from the scene by an emergency vehicle operated by a political
subdivision or an ambulance.



      (3)   If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or
unattended motor vehicle, the operator who collides with the motor vehicle
shall securely attach the information required to be given in this section,
in writing, to a conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or unattended
motor vehicle.



   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is
guilty of failure to stop after an accident. Except as otherwise provided in
division (B)(2) or (B)(3) of this section, failure to stop after an accident
is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (2)   If the accident or collision results in serious physical
harm to a person, failure to stop after an accident is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (3)   If the accident or collision results in the death of a
person, failure to stop after an accident is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



      (4)   In all cases, the court, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a class five
suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(5). No
judge shall suspend the first six months of suspension of an offender’s
license, permit, or privilege required by this division.



      (5)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of
financial responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails
to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any
other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to
R.C. § 2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic
loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate
result of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before, during, or
after committing the offense charged under this section.



(R.C. § 4549.02)



§ 73.21  STOPPING AFTER ACCIDENT ON OTHER THAN PUBLIC ROADS OR HIGHWAYS.



   (A)   (1)   In the case of a motor vehicle accident or collision
resulting in injury or damage to persons or property on any public or private
property other than a public road or highway, the operator of the motor
vehicle, having knowledge of the accident or collision, shall stop at the
scene of the accident or collision. Upon request of any person who is injured
or damaged, or any other person, the operator shall give that person the
operator’s name and address, and, if the operator is not the owner, the
name and address of the owner of that motor vehicle, together with the
registered number of that motor vehicle, and, if available, exhibit the
operator’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license.



      (2)   If the operator of the motor vehicle involved in the
accident or collision does not provide the information specified in division
(A)(1) of this section, the operator shall give that information, within 24
hours after the accident or collision, to the police department of the city
or village in which the accident or collision occurred, or if it occurred
outside the corporate limits of a city or village, to the sheriff of the
county in which the accident or collision occurred.



      (3)   If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or
unattended motor vehicle, the operator who collides with the motor vehicle
shall securely attach the information required under division (A)(1) of this
section, in writing, to a conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or
unattended motor vehicle.



   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is
guilty of failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident. Except as
otherwise provided in division (B)(2) or (B)(3) of this section, failure to
stop after a nonpublic road accident is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (2)   If the accident or collision results in serious physical
harm to a person, failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (3)   If the accident or collision results in the death of a
person, failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (4)   In all cases, the court, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a class five
suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(5). No
judge shall suspend the first six months of suspension of an offender’s
license, permit, or privilege required by this division.



      (5)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of
financial responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails
to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any
other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to
R.C. § 2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic
loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate
result of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before, during, or
after committing the offense charged under this section.



(R.C. § 4549.021)



§ 73.22  ACCIDENT INVOLVING DAMAGE TO REALTY.



   (A)   (1)   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident
resulting in damage to real property, or personal property attached to real
property, legally upon or adjacent to a public road or highway immediately
shall stop and take reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person
in charge of the property of that fact, of the driver's name and address, and
of the registration number of vehicle the driver is driving and, upon request
and if available, shall exhibit the driver's driver's or commercial driver's
license.



      (2)   If the owner or person in charge of the property cannot
be located after reasonable search, the driver of the vehicle involved in the
accident resulting in damage to the property, within 24 hours after accident,
shall forward to the police department of the municipality the same
information required to be given to the owner or person in control of the
property and give the location of the accident and a description of the
damage insofar as it is known.



   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is
guilty of failure to stop after an accident involving the property of others,
a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (2)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of
financial responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails
to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any
other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to
§ 130.99(G) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any
economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and
proximate result of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before,
during, or after committing the offense charged under this section.



(R.C. § 4549.03)



§ 73.23  FAILURE TO REPORT ACCIDENT.



   (A)   No person shall fail to report a motor vehicle accident as
required under state or local law.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4509.74)



CHAPTER 74:  EQUIPMENT AND LOADS



Section




Equipment




   74.01   Unsafe vehicles, prohibition against operation



   74.02   Bumpers on motor vehicles



   74.03   Lighted lights required



   74.04   Headlights



   74.05   Tail lights and illumination of rear license plate



   74.06   Red reflectors required



   74.07   Safety lighting of commercial vehicles



   74.08   Stoplight regulations



   74.09   Obscured lights on vehicles



   74.10   Red light or flag required



   74.11   Lights on parked vehicles



   74.12   Lights and emblem on slow-moving vehicles; lights and
reflectors on multi-wheel agricultural tractors or farm machinery



   74.13   Spotlight and auxiliary driving lights



   74.14   Cowl, fender, and back-up lights



   74.15   Two lights displayed



   74.16   Headlights required



   74.17   Lights of less intensity



   74.18   Number of lights permitted; red and flashing lights



   74.19   Standards for lights on snow removal equipment and oversize
vehicles



   74.20   Flashing lights permitted for certain types of vehicles



   74.21   Lights and sign on transportation for preschool children



   74.22   Focus and aim of headlights



   74.23   Brake equipment; specifications



   74.24   Brake fluid



   74.25   Minimum standards for brakes and components



   74.26   Horns, sirens, and warning devices



   74.27   Mufflers; excessive smoke or gas



   74.28   Rearview mirrors



   74.29   Windshields and wipers



   74.30   Solid tire requirements



   74.31   Requirements for safety glass in motor vehicles; use of
tinted glass or reflectorized material



   74.32   Directional signals



   74.33   Installation and sale of seat safety belts required;
definition



   74.34   Requirements for extra signal equipment



   74.35   Display of warning devices on disabled vehicles



   74.36   Requirements for vehicles transporting explosives



   74.37   Studded tires; seasonal use permitted



   74.38   Safety inspection decals for buses



   74.39   Air bags




Loads




   74.40   Permit required to exceed load limits



   74.41   Limitation of load extension on left side of vehicle



   74.42   All loads shall be properly secured



   74.43   Towing requirements; exception to size and weight
restrictions



   74.44   Weighing of vehicle; removal of excess load



   74.45   Operation of vehicle exceeding weight limits prohibited



   74.46   Load limits



   74.47   Maximum width, height, and length



   74.48   Statement of gross vehicle weight



   74.49   Wheel protectors required on heavy commercial vehicles



   74.50   Liability for damages; prosecution; application of monies



   74.51   Weight exceptions for certain vehicles



Statutory reference:



   Exemption of certain vehicles from emission, noise control and fuel
standards, see R.C. § 4513.41



   Exemption of collector's or historical vehicles from equipment
standards, see R.C. § 4513.38



   Motorcycles, protective eye devices required for operators and
passengers; helmets required for persons under 18 years of age, see O.A.C. §
4501-17-01



   Notice of arrest of certain commercial drivers, see R.C. § 5577.14



   Snowmobiles and all-purpose vehicles, equipment, see O.A.C. §
4501-29-01



   Vehicle lighting, see O.A.C. Chapter 4501-15



EQUIPMENT



§ 74.01  UNSAFE VEHICLES, PROHIBITION AGAINST OPERATION.



   (A)   No person shall drive or move, or cause or knowingly permit to
be driven or moved, on any highway any vehicle or combination of vehicles
which is in such unsafe condition as to endanger any person.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.02(A), (H))  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.02  BUMPERS ON MOTOR VEHICLES.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING means the manufacturer's gross
vehicle weight rating established for that vehicle.



      MANUFACTURER has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.



      MULTIPURPOSE PASSENGER VEHICLE means a motor vehicle with motive
power, except a motorcycle, designed to carry ten persons or less, that is
constructed either on a truck chassis or with special features for occasional
off-road operation.



      PASSENGER CAR means any motor vehicle with motive power, designed
for carrying ten persons or less, except a multipurpose passenger vehicle or
motorcycle.



      TRUCK means every motor vehicle, except trailers and
semitrailers, designed and used to carry property and having a gross vehicle
weight rating of 10,000 pounds or less.



   (B)   Rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety, in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 119, shall govern the maximum bumper height or, in the
absence of bumpers and in cases where bumper height have been lowered or
modified, the maximum height to the bottom of the frame rail of any passenger
car, multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck.



   (C)   No person shall operate upon a street or highway any passenger
car, multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck registered in this state that
does not conform to the requirements of this section or any applicable rule
adopted pursuant to R.C. § 4513.021.



   (D)   No person shall modify any motor vehicle registered in this
state in such a manner as to cause the vehicle body or chassis to come in
contact with the ground, expose the fuel tank to damage from collision, or
cause the wheels to come in contact with the body under normal operation, and
no person shall disconnect any part of the original suspension system of the
vehicle to defeat the safe operation of that system.



   (E)   Nothing contained in this section or in the rules adopted
pursuant to R.C. § 4513.021 shall be construed to prohibit either of the
following:



      (1)   The installation upon a passenger car, multipurpose
passenger vehicle or truck registered in this state of heavy duty equipment,
including shock absorbers and overload springs:



      (2)   The operation on a street or highway of a passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle, or truck registered in this state with normal
wear to the suspension system if the normal wear does not adversely affect
the control of the vehicle.



   (F)   This section and the rules adopted pursuant to R.C. §
4513.021 do not apply to any specially designed or modified passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle, or truck when operated off a street or
highway in races and similar events.



   (G)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.021)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Maximum height on bumpers, see O.A.C. Chapter 4501-43



§ 74.03  LIGHTED LIGHTS REQUIRED.



   (A)   Every vehicle, other than a motorized bicycle, operated upon a
street or highway within this state shall display lighted lights and
illuminating devices as required by sections 4513.04 to 4513.37 of the
Revised Code during all of the following times:



      (1)   The time from sunset to sunrise;



      (2)   At any other time when, due to insufficient natural
light or unfavorable atmospheric conditions, persons, vehicles, and
substantial objects on the highway are not discernible at a distance of 1,000
feet ahead;



      (3)   At any time when the windshield wipers of the vehicle
are in use because of precipitation on the windshield.



   (B)   Every motorized bicycle shall display at such times lighted
lights meeting the rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety under
R.C. § 4511.521. No motor vehicle, during any time specified in this
section, shall be operated upon a street or highway within this state using
only parking lights as illumination.



   (C)   Whenever in such sections a requirement is declared as to the
distance from which certain lamps and devices shall render objects visible,
or within which such lamps or devices shall be visible, such distance shall
be measured upon a straight level unlighted highway under normal atmospheric
conditions unless a different condition is expressly stated.



   (D)   Whenever in such sections a requirement is declared as to the
mounted height of lights or devices, it shall mean from the center of such
light or device to the level ground upon which the vehicle stands.



   (E)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a vehicle being operated upon
a street or highway within this state to stop the vehicle solely because the
officer observes that a violation of division (A)(3) of this section has been
or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation,
or summons for a violation of that division, or causing the arrest of or
commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation of that division.



   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.03)



§ 74.04  HEADLIGHTS.



   (A)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, shall
be equipped with at least two headlights with at least one near each side of
the front of the motor vehicle.



      (2)   Every motorcycle shall be equipped with at least one and
not more than two headlights.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.04) 



§ 74.05  TAIL LIGHTS AND ILLUMINATION OF REAR LICENSE PLATE.



   (A)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, pole
trailer or vehicle which is being drawn at the end of a train of vehicles
shall be equipped with at least one tail light mounted on the rear which,
when lighted, shall emit a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to
the rear, provided that in the case of a train of vehicles only the tail
light on the rearmost vehicle need be visible from the distance specified.



      (2)   Either a tail light or a separate light shall be so
constructed and placed as to illuminate with a white light the rear
registration plate, when such registration plate is required, and render it
legible from a distance of 50 feet to the rear. Any tail light, together with
any separate light for illuminating the rear registration plate, shall be so
wired as to be lighted whenever the headlights or auxiliary driving lights
are lighted, except where separate lighting systems are provided for trailers
for the purpose of illuminating such registration plate.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.05) 



§ 74.06  RED REFLECTORS REQUIRED.



   (A)   (1)   Every new motor vehicle sold after September 6, 1941,
and operated on a highway, other than a commercial tractor to which a trailer
or semitrailer is attached, shall carry at the rear, either as a part of the
tail lamps or separately, two red reflectors meeting the requirements of this
section, except that vehicles of the type mentioned in R.C. § 4513.07 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance shall be equipped with
reflectors as required by the regulations provided for in that section.



      (2)   Every such reflector shall be of such size and
characteristics and so maintained as to be visible at night from all
distances within 300 feet to 50 feet from such vehicle.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.06) 



§ 74.07  SAFETY LIGHTING OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.



   (A)   (1)   When the Director of Public Safety prescribes and
promulgates regulations relating to clearance lights, marker lights,
reflectors and stop lights on buses, trucks, commercial tractors, trailers,
semitrailers and pole trailers, when operated upon any highway, these
vehicles shall be equipped as required by such regulations, and such
equipment shall be lighted at all times mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, except that clearance lights
and side marker lights need not be lighted on any such vehicle when it is
operated within the municipality where there is sufficient light to reveal
any person or substantial object on the highway at a distance of 500 feet.



      (2)   Such equipment shall be in addition to all other lights
specifically required by R.C. §§ 4513.03 through 4513.16, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinances.



      (3)   Vehicles operated under the jurisdiction of the Public
Utilities Commission are not subject to this section.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.07) 



§ 74.08  STOPLIGHT REGULATIONS.



   (A)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, and pole
trailer when operated upon a highway shall be equipped with two or more stop
lights, except that passenger cars manufactured or assembled prior to January
1, 1967, motorcycles, and motor-driven cycles shall be equipped with at least
one stop light. Stop lights shall be mounted on the rear of the vehicle,
actuated upon application of the service brake, and may be incorporated with
other rear lights. Such stop lights when actuated shall emit a red light
visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear; provided that in the case of
a train of vehicles only the stop lights on the rearmost vehicle need be
visible from the distance specified.



      (2)   Such stop lights when actuated shall give a steady
warning light to the rear of a vehicle or train of vehicles to indicate the
intention of the operator to diminish the speed of or stop a vehicle or train
of vehicles.



      (3)   When stop lights are used as required by this section,
they shall be constructed or installed so as to provide adequate and reliable
illumination and shall conform to the appropriate rules and regulations
established under R.C. § 4513.19.



      (4)   Historical motor vehicles as defined in R.C. §
4503.181, not originally manufactured with stop lights, are not subject to
this section.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.071) 



§ 74.09  OBSCURED LIGHTS ON VEHICLES.



   Whenever motor and other vehicles are operated in combination during
the time that lights are required, any light, except tail lights, which by
reason of its location on a vehicle of the combination would be obscured by
another vehicle of the combination, need not be lighted, but this section
does not affect the requirement that lighted clearance lights be displayed on
the front of the foremost vehicle required to have clearance lights or that
all lights required on the rear of the rearmost vehicle of any combination
shall be lighted.



(R.C. § 4513.08)



§ 74.10  RED LIGHT OR FLAG REQUIRED.



   (A)   Whenever the load upon any vehicle extends to the rear four
feet or more beyond the bed or body of this vehicle, there shall be displayed
at the extreme rear end of the load, at the times specified in R.C. §
4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, a red light or
lantern plainly visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the sides and
rear. The red light or lantern required by this section is in addition to the
red rear light required upon every vehicle. At any other time there shall be
displayed at the extreme rear end of such load a red flag or cloth not less
than 16 inches square.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.09) 



§ 74.11  LIGHTS ON PARKED VEHICLES.



   (A)   Except in case of an emergency, whenever a vehicle is parked
or stopped upon a roadway open to traffic or a shoulder adjacent thereto,
whether attended or unattended, during the times mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, such vehicle shall be
equipped with one or more lights which shall exhibit a white or amber light
on the roadway side visible from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such
vehicle, and a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear. No
lights need be displayed upon any such vehicle when it is stopped or parked
within the municipality where there is sufficient light to reveal any person
or substantial object within a distance of 500 feet upon such highway. Any
lighted headlights upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed.



(R.C. § 4513.10) 



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.99)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.12  LIGHTS AND EMBLEM ON SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES; LIGHTS AND REFLECTORS
ON MULTI-WHEEL AGRICULTURAL TRACTORS OR FARM MACHINERY.



   (A)   All vehicles other than bicycles, including animal-drawn
vehicles and vehicles referred to in R.C. § 4513.02(G), not specifically
required to be equipped with lamps or other lighting devices by R.C. §§
4513.03 through 4513.10, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinances, shall, at the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, be equipped with at least one
lamp displaying a white light visible from a distance of not less than 1,000
feet to the front of the vehicle and also shall be equipped with two lamps
displaying red light visible from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet to
the rear of the vehicle, or as an alternative, one lamp displaying a red
light visible from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the rear and two
red reflectors visible from all distances of 600 feet to 100 feet to the rear
when illuminated by the lawful lower beams of headlamps. Lamps and reflectors
required by this section shall meet standards adopted by the Director of
Public Safety.



   (B)   All boat trailers, farm machinery and other machinery,
including all road construction machinery, upon a street or highway, except
when being used in actual construction and maintenance work in an area
guarded by a flagperson, or where flares are used, or when operating or
traveling within the limits of a construction area designated by the Director
of Transportation, a city or village engineer, or the county engineer of the
several counties, when such construction area is marked in accordance with
requirements of the Director and the Manual and Specifications for a Uniform
System of Traffic-Control Devices, as set forth in R.C. § 4511.09, which is
designed for operation at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less, shall be
operated at a speed not exceeding 25 miles per hour, and shall display a
triangular slow- moving vehicle emblem (SMV). The emblem shall be mounted so
as to be visible from a distance of not less than 500 feet to the rear. The
Director of Public Safety shall adopt standards and specifications for the
design and position of mounting the SMV emblem. The standards and
specifications for SMV emblems referred to in this section shall correlate
with and, so far as possible, conform with those approved by the American
Society of Agricultural Engineers. A unit of farm machinery that is designed
by its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour may
be operated on a street or highway at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour
provided it is operated in accordance with this section. As used in this
division, MACHINERY does not include any vehicle designed to be drawn by an
animal.



   (C)   The use of the SMV emblem shall be restricted to animal-drawn
vehicles and to the slow- moving vehicles specified in division (B) of this
section operating or traveling within the limits of the highway. Its use on
slow-moving vehicles being transported upon other types of vehicles or on any
other type of vehicle or stationary object on the highway is prohibited.



   (D)   (1)   No person shall sell, lease, rent or operate any boat
trailer, farm machinery or other machinery defined as a slow-moving vehicle
in division (B) of this section, except those units designed to be completely
mounted on a primary power unit, which is manufactured or assembled on or
after April 1, 1966, unless the vehicle is equipped with a slow-moving
vehicle emblem mounting device as specified in division (B) of this section.



      (2)   No person shall sell, lease, rent, or operate on a
street or highway any unit of farm machinery that is designed by its
manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour unless the
unit displays a slow-moving vehicle emblem as specified in division (B) of
this section and a speed identification symbol that meets the specifications
contained in the American Society of Agricultural Engineers Standard
ANSI/ASAE S584 JAN2005, Agricultural Equipment: Speed Identification Symbol
(SIS).



   (E)   Any boat trailer, farm machinery or other machinery defined as
a slow-moving vehicle in division (B) of this section, in addition to the use
of the slow-moving vehicle emblem, and any unit of farm machinery that is
designed by its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per
hour, in addition to the display of a speed identification symbol, may be
equipped with a red flashing light that shall be visible from a distance of
not less than 1,000 feet to the rear at all times specified in R.C. §
4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance. When a
double-faced light is used, it shall display amber light to the front and red
light to the rear. In addition to the lights described in this division, farm
machinery and motor vehicles escorting farm machinery may display a flashing,
oscillating or rotating amber light, as permitted by R.C. § 4513.17 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and also may display
simultaneously flashing turn signals or warning lights, as permitted by that
section.



   (F)   (1)   Every animal-drawn vehicle upon a street or highway
shall at all times be equipped in one of the following ways:



         (a)   With a slow-moving vehicle emblem complying with
division (B) of this section;



         (b)   With alternate reflective material complying with
rules adopted under division (F)(2) below;



         (c)   With both a slow-moving vehicle emblem and
alternate reflective material as specified in division (F)(2) below.



      (2)   Rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety, subject
to R.C. Chapter 119, establishing standards and specifications for the
position of mounting of the alternate reflective material authorized by this
division, permit, as a minimum, the alternate reflective material to be
black, gray, or silver in color. The alternate reflective material shall be
mounted on the animal-drawn vehicle so as to be visible, at all times
specified in R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, from a distance of not less than 500 feet to the rear when
illuminated by the lawful lower beams of headlamps.



   (G)   (1)   Every unit of farm machinery that is designed by its
manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour shall
display a slow-moving vehicle emblem and a speed identification symbol that
meets the specifications contained in the American Society of Agricultural
Engineers Standard ANSI/ASAE S584 JAN2005, Agricultural Equipment: Speed
Identification Symbol (SIS) when the unit is operated upon a street or
highway, irrespective of the speed at which the unit is operated on the
street or highway. The speed identification symbol shall indicate the maximum
speed in miles per hour at which the unit of farm machinery is designed by
its manufacturer to operate. The display of the speed identification symbol
shall be in accordance with the standard prescribed in this division.



      (2)   If an agricultural tractor that is designed by its
manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour is being
operated on a street or highway at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour and
is towing, pulling, or otherwise drawing a unit of farm machinery, the unit
of farm machinery shall display a slow-moving vehicle emblem and a speed
identification symbol that is the same as the speed identification symbol
that is displayed on the agricultural tractor.



   (H)   When an agricultural tractor that is designed by its
manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour is being
operated on a street or highway at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour,
the operator shall possess some documentation published or provided by the
manufacturer indicating the maximum speed in miles per hour at which the
manufacturer designed the agricultural tractor to operate.



   (I)   As used in this section, BOAT TRAILER means any vehicle
designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage
and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or
highway for a distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of 25 miles
per hour or less.



(R.C. § 4513.11) 



   (J)   Lights and reflector requirements for multi-wheel agricultural
tractors or farm machinery.



      (1)   (a)   Every multi-wheel agricultural tractor whose
model year was 2001 or earlier, when being operated or traveling on a street
or highway at the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, at a minimum shall be equipped with and
display reflectors and illuminated amber lamps so that the extreme left and
right projections of the tractor are indicated by flashing lamps displaying
amber light, visible to the front and the rear; by amber reflectors, all
visible to the front; and by red reflectors, all visible to the rear.



         (b)   The lamps displaying amber light need not flash
simultaneously and need not flash in conjunction with any directional signals
of the tractor.



         (c)   The lamps and reflectors required by division
(J)(1)(a) of this section and their placement shall meet standards and
specifications contained in rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 119. The rules governing the amber lamps, amber
reflectors, and red reflectors and their placement shall correlate with and,
as far as possible, conform with paragraphs 4.1.4.1, 4.1.7.1, and 4.1.7.2,
respectively, of the American Society of Agricultural Engineers Standard
ANSI/ASAE S279.10 OCT98, Lighting and Marking of Agricultural Equipment on
Highways.



      (2)   Every unit of farm machinery whose model year was 2002
or later, when being operated or traveling on a street or highway at the
times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, shall be equipped with and display markings and illuminated lamps
that meet or exceed the lighting, illumination, and marking standards and
specifications that are applicable to that type of farm machinery for the
unit's model year specified in the American Society of Agricultural Engineers
Standard ANSI/ASAE S279.11 APR01, Lighting and Marking of Agricultural
Equipment on Highways, or any subsequent revisions of that standard.



      (3)   The lights and reflectors required by division (J)(1) of
this section are in addition to the slow-moving vehicle emblem and lights
required or permitted by R.C. §§ 4513.11 or 4513.17, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, to be displayed on farm machinery being
operated or traveling on a street or highway.



      (4)   No person shall operate any unit of farm machinery on a
street or highway or cause any unit of farm machinery to travel on a street
or highway in violation of divisions (J)(1) or (J)(2) of this section.



(R.C. § 4513.111)



   (K)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. §§ 4513.11(I), 4513.111(E)) 



§ 74.13  SPOTLIGHT AND AUXILIARY DRIVING LIGHTS.



   (A)   (1)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than
one spotlight and every lighted spotlight shall be so aimed and used upon
approaching another vehicle that no part of the high-intensity portion of the
beam will be directed to the left of the prolongation of the extreme left
side of the vehicle, nor more than 100 feet ahead of the vehicle.



      (2)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than
three auxiliary driving lights mounted on the front of the vehicle. Any such
lights which do not conform to the specifications for auxiliary driving
lights and the regulations for their use prescribed by the Director of Public
Safety shall not be used.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.12)



§ 74.14  COWL, FENDER, AND BACK-UP LIGHTS.



   (A)   (1)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with side cowl or
fender lights which shall emit a white or amber light without glare.



      (2)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with lights on each
side thereof which shall emit a white or amber light without glare.



      (3)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with back-up lights,
either separately or in combination with another light. No back-up lights
shall be continuously lighted when the motor vehicle is in forward motion.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.13)



§ 74.15  TWO LIGHTS DISPLAYED.



   (A)   At all times mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, at least two lighted lights shall be
displayed, one near each side of the front of every motor vehicle, except
when such vehicle is parked subject to the regulations governing lights on
parked vehicles.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.14) 



§ 74.16  HEADLIGHTS REQUIRED.



   (A)   Whenever a motor vehicle is being operated on a roadway or
shoulder adjacent thereto during the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the driver shall use a
distribution of light, or composite beam, directed high enough and of
sufficient intensity to reveal persons, vehicles and substantial objects at a
safe distance in advance of the vehicle, subject to the following
requirements:



      (1)   Whenever the driver of a vehicle approaches an oncoming
vehicle, such driver shall use a distribution of light, or composite beam, so
aimed that the glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of the oncoming
driver.



      (2)   Every new motor vehicle registered in this state which
has multiple-beam road lighting equipment shall be equipped with a beam
indicator, which shall be lighted whenever the uppermost distribution of
light from the headlights is in use, and shall not otherwise be lighted. This
indicator shall be so designed and located that, when lighted, it will be
readily visible without glare to the driver of the vehicle.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C.  §4513.15) 



§ 74.17  LIGHTS OF LESS INTENSITY.



   (A)   Any motor vehicle may be operated under the conditions
specified in R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance when it is equipped with two lighted lights upon the front thereof
capable of revealing persons and substantial objects 75 feet ahead, in lieu
of lights required in R.C. § 4513.14 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, provided that such vehicle shall not be operated at a speed in
excess of 20 miles per hour.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.16) 



§ 74.18  NUMBER OF LIGHTS PERMITTED; RED AND FLASHING LIGHTS.



   (A)   Whenever a motor vehicle equipped with headlights is also
equipped with any auxiliary lights or spotlight or any other light on the
front thereof projecting a beam of an intensity greater than 300 candlepower,
not more than a total of five of any such lights on the front of a vehicle
shall be lighted at any one time when the vehicle is upon a highway.



   (B)   Any lighted light or illuminating device upon a motor vehicle,
other than headlights, spotlights, signal lights, or auxiliary driving
lights, that projects a beam of light of an intensity greater than 300
candlepower shall be so directed that no part of the beam will strike the
level of the roadway on which the vehicle stands at a distance of more than
75 feet from the vehicle.



   (C)   (1)   Flashing lights are prohibited on motor vehicles,
except as a means for indicating a right or a left turn, or in the presence
of vehicular traffic hazard requiring unusual care in approaching, or
overtaking or passing. This prohibition does not apply to emergency vehicles,
road service vehicles servicing or towing a disabled vehicle, stationary
waste collection vehicles actively collecting garbage, refuse, trash, or
recyclable materials on the roadside, rural mail delivery vehicles, vehicles
as provided in R.C. § 4513.182 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, highway maintenance vehicles, funeral hearses, funeral escort
vehicles, and similar equipment operated by the Department or local
authorities, which shall be equipped with and display, when used on a street
or highway for the special purpose necessitating such lights, a flashing,
oscillating or rotating amber light, but shall not display a flashing,
oscillating or rotating light of any other color, nor to vehicles or
machinery permitted by R.C. § 4513.11 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance to have a flashing red light.



      (2)   When used on a street or highway, farm machinery and
vehicles escorting farm machinery may be equipped with and display a
flashing, oscillating or rotating amber light, and the prohibition contained
in division (C)(1) of this section does not apply to such machinery or
vehicles. Farm machinery may also display the lights described in R.C. §
4513.11 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



   (D)   Except a person operating a public safety vehicle, as defined
in R.C. § 4511.01(E), or a school bus, no person shall operate, move, or
park upon or permit to stand within the right-of-way of any public street or
highway any vehicle or equipment that is equipped with and displaying a
flashing red or a flashing combination red and white light, or an oscillating
or rotating red light, or a combination red and white oscillating or rotating
light; and except a public law enforcement officer, or other person sworn to
enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state, operating a public safety
vehicle when on duty, no person shall operate, move or park upon or permit to
stand within the right-of-way of any street or highway any vehicle or
equipment that is equipped with, or upon which is mounted, and displaying a
flashing blue or a flashing combination blue and white light, or an
oscillating or rotating blue light, or a combination blue and white
oscillating or rotating light.



   (E)   This section does not prohibit the use of warning lights
required by law or the simultaneous flashing of turn signals on disabled
vehicles or on vehicles being operated in unfavorable atmospheric conditions
in order to enhance their visibility. This section also does not prohibit the
simultaneous flashing of turn signals or warning lights whether on farm
machinery or vehicles escorting farm machinery when used on a street or
highway.



(R.C. § 4513.17) 



   (F)   (1)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a motor
vehicle operated by a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner's investigator may
be equipped with a flashing, oscillating or rotating red or blue light and
siren, whistle or bell capable of emitting sound audible under normal
conditions from a distance of not less than 500 feet. Such a vehicle may
display the flashing, oscillating or rotating red or blue light and may give
the audible signal of the siren, whistle or bell only when responding to a
fatality or a fatal motor vehicle accident on a street or highway and only at
those locations where the stoppage of traffic impedes the ability of the
coroner, deputy coroner or coroner's investigator to arrive at the site of
the fatality.



      (2)   This division (F) does not relieve the coroner, deputy
coroner or coroner's investigator operating a motor vehicle from the duty to
drive with due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the
highway.



(R.C. § 4513.171)



   (G)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. §§ 4513.17(F), 4513.171(B))



§ 74.19  STANDARDS FOR LIGHTS ON SNOW REMOVAL EQUIPMENT AND OVERSIZE
VEHICLES.



   (A)   It is unlawful to operate snow removal equipment on a highway
unless the lights thereon comply with and are lighted when and as required by
the standards and specifications adopted by the Director of Transportation
pursuant to R.C. § 4513.18.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.18)



§ 74.20  FLASHING LIGHTS PERMITTED FOR CERTAIN TYPES OF VEHICLES.



   Rural mail delivery vehicles, state highway survey vehicles, and
funeral escort vehicles are permitted to use flashing lights.



(R.C. § 4513.181)



§ 74.21  LIGHTS AND SIGN ON TRANSPORTATION FOR PRESCHOOL CHILDREN.



   (A)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle owned, leased, or
hired by a nursery school, kindergarten, or day-care center, while
transporting preschool children to or from such an institution unless the
motor vehicle is equipped with and displaying two amber flashing lights
mounted on a bar attached to the top of the vehicle, and a sign bearing the
designation "caution - children," which shall be attached to the bar carrying
the amber flashing lights in such a manner as to be legible to persons both
in front of and behind the vehicle. The lights and sign shall meet standards
and specifications adopted by the Director of Public Safety.



   (B)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle displaying the lights
and sign required by this section for any purpose other than the
transportation of preschool children as provided in this section.



(R.C. § 4513.182)



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.99)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.22  FOCUS AND AIM OF HEADLIGHTS.



   (A)   No person shall use any lights mentioned in R.C. §§ 4513.03
through 4513.18, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, upon
any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer unless these lights are equipped,
mounted and adjusted as to focus and aim in accordance with regulations which
are prescribed by the Director of Public Safety.



   (B)   The headlights on any motor vehicle shall comply with the
headlamp color requirements contained in Federal Motor Vehicle Safety
Standard Number 108, 49 C.F.R. § 571.108. No person shall operate a motor
vehicle in violation of this division.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.19) 



§ 74.23  BRAKE EQUIPMENT; SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   The following requirements govern as to brake equipment on
vehicles:



      (1)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, when
operated upon a highway shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the
movement of and to stop and hold the motor vehicle, including two separate
means of applying the brakes, each of which means shall be effective to apply
the brakes to at least two wheels. If these two separate means of applying
the brakes are connected in any way, then on such motor vehicles,
manufactured or assembled after January 1, 1942, they shall be so constructed
that failure of any one part of the operating mechanism shall not leave the
motor vehicle without brakes on at least two wheels.



      (2)   Every motorcycle, when operated upon a highway shall be
equipped with at least one adequate brake, which may be operated by hand or
by foot.



      (3)   Every motorized bicycle shall be equipped with brakes
meeting the rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety under R.C. §
4511.521.



      (4)   When operated upon the highways, the following vehicles
shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop
and to hold the vehicle, designed to be applied by the driver of the towing
motor vehicle from its cab, and also designed and connected so that, in case
of a breakaway of the towed vehicle, the brakes shall be automatically
applied:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this section,
every trailer or semitrailer, except a pole trailer, with an empty weight of
2,000 pounds or more, manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1942;



         (b)   Every manufactured home or travel trailer with an
empty weight of 2,000 pounds or more, manufactured or assembled on or after
January 1, 2001.



      (5)   Every watercraft trailer with a gross weight or
manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating of 3,000 pounds or more that is
manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 2008, shall have separate
brakes equipped with hydraulic surge or electrically operated brakes on two
wheels.



      (6)   In any combination of motor-drawn trailers or
semitrailers equipped with brakes, means shall be provided for applying the
rearmost brakes in approximate synchronism with the brakes on the towing
vehicle, and developing the required braking effort on the rearmost wheels at
the fastest rate; or means shall be provided for applying braking effort
first on the rearmost brakes; or both of the above means, capable of being
used alternatively, may be employed.



      (7)   Every vehicle and combination of vehicles, except
motorcycles and motorized bicycles, and except trailers and semitrailers of a
gross weight of less than 2,000 pounds, and pole trailers, shall be equipped
with parking brakes adequate to hold the vehicle on any grade on which it is
operated, under all conditions of loading, on a surface free from snow, ice,
or loose material. The parking brakes shall be capable of being applied in
conformance with the foregoing requirements by the driver's muscular effort
or by spring action or by equivalent means. Their operation may be assisted
by the service brakes or other source of power provided that failure of the
service brake actuation system or other power assisting mechanism will not
prevent the parking brakes from being applied in conformance with the
foregoing requirements. The parking brakes shall be so designed that when
once applied they shall remain applied with the required effectiveness
despite exhaustion of any source of energy or leakage of any kind.



      (8)   The same brake drums, brake shoes and lining assemblies,
brake shoe anchors, and mechanical brake shoe actuation mechanism normally
associated with the wheel brake assemblies may be used for both the service
brakes and the parking brakes. If the means of applying the parking brakes
and the service brakes are connected in any way, they shall be so constructed
that failure of any one part shall not leave the vehicle without operative
brakes.



      (9)   Every motor vehicle or combination of motor-drawn
vehicles shall, at all times and under all conditions of loading, be capable
of being stopped on a dry, smooth, level road free from loose material, upon
application of the service or foot brake, within the following specified
distances, or shall be capable of being decelerated at a sustained rate
corresponding to these distances:



         (a)   Vehicles or combinations of vehicles having brakes
on all wheels shall come to a stop in 30 feet or less from a speed of 20
miles per hour.



         (b)   Vehicles or combinations of vehicles not having
brakes on all wheels shall come to a stop in 40 feet or less from a speed of
20 miles per hour.



      (10)   All brakes shall be maintained in good working order
and shall be so adjusted as to operate as equally as practicable with respect
to the wheels on opposite sides of the vehicle.



(R.C. § 4513.20)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.99)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.24  BRAKE FLUID.



   (A)   No hydraulic brake fluid for use in motor vehicles shall be
sold in this municipality if the brake fluid is below the minimum standard of
specifications for heavy duty type brake fluid established by the society of
automotive engineers and the standard of specifications established by 49
C.F.R. § 571.116, as amended.



   (B)   All manufacturers, packers, or distributors of brake fluid
selling such fluid in this municipality shall state on the containers that
the brake fluid meets or exceeds the applicable minimum SAE standard of
specifications, and the standard of specifications established in 49 C.F.R.
§ 571.116, as amended.



(R.C. § 4513.201) 



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.99)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.25  MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR BRAKES AND COMPONENTS.



   (A)   No brake lining, brake lining material, or brake lining
assemblies for use as repair and replacement parts in motor vehicles shall be
sold in this municipality if these items do not meet or exceed the minimum
standard of specifications established by the Society of Automotive Engineers
and the standard of specifications established in 49 C.F.R. § 571.105, as
amended, and 49 C.F.R. § 571.135, as amended.



   (B)   All manufacturers or distributors of brake lining, brake
lining material, or brake lining assemblies selling these items for use as
repair and replacement parts in motor vehicles shall state that the items
meet or exceed the applicable minimum standard of specifications.



   (C)   As used in this section, MINIMUM STANDARD OF SPECIFICATIONS
means a minimum standard for brake system or brake component performance that
meets the need for motor vehicle safety and complies with the applicable SAE
standards and recommended practices, and the federal motor vehicle safety
standards that cover the same aspect of performance for any brake lining,
brake lining material, or brake lining assemblies.



(R.C. § 4513.202) 



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.99)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.26  HORNS, SIRENS, AND WARNING DEVICES.



   (A)   (1)   Every motor vehicle when operated upon a highway
shall be equipped with a horn which is in good working order and capable of
emitting sound audible, under normal conditions, from a distance of not less
than 200 feet.



      (2)   No motor vehicle shall be equipped with, nor shall any
person use upon a vehicle, any siren, whistle, or bell. Any vehicle may be
equipped with a theft alarm signal device which shall be so arranged that it
cannot be used as an ordinary warning signal. Every emergency vehicle shall
be equipped with a siren, whistle or bell, capable of emitting sound audible
under normal conditions from a distance of not less than 500 feet and of a
type approved by the Director of Public Safety. Such equipment shall not be
used except when such vehicle is operated in response to an emergency call or
is in the immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, in
which case the driver of the emergency vehicle shall sound such equipment
when it is necessary to warn pedestrians and other drivers of the approach
thereof.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.21) 



§ 74.27  MUFFLERS; EXCESSIVE SMOKE OR GAS.



   (A)   (1)   Every motor vehicle and motorcycle with an internal
combustion engine shall at all times be equipped with a muffler which is in
good working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual
noise, and no person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar device
upon a motor vehicle on a highway. Every motorcycle muffler shall be equipped
with baffle plates.



      (2)   No person shall own, operate or have in the person's
possession any motor vehicle or motorcycle equipped with a device for
producing excessive smoke or gas, or so equipped as to permit oil or any
other chemical to flow into or upon the exhaust pipe or muffler of such
vehicle, or equipped in any way to produce or emit smoke or dangerous or
annoying gases from any portion of such vehicle, other than the ordinary
gases emitted by the exhaust of an internal combustion engine under normal
operation.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.22)



§ 74.28  REARVIEW MIRRORS.



   (A)   Every motor vehicle and motorcycle shall be equipped with a
mirror so located as to reflect to the operator a view of the highway to the
rear of such vehicle or motorcycle. Operators of vehicles and motorcycles
shall have a clear and unobstructed view to the front and to both sides of
their vehicles and motorcycles and shall have a clear view to the rear of
their vehicles and motorcycles by mirror.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.23)



§ 74.29  WINDSHIELDS AND WIPERS.



   (A)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle on a street or highway
in this municipality, other than a motorcycle or motorized bicycle, that is
not equipped with a windshield.



   (B)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle, other than a bus,
with any sign, poster, or other nontransparent material upon the front
windshield, sidewings, side, or rear windows of such vehicle other than a
certificate or other paper required to be displayed by law, except that there
may be in the lower left-hand or right-hand corner of the windshield a sign,
poster, or decal not to exceed four inches in height by six inches in width.
No sign, poster, or decal shall be displayed in the front windshield in such
a manner as to conceal the vehicle identification number for the motor
vehicle when, in accordance with federal law, that number is located inside
the vehicle passenger compartment and so placed as to be readable through the
vehicle glazing without moving any part of the vehicle.



   (C)   The windshield on every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a
device for cleaning rain, snow, or other moisture from the windshield. The
device shall be maintained in good working order and so constructed as to be
controlled or operated by the operator of the vehicle.



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.24) 



§ 74.30  SOLID TIRE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Every solid tire, as defined in R.C. § 4501.01, on a vehicle
shall have rubber or other resilient material on its entire traction surface
at least one inch thick above the edge of the flange of the entire periphery.



(R.C. § 4513.25)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.99)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.31  REQUIREMENTS FOR SAFETY GLASS IN MOTOR VEHICLES; USE OF TINTED
GLASS OR REFLECTORIZED MATERIAL.



   (A)   Safety glass.



      (1)   No person shall sell any new motor vehicle nor shall any
new motor vehicle be registered, and no person shall operate any motor
vehicle, which is registered in this state and which has been manufactured or
assembled on or after January 1, 1936, unless the motor vehicle is equipped
with safety glass, wherever glass is used in the windshields, doors,
partitions, rear windows, and windows on each side immediately adjacent to
the rear window.



      (2)   SAFETY GLASS means any product composed of glass so
manufactured, fabricated, or treated as substantially to prevent shattering
and flying of the glass when it is struck or broken, or such other or similar
product as may be approved by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles.



      (3)   Glass other than safety glass shall not be offered for
sale, or sold for use in, or installed in any door, window, partition, or
windshield that is required by this section to be equipped with safety glass.



(R.C. § 4513.26)



   (B)   Tinted or reflectorized material.



      (1)   No person shall operate, on any highway or other public
or private property open to the public for vehicular travel or parking,
lease, or rent any motor vehicle that is registered in this state unless the
motor vehicle conforms to the requirements concerning tinted glass and
reflectorized material of R.C. § 4513.241 and of any applicable rule adopted
under that section.



      (2)   No person shall install in or on any motor vehicle, any
glass or other material that fails to conform to the requirements of R.C. §
4513.241 or of any rule adopted under that section.



      (3)   (a)   No used motor vehicle dealer or new motor
vehicle dealer, as defined in R.C. § 4517.01, shall sell any motor vehicle
that fails to conform to the requirements of R.C. § 4513.241 or of any rule
adopted under that section.



         (b)   No manufacturer, remanufacturer, or distributor,
as defined in R.C. § 4517.01, shall provide to a motor vehicle dealer
licensed under R.C. Chapter 4517 or to any other person, a motor vehicle that
fails to conform to the requirements of R.C. § 4513.241  or of any rule
adopted under that section.



      (4)   No reflectorized materials shall be permitted upon or in
any front windshield, side windows, sidewings, or rear window.



      (5)   This division (B) does not apply to the manufacturer's
tinting or glazing of motor vehicle windows or windshields that is otherwise
in compliance with or permitted by Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard #205.



      (6)   With regard to any side window behind a driver’s seat
or any rear window other than any window on an emergency door, this division
(B) does not apply to any school bus used to transport a child with
disabilities pursuant to R.C. Chapter 3323, whom it is impossible or
impractical to transport by regular school bus in the course of regular route
transportation provided by a school district. As used in this subdivision,
CHILD WITH DISABILITIES has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3323.01.



      (7)   This division (B) does not apply to any school bus that
is to be sold and operated outside the municipality.



      (8)   (a)   This division (B) does not apply to a motor
vehicle used by a law enforcement agency under either of the following
circumstances:



            1.   The vehicle does not have distinctive
markings of a law enforcement vehicle but is operated by or on behalf of the
law enforcement agency in an authorized investigation or other activity
requiring that the presence and identity of the vehicle occupants be
undisclosed.



            2.   The vehicle primarily is used by the law
enforcement canine unit for transporting a police dog.



         (b)   As used in this division, LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY
means a police department, the office of a sheriff, the State Highway Patrol,
a county prosecuting attorney, or a federal, state, or local governmental
body that enforces criminal laws and that has employees who have a statutory
power of arrest.



(R.C. § 4513.241(C) - (J))



   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.99)



      (2)   Whoever violates division (B)(1), (B)(3)(b) or (B)(4) of
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



      (3)   Whoever violates division (B)(3)(a) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor if the dealer or the dealer’s agent knew of
the nonconformity at the time of sale.



      (4)   (a)   Whoever violates division (B)(2) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, except that an
organization may not be convicted unless the act of installation was
authorized by the board of directors, trustees, partners, or by a high
managerial officer acting on behalf of the organization, and installation was
performed by an employee of the organization acting within the scope of the
person’s employment.



         (b)   In addition to any other penalty imposed under
this section, whoever violates division (B)(2) of this section is liable in a
civil action to the owner of a motor vehicle on which was installed the
nonconforming glass or material for any damages incurred by that person as a
result of the installation of the nonconforming glass or material, costs of
maintaining the civil action, and attorney fees.



         (c)   In addition to any other penalty imposed under
this section, if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (B)(2) of this section and the offender is
a motor vehicle repair operator registered under R.C. Chapter 4775 or a motor
vehicle dealer licensed under R.C. Chapter 4517, whoever violates division
(B)(2) of this section is subject to a registration or license suspension, as
applicable, for a period of not more than 180 days.



(R.C. § 4513.241(K))  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Administrative regulations, see O.A.C. Chapter 4501-41



   Recording and reporting violations, certain court requirements, see
R.C. § 4513.241(L)



§ 74.32  DIRECTIONAL SIGNALS.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle
manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1954, unless the vehicle is
equipped with electrical or mechanical directional signals.



      (2)   No person shall operate any motorcycle or motor-driven
cycle manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1968, unless the
vehicle is equipped with electrical or mechanical directional signals.



   (B)   DIRECTIONAL SIGNALS means an electrical or mechanical signal
device capable of clearly indicating an intention to turn either to the right
or to the left and which shall be visible from both the front and rear.



   (C)   All mechanical signal devices shall be self-illuminating
devices when in use at the times mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.261)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.33  INSTALLATION AND SALE OF SEAT SAFETY BELTS REQUIRED; DEFINITION.



   (A)   As used in this section and in R.C. § 4513.263 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the component parts of a SEAT
SAFETY BELT include a belt, anchor attachment assembly, and a buckle or
closing device.



   (B)   No person shall sell, lease, rent, or operate any passenger
car, as defined in R.C. § 4501.01(E), that is registered or to be registered
in this state and that is manufactured or assembled on or after January 1,
1962, unless the passenger car is equipped with sufficient anchorage units at
the attachment points for attaching at least two sets of seat safety belts to
its front seat. Such anchorage units at the attachment points shall be of
such construction, design, and strength to support a loop load pull of not
less than 4,000 pounds for each belt.



   (C)   No person shall sell, lease, or rent any passenger car, as
defined in R.C. § 4501.01(E), that is registered or to be registered in this
state and that is manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1966,
unless the passenger car has installed in its front seat at least two seat
safety belt assemblies.



   (D)   After January 1, 1966, neither any seat safety belt for use in
a motor vehicle nor any component part of any such seat safety belt shall be
sold in this municipality unless the seat safety belt or the component part
satisfies the minimum standard of specifications established by the society
of automotive engineers for automotive seat belts and unless the seat safety
belt or component part is labeled so as to indicate that it meets those
minimum standard specifications.



   (E)   Each sale, lease, or rental in violation of this section
constitutes a separate offense.



   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.262)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Child restraint systems, administrative regulations, see O.A.C. Chapter
4501-37



§ 74.34  REQUIREMENTS FOR EXTRA SIGNAL EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   No person shall operate any motor truck, bus, or commercial
tractor upon any highway at any time from sunset to sunrise unless there is
carried in such vehicle, except as provided in division (B) of this section,
the following equipment which shall be of the types approved by the Director
of Transportation.



      (1)   At least three flares or three red reflectors or three
red electric lanterns, each of which is capable of being seen and
distinguished at a distance of 500 feet under normal atmospheric conditions
at nighttime;



      (2)   At least three red-burning fusees, unless red reflectors
or red electric lanterns are carried;



      (3)   At least two red cloth flags, not less than two inches
square, with standards to support them;



      (4)   The type of red reflectors shall comply with such
standards and specifications in effect on September 16, 1963, or later
established by the Interstate Commerce Commission and must be certified as
meeting such standards by Underwriters Laboratories.



   (B)   No person shall operate at the time and under the conditions
stated in this section any motor vehicle used in transporting flammable
liquids in bulk, or in transporting compressed flammable gases, unless there
is carried in such vehicle three red electric lanterns or three red
reflectors meeting the requirements stated in division (A) of this section.
There shall not be carried in any such vehicle any flare, fusee, or signal
produced by a flame.



   (C)   This section does not apply to any person who operates any
motor vehicle in a work area designated by protection equipment devices that
are displayed and used in accordance with the manual adopted by the
Department of Transportation under R.C. § 4511.09.



(R.C. § 4513.27) 



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.99) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.35  DISPLAY OF WARNING DEVICES ON DISABLED VEHICLES.



   (A)   Whenever any motor truck, bus, commercial tractor, trailer,
semitrailer, or pole trailer is disabled upon any freeway, expressway,
thruway and connecting, entering, or exiting ramps within the municipality,
at any time when lighted lamps are required on vehicles, the operator of such
vehicle shall display the following warning devices upon the highway during
the time the vehicle is so disabled on the highway except as provided in
division (B) of this section:



      (1)   A lighted fusee shall be immediately placed on the
roadway at the traffic side of such vehicle, unless red electric lanterns or
red reflectors are displayed.



      (2)   Within the burning period of the fusee and as promptly
as possible, three lighted flares or pot torches, or three red reflectors or
three red electric lanterns shall be placed on the roadway as follows:



         (a)   One at a distance of 40 paces or approximately 100
feet in advance of the vehicle;



         (b)   One at a distance of 40 paces or approximately 100
feet to the rear of the vehicle, except as provided in this section, each in
the center of the lane of traffic occupied by the disabled vehicle;



         (c)   One at the traffic side of the vehicle.



   (B)   Whenever any vehicle used in transporting flammable liquids in
bulk, or in transporting compressed flammable gases, is disabled upon a
highway at any time or place mentioned in division (A) of this section, the
driver of such vehicle shall display upon the roadway the following warning
devices:



      (1)   One red electric lantern or one red reflector shall be
immediately placed on the roadway at the traffic side of the vehicle;



      (2)   Two other red electric lanterns or two other red
reflectors shall be placed to the front and rear of the vehicle in the same
manner prescribed for flares in division (A) of this section.



   (C)   When a vehicle of a type specified in division (B) of this
section is disabled, the use of flares, fusees, or any signal produced by
flame as warning signals is prohibited.



   (D)   Whenever any vehicle of a type referred to in this section is
disabled upon any freeway, expressway, thruway, and connecting, entering, or
exiting ramps within the municipality, at any time when the display of
fusees, flares, red reflectors, or electric lanterns is not required, the
operator of such vehicle shall display two red flags upon the roadway in the
lane of traffic occupied by the disabled vehicle, one at a distance of 40
paces or approximately 100 feet in advance of the vehicle, and one at a
distance of 40 paces or approximately 100 feet to the rear of the vehicle,
except as provided in this section.



   (E)   The flares, fusees, lanterns, red reflectors, and flags to be
displayed as required in this section shall conform with the applicable
requirements of R.C. § 4513.27 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.



   (F)   In the event the vehicle is disabled near a curve, crest of a
hill, or other obstruction of view, the flare, flag, reflector, or lantern in
that direction shall be placed as to afford ample warning to other users of
the highway, but in no case shall it be placed less than 40 paces or
approximately 100 feet nor more than 120 paces or approximately 300 feet from
the disabled vehicle.



   (G)   This section does not apply to the operator of any vehicle in
a work area designated by protection equipment devices that are displayed and
used in accordance with the manual adopted by the Department of
Transportation under R.C. § 4511.09.



   (H)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.28) 



§ 74.36  REQUIREMENTS FOR VEHICLES TRANSPORTING EXPLOSIVES.



   (A)   Any person operating any vehicle transporting explosives upon
a highway shall at all times comply with the following requirements:



      (1)   The vehicle shall be marked or placarded on each side
and on the rear with the word “EXPLOSIVES” in letters not less than eight
inches high, or there shall be displayed on the rear of such vehicle a red
flag not less than 24 inches square marked with the word “DANGER” in
white letters six inches high, or shall be marked or placarded in accordance
with Section 177.823 of the United States Department of Transportation
regulations.



      (2)   The vehicle shall be equipped with not less than two
fire extinguishers, filled and ready for immediate use, and placed at
convenient points on such vehicle.



(R.C. § 4513.29)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.99)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.37  STUDDED TIRES; SEASONAL USE PERMITTED.



   (A)   For the purposes of this section, STUDDED TIRE means any tire
designed for use on a vehicle and equipped with metal studs or studs of
wear-resisting material that project beyond the tread of the traction surface
of the tire.



   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) of this
section, no person shall operate any motor vehicle other than a public safety
vehicle or school bus that is equipped with studded tires on any street or
highway in this municipality, except during the period extending from the
first day of November of each year through the fifteenth day of April of the
succeeding year.



      (2)   A person may operate a motor vehicle that is equipped
with retractable studded tires with the studs retracted at any time of the
year, but shall operate the motor vehicle with the studs extended only as
provided in division (B)(1) of this section.



   (C)   This section does not apply to the use of tire chains when
there is snow or ice on the streets or highways where such chains are being
used, or the immediate vicinity thereof.



(R.C. § 5589.081)



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 5589.99(B))  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.38  SAFETY INSPECTION DECALS FOR BUSES.



   (A)   Definitions. As used in this section:



      BUS.



         (a)   BUS means any vehicle used for the transportation
of passengers that meets at least one of the following:



            1.   Was originally designed by the manufacturer
to transport more than 15 passengers, including the driver;



            2.   Either the gross vehicle weight rating or the
gross vehicle weight exceeds 10,000 pounds.



         (b)   BUS does not include a church bus as defined in
R.C. § 4503.07 or a school bus unless the church bus or school bus is used
in the transportation of passengers by a motor carrier.



         (c)   BUS also does not include any of the following:



            1.   Any vehicle operated exclusively on a rail or
rails;



            2.   A trolley bus operated by electric power
derived from a fixed overhead wire furnishing local passenger transportation
similar to street-railway service;



            3.   Vehicles owned or leased by government
agencies or political subdivisions.



      MOTOR CARRIER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4923.01(R.C. §
4513.50)



   (B)   Safety inspection decals.



      (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) of this section,
on and after July 1, 2001, no person shall operate a bus, nor shall any
person being the owner of a bus or having supervisory responsibility for a
bus, permit the operation of any bus unless the bus displays a valid, current
safety inspection decal issued by the State Highway Patrol under R.C. §
4513.52.



      (2)   For the purpose of complying with the requirements of
this section and R.C. § 4513.52, the owner or other operator of a bus may
drive the bus directly to an inspection site conducted by the State Highway
Patrol and directly back to the person's place of business without a valid
registration and without displaying a safety inspection decal, provided that
no passengers may occupy the bus during such operation.



(R.C. § 4513.51(A), (B))



   (C)   Whoever violates division (B)(1) of this section is guilty of
a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 4513.51(D))  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.39  AIR BAGS.



   (A)   As used in this section:



      AIR BAG. Has the same meaning as in 49 C.F.R. § 579.4, as
amended.



      COUNTERFEIT AIR BAG. An air bag displaying a mark identical or
similar to the genuine mark of a motor vehicle manufacturer, without the
authorization of the motor vehicle manufacturer.



      NONFUNCTIONAL AIR BAG. Any of the following:



         (a)   A replacement air bag that has been previously
deployed or damaged;



         (b)   A replacement air bag that has an electrical fault
that is detected by the air bag diagnostic system of a vehicle after the air
bag is installed;



         (c)   A counterfeit air bag, air bag cover, or some
other object that is installed in a vehicle to deceive an owner or operator
of the vehicle into believing that a functional air bag has been installed.



   (B)   No person shall install or reinstall in any motor vehicle a
counterfeit or nonfunctional air bag or any object intended to fulfill the
function of an air bag other than an air bag that was designed in conformance
with or that is regulated by Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 208
for the make, model, and model year of the vehicle, knowing that the object
is not in accordance with that standard.



   (C)   No person shall knowingly manufacture, import, sell, or offer
for sale any of the following:



      (1)   A counterfeit air bag;



      (2)   A nonfunctional air bag;



      (3)   Any other object that is intended to be installed in a
motor vehicle to fulfill the function of an air bag and that is not in
conformance with Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 208 for the
make, model, and model year of the vehicle in which the object is intended to
be installed.



   (D)   No person shall knowingly sell, install, or reinstall a device
in a motor vehicle that causes the diagnostic system of a vehicle to
inaccurately indicate that the vehicle is equipped with a functional air bag.



   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates division (B) or (D) of this section
is guilty of improper replacement of a motor vehicle air bag, a misdemeanor
of the first degree on a first offense. On each subsequent offense, or if the
violation results in serious physical harm to an individual, the person is
guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (2)   A violation of division (C) of this section is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (3)   Each manufacture, importation, installation,
reinstallation, sale, or offer for sale in violation of this section shall
constitute a separate and distinct violation.



(R.C. § 4549.20)  Penalty, see § 70.99



LOADS



§ 74.40  PERMIT REQUIRED TO EXCEED LOAD LIMITS.



   (A)   (1)   The municipality, with respect to highways under
their jurisdiction, upon application in writing, shall issue a special
regional heavy hauling permit authorizing the applicant to operate or move a
vehicle or combination of vehicles as follows:



         (a)   At a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding
the maximum specified in R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or otherwise not in
conformity with R.C. §§ 4513.01 to 4513.37.



         (b)   Upon any highway under the jurisdiction of
municipality except those highways with a condition insufficient to bear the
weight of the vehicle or combination of vehicles as stated in the application.



         (c)   For regional trips at distances of 150 miles or
less from a facility stated on the application as the applicant’s point of
origin.



         (d)   Issuance of a special regional heavy hauling
permit is subject to the payment of a fee established by the municipality in
accordance with this section.



      (2)   In circumstances where a person is not eligible to
receive a permit under division (A)(1) of this section, the municipality,
with respect to highways under its jurisdiction, upon application in writing
and for good cause shown, may issue a special permit in writing authorizing
the applicant to operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles of a
size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the maximum specified in R.C.
§§ 5577.01 through 5577.09, or otherwise not in conformity with R.C. §§
4513.01 through 4513.37, upon any highway under its jurisdiction.



   (B)   Notwithstanding R.C. §§ 715.22 and 723.01, the holder of a
permit issued by the Director of Transportation under R.C. § 4513.34 may
move the vehicle or combination of vehicles described in the permit on any
highway that is a part of the state highway system when the movement is
partly within and partly without the corporate limits of the municipality. No
local authority shall require any other permit or license or charge any
license fee or other charge against the holder of a permit for the movement
of a vehicle or combination of vehicles on any highway which is a part of the
state highway system. The Ohio Director of Transportation shall not require
the holder of a permit issued by the municipality to obtain a special permit
for the movement of vehicles or combination of vehicles on highways within
the jurisdiction of the municipality. Permits may be issued for any period of
time not to exceed one year, as the local authority in its discretion
determines advisable or for the duration of any public construction project.



   (C)   (1)   The application for a permit issued under this
section shall be in the form that the municipality prescribes. The
municipality may prescribe a permit fee to be imposed and collected when any
permit described in this section is issued. The permit fee may be in an
amount sufficient to reimburse the municipality for the administrative costs
incurred in issuing the permit, and also to cover the cost of normal and
expected damage caused to the roadway or a street or highway structure as the
result of the operation of the nonconforming vehicle or combination of
vehicles.



      (2)   For the purposes of this section and of rules adopted by
the Director under R.C. § 4513.34, milk transported in bulk by vehicle is
deemed a nondivisible load.



      (3)   For purposes of this section and of rules adopted by the
Director under R.C. § 4513.34, three or fewer aluminum coils, transported by
a vehicle, are deemed a nondivisible load. The Director shall adopt rules
establishing requirements for an aluminum coil permit that are substantially
similar to the requirements for a steel coil permit under O.A.C. Chapter
5501:2-1.



   (D)   The municipality shall issue a special regional heavy hauling
permit under division (A)(1) of this section upon application and payment of
the applicable fee. However, the municipality may issue or withhold a special
permit specified in division (A)(2) of this section. If a permit is to be
issued, the municipality may limit or prescribe conditions of operation for
the vehicle and may require the posting of a bond or other security
conditioned upon the sufficiency of the permit fee to compensate for damage
caused to the roadway or a street or highway structure. In addition, the
municipality, as a condition of issuance of an overweight permit, may require
the applicant to develop and enter into a mutual agreement with the
municipality to compensate for or to repair excess damage caused to the
roadway by travel under the permit.



   (E)   Every permit issued under this section shall be carried in the
vehicle or combination of vehicles to which it refers and shall be open to
inspection by any police officer or authorized agent of any authority
granting the permit. No person shall violate any of the terms of a permit.



   (F)   The Director of Transportation may debar an applicant from
applying for a special permit under this section upon a finding based on a
reasonable belief that the applicant has done any of the actions specified in
R.C. § 4513.34(F).



   (G)   Notice and procedures for debarment shall be as provided in
R.C. § 4513.34(G).



   (H)   (1)   No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued
under this section that relate to gross load limits.



      (2)   No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued
under this section that relate to axle load by more than 2,000 pounds per
axle or group of axles.



      (3)   No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued
under this section that relate to an approved route except upon order of a
law enforcement officer or authorized agent of the issuing authority.



   (I)   A permit issued by the municipality under this section for the
operation of a vehicle or combination of vehicles is valid for the purposes
of the vehicle operation in accordance with the conditions and limitations
specified on the permit. Such a permit is voidable by law enforcement only
for operation of a vehicle or combination of vehicles in violation of the
weight, dimension, or route provisions of the permit. However, a permit is
not voidable for operation in violation of a route provision of a permit if
the operation is upon the order of a law enforcement officer.



(R.C. § 4513.34)



   (J)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.99)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Oversized vehicles, state permit regulations, see O.A.C. Chapter
5501:2-1



§ 74.41  LIMITATION OF LOAD EXTENSION ON LEFT SIDE OF VEHICLES.



   (A)   No passenger-type vehicle shall be operated on a highway with
any load carried on the vehicle which extends more than six inches beyond the
line of the fenders on the vehicle's left side.



(R.C. § 4513.30)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.99)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.42  ALL LOADS SHALL BE PROPERLY SECURED.



   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any highway unless the
vehicle is so constructed, loaded, or covered as to prevent any of its load
from dropping, sifting, leaking, or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that
sand or other substances may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction,
or water or other substances may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or
maintaining the roadway.



   (B)   Except for a farm vehicle used to transport agricultural
produce or agricultural production materials or a rubbish vehicle in the
process of acquiring its load, no vehicle loaded with garbage, swill, cans,
bottles, waste paper, ashes, refuse, trash, rubbish, waste, wire, paper,
cartons, boxes, glass, solid waste, or any other material of an unsanitary
nature that is susceptible to blowing or bouncing from a moving vehicle shall
be driven or moved on any highway unless the load is covered with a
sufficient cover to prevent the load or any part of the load from spilling
onto the highway.



(R.C. § 4513.31)



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.99)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.43  TOWING REQUIREMENTS; EXCEPTIONS TO SIZE AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   (1)   When one vehicle is towing another vehicle, the
drawbar or other connection shall be of sufficient strength to pull all the
weight towed thereby, and the drawbar or other connection shall not exceed 15
feet from one vehicle to the other, except the connection between any two
vehicles transporting poles, pipe, machinery, or other objects of structural
nature which cannot readily be dismembered.



      (2)   When one vehicle is towing another and the connection
consists only of a chain, rope, or cable, there shall be displayed upon such
connection a white flag or cloth not less than 12 inches square.



      (3)   In addition to such drawbar or other connection, each
trailer and each semitrailer which is not connected to a commercial tractor
by means of a fifth wheel shall be coupled with stay chains or cables to the
vehicle by which it is being drawn. These chains or cables shall be of
sufficient size and strength to prevent the towed vehicle's parting from the
drawing vehicle in case the drawbar or other connection should break or
become disengaged. In case of a loaded pole trailer, the connecting pole to
the drawing vehicle shall be coupled to the drawing vehicle with stay chains
or cables of sufficient size and strength to prevent the towed vehicle's
parting from the drawing vehicle.



      (4)   Every trailer or semitrailer, except pole and cable
trailers and pole and cable dollies operated by a public utility as defined
in R.C. § 5727.01, shall be equipped with a coupling device which shall be
so designed and constructed that the trailer will follow substantially in the
path of the vehicle drawing it, without whipping or swerving from side to
side. Vehicles used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural
production materials between a local place of storage and supply and the
farm, when drawn or towed on a street or highway at a speed of 25 miles per
hour or less, and vehicles designed and used exclusively to transport a boat
between a place of storage and a marina, or in and around a marina, when
drawn or towed on a street or highway for a distance of no more than ten
miles and at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less, shall have a drawbar or
other connection, including the hitch mounted on the towing vehicle, which
shall be of sufficient strength to pull all the weight towed thereby. Only
one such vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural
production materials as provided in this section may be towed or drawn at one
time except as follows:



         (a)   An agricultural tractor may tow or draw more than
one such vehicle;



         (b)   A pickup truck or straight truck designed by the
manufacturer to carry a load of not less than one-half ton and not more than
two tons may tow or draw not more than two such vehicles that are being used
to transport agricultural produce from the farm to a local place of storage.
No vehicle being so towed by such a pickup truck or straight truck shall be
considered to be a motor vehicle.



(R.C. § 4513.32) 



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.99) 



   (C)   Exception to size and weight restrictions.



      (1)   The size and weight provisions of this chapter and R.C.
Chapter 5577 do not apply to a person who is engaged in the initial towing or
removal or a wrecked or disabled motor vehicle from the site of an emergency
on a public highway where the vehicle became wrecked or disabled to the
nearest site where the vehicle can be brought into conformance with the
requirements of this chapter and R.C. Chapter 5577 or to the nearest
qualified repair facility.



      (2)   Any subsequent towing of a wrecked or disabled vehicle
shall comply with the size and weight provisions of this chapter and R.C.
Chapter 5577.



      (3)   No court shall impose any penalty prescribed in R.C. §
5577.99, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or the civil
liability established in R.C. § 5577.12 upon a person towing or removing a
vehicle in the manner described in division (C)(1) of this section.



(R.C. § 5577.15)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.44  WEIGHING OF VEHICLE; REMOVAL OF EXCESS LOAD.



   (A)   Any police officer having reason to believe that the weight of
a vehicle and its load is unlawful may require the driver of the vehicle to
stop and submit to a weighing of it by means of a compact, self- contained,
portable, sealed scale specially adapted to determining the wheel loads of
vehicles on highways; a sealed scale permanently installed in a fixed
location, having a load-receiving element specially adapted to determining
the wheel loads of highway vehicles; a sealed scale, permanently installed in
a fixed location, having a load-receiving element specially adapted to
determining the combined load of all wheels on a single axle or on successive
axles of a highway vehicle; or a sealed scale adapted to weighing highway
vehicles, loaded or unloaded.



   (B)   The driver of the vehicle shall, if necessary, be directed to
proceed to the nearest available sealed scales to accomplish the weighing,
provided the scales are within three miles of the point where the vehicle is
stopped.



   (C)   Any vehicle stopped in accordance with this section may be
held by the police officer for a reasonable time only to accomplish the
weighing as prescribed by this section.



   (D)   All scales used in determining the lawful weight of a vehicle
and its load shall be annually compared by a municipal, county or state
sealer with the state standards or standards approved by the state, and the
scales shall not be sealed if they do not conform to the state standards or
standards approved by the state.



   (E)   At each end of a permanently installed scale, there shall be a
straight approach in the same plane as the platform, of sufficient length and
width to insure the level positioning of vehicles during weight
determinations. During determination of weight by compact, self-contained,
portable, sealed scales, specially adapted to determining the wheel loads of
vehicles on highways, they shall always be used on a level terrain of
sufficient length and width to accommodate the entire vehicle being weighed.
Such terrain shall be level, or if not level, it shall be of such elevation
that the difference in elevation between the wheels on any one axle does not
exceed two inches and the difference in elevation between axles being weighed
does not exceed one-quarter inch per foot of the distance between such axles.



   (F)   In all determinations of all weights, except gross weight, by
compact, self-contained, portable, sealed scales, specially adapted to
determining the wheel loads of vehicles on highways, all successive axles, 12
feet or less apart, shall be weighed simultaneously by placing one such scale
under the outside wheel of each such axle. In determinations of gross weight
by the use of compact, self-contained, portable, sealed scales, specially
adapted to determining the wheel loads of vehicles on highways, all axles
shall be weighed simultaneously by placing one such scale under the outside
wheel of each axle.



   (G)   Whenever an officer, upon weighing a vehicle and load,
determines that the weight is unlawful, he or she may require the driver to
stop the vehicle in a suitable place and remain standing until such portion
of the load is removed as is necessary to reduce the weight of the vehicle to
the limit permitted under R.C. §§ 5577.01 through 5577.14 and this chapter.



(R.C. § 4513.33)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Alteration of weight limits, approval of Director required, see R.C. §
4513.33



§ 74.45  OPERATION OF VEHICLE EXCEEDING WEIGHT LIMITS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No traction engine, steam roller, or other vehicle, load,
object or structure, whether propelled by muscular or motor power, not
including vehicles run upon stationary rails or tracks, fire engines, fire
trucks, or other vehicles or apparatus belonging to or used by any municipal
or volunteer fire department in the discharge of its functions, shall be
operated or moved over or upon the improved public streets, highways,
bridges, or culverts in this municipality upon wheels, rollers or otherwise,
weighing in excess of the weights prescribed in this subchapter or R.C. §§
5577.01 et seq., including the weight of the vehicle, object, structure or
contrivance and load, except upon special permission granted as provided by
R.C. § 4513.34 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



(R.C. § 5577.02) 



   (B)   Whoever violates the weight provisions of this section shall
be fined $80 for the first 2,000 pounds, or fraction thereof, of overload;
for overloads in excess of 2,000 pounds, but not in excess of 5,000 pounds,
such person shall be fined $100, and in addition thereto $1 per 100 pounds of
overload; for overloads in excess of 5,000 pounds but not in excess of 10,000
pounds, such person shall be fined $130, and in addition thereto $2 per 100
pounds of overload, or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. For all
overloads in excess of 10,000 pounds, such person shall be fined $160, and in
addition thereto $3 per 100 pounds of overload, or imprisoned not more than
30 days, or both. Whoever violates the weight provisions of vehicle and load
relating to gross load limits shall be fined not less than $100. No penalty
prescribed in this division (B)(2) shall be imposed on any vehicle
combination if the overload on any one axle does not exceed 1,000 pounds, and
if the immediately preceding or following axle, excepting the front axle of
the vehicle combination, is underloaded by the same or greater amount. For
purposes of this division (B)(2), two axles on one vehicle less than eight
feet apart shall be considered as one axle.



(R.C. § 5577.99(A)) 



§ 74.46  LOAD LIMITS.



   (A)   Weight of load; width of tire. No person, firm or corporation
shall transport over the improved public streets, alleys, intercounty
highways, state highways, bridges or culverts in this municipality, in any
vehicle propelled by muscular, motor or other power, any burden, including
weight of vehicle and load, greater than the following:



      (1)   (a)   In vehicles having metal tires three inches or
less in width, a load of 500 pounds for each inch of the total width of the
tire on all wheels;



         (b)   When the tires on such vehicles exceed three
inches in width, an additional load of 800 pounds shall be permitted for each
inch by which the total width of the tires on all wheels exceeds 12 inches.



      (2)   In vehicles having tires of rubber or other similar
substance, for each inch of the total width of tires on all wheels, as
follows:



 


Tire Width (in inches)

 

Load Limit (in pounds)




3

 

450




3½

 

450




4

 

500




5

 

600




6 and over

 

650




 



      (3)   The total width of tires on all wheels shall be, in the
case of solid tires of rubber or other similar substance, the actual width in
inches of all such tires between the flanges at the base of the tires, but in
no event shall that portion of tire coming in contact with the road surface
be less than two-thirds the width so measured between the flanges.



      (4)   In the case of pneumatic tires, of rubber or other
similar substance, the total width of tires on all wheels shall be the actual
width of all such tires, measured at the widest portion thereof when inflated
and not bearing a load.



      (5)   In no event shall the load, including the proportionate
weight of vehicle that can be concentrated on any wheel, exceed 650 pounds to
each inch in width of the tread as defined in this division (A) for solid
tires, or each inch in the actual diameter of pneumatic tires measured when
inflated and not bearing a load.



(R.C. § 5577.03)



   (B)   Vehicles with pneumatic tires, load limits.



      (1)   The maximum wheel load of any one wheel of any vehicle,
load, object or structure operated or moved upon improved public highways,
streets, bridges or culverts shall not exceed 650 pounds per inch width of
pneumatic tire, measured as prescribed by division (A) of this section.



      (2)   The weight of the vehicle and load imposed upon a road
surface that is part of the interstate system by vehicles with pneumatic
tires shall not exceed any of the following weight limitations:



         (a)   On any one axle, 20,000 pounds;



         (b)   On any tandem axle, 34,000 pounds;



         (c)   On any two or more consecutive axles, the maximum
weight as determined by application of the formula provided in division
(B)(3) of this section.



      (3)   (a)   For purposes of division (B)(2)(c) of this
section, the maximum gross weight on any two or more consecutive axles shall
be determined by application of the following formula:



            W = 500[(LN/N-1) + 12N + 36]



         (b)   In this formula, W equals the overall gross weight
on any group of two or more consecutive axles to the nearest 500 pounds, L
equals the distance in rounded whole feet between the extreme of any group of
two or more consecutive axles, and N equals the number of axles in the group
under consideration. However, two consecutive sets of tandem axles may carry
a gross load of 34,000 pounds each, provided the overall distance between the
first and last axles of such consecutive sets of tandem axles is 36 feet or
more.



      (4)   Except as provided in division (B)(9) of this section,
the weight of vehicle and load imposed upon a road surface that is not part
of the interstate system by vehicles with pneumatic tires shall not exceed
any of the following weight limitations:



         (a)   On any one axle, 20,000 pounds.



         (b)   On any two successive axles:



            1.   Spaced four feet or less apart, and weighed
simultaneously, 24,000 pounds;



            2.   Spaced more than four feet apart, and weighed
simultaneously, 34,000 pounds, plus 1,000 pounds per foot or fraction
thereof, over four feet, not to exceed 40,000 pounds.



         (c)   On any three successive load-bearing axles
designed to equalize the load between such axles and spaced so that each such
axle of the three-axle group is more than four feet from the next axle in the
three-axle group and so that the spacing between the first axle and the third
axle in the three-axle group is no more than nine feet, and with such
load-bearing three-axle group weighed simultaneously as a unit:



            1.   48,000 pounds, with the total weight of the
vehicle and load not exceeding 38,000 pounds plus an additional 900 pounds
for each foot of spacing between the front axle and the rearmost axle of the
vehicle;



            2.   As an alternative to division (B)(4)(c)1. of
this section, 42,500 pounds, if part of a six-axle vehicle combination with
at least 20 feet of spacing between the front axle and rearmost axle, with
the total weight of the vehicle and load not exceeding 54,000 pounds plus an
additional 600 pounds per each foot of spacing between the front axle and the
rearmost axle of the vehicle.



         (d)   The total weight of the vehicle and load utilizing
any combination of axles, other than as provided for three-axle groups in
division (B)(4) of this section, shall not exceed 38,000 pounds plus an
additional 900 pounds for each foot of spacing between the front axle and the
rearmost axle of the vehicle.



      (5)   Notwithstanding divisions (B)(2) and (B)(4) of this
section, the maximum overall gross weight of a vehicle and load imposed upon
the road surface shall not exceed 80,000 pounds.



      (6)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, when a
vehicle is towing another vehicle, such drawbar or other connection shall be
of a length such as will limit the spacing between nearest axles of the
respective vehicles to a distance not in excess of 12½ feet.



      (7)   As used in division (B)(2) of this section, TANDEM AXLE
means two or more consecutive axles whose centers may be included between
parallel transverse vertical planes spaced more than 40 inches but not more
than 96 inches apart, extending across the full width of the vehicle.



      (8)   This division (B) does not apply to passenger bus type
vehicles operated by a regional transit authority pursuant to R.C. §§
306.30 through 306.54.



      (9)   Either division (B)(2) or (B)(4) of this section applies
to the weight of a vehicle and its load imposed upon any road surface that is
not a part of the interstate system by vehicles with pneumatic tires. As
between divisions (B)(2) and (B)(4) of this section, only the division that
yields the highest total gross vehicle weight limit shall be applied to any
such vehicle. Once that division has been determined, only the limits
contained in the subdivisions of that division shall apply to that vehicle.



(R.C. § 5577.04) 



   (C)   Axle and wheel load, gross weights and towing connection
length for solid rubber tires.



      (1)   No vehicle, load, object or structure having a maximum
axle load greater than 16,000 pounds when such vehicle is equipped with solid
rubber tires shall be operated or moved upon the improved public highways,
streets, bridges or culverts. The maximum wheel load of any one wheel of such
vehicle shall not exceed 650 pounds per inch width of tire, measured as
prescribed by division (A) of this section, nor shall any solid tire or
rubber or other resilient material, on any wheel of any such vehicle, be less
than one inch thick when measure from the top of the flanges of the tire
channel.



      (2)   The weight of vehicle and load imposed upon the road
surface by any two successive axles, spaces four feet or less apart, shall
not exceed 19,000 pounds for solid tires; or by any two successive axles
spaced more than four feet but less than eight feet apart, shall not exceed
24,000 pounds for solid tires; or by any two successive axles, spaced eight
feet or more apart, shall not exceed 28,000 pounds for solid tires; nor shall
the total weight of vehicle and load exceed, for solid rubber tires, 28,000
pounds plus an additional 600 pounds for each foot or fraction thereof of
spacing between the front axle and the rear-most axle of the vehicle; nor
shall the weight of the vehicle and load imposed upon the road surface by any
vehicle equipped with solid rubber tires exceed 80% of the permissible weight
of vehicle and load as provided for pneumatic tires.



      (3)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, when a
vehicle is towing another vehicle, such drawbar or other connection shall be
of a length such as will limit the spacing between the nearest axles of the
respective vehicles to a distance not in excess of 12½  feet. If the
provisions of this division (C) are held to exceed the weight limitations or
other provisions set forth in the “Federal-Aid Highway Act of 1958,” 72
Stat. 902, 23 U.S.C. § 127, this division (C) shall become null and void to
the extent of such inconsistency.



(R.C. § 5577.041)



   (D)   Penalties.



      (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second or subsequent offense, such
person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 5577.99(C))



      (2)   Whoever violates the weight provisions of this section
shall be punished as set forth in § 74.45(B).



   (E)   Modification of load limits. The load limits established in
this section may be modified or waived upon special permission granted as
provided in R.C. § 4513.34 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



§ 74.47  MAXIMUM WIDTH, HEIGHT, AND LENGTH.



   (A)   No vehicle shall be operated upon the public highways,
streets, bridges, and culverts within this municipality whose dimensions
exceed those specified in this section.



   (B)   No such vehicle shall have a width:



      (1)   In excess of 104 inches for passenger bus type vehicles
operated exclusively within the municipality.



      (2)   In excess of 102 inches, excluding such safety devices
as are required by law, for passenger bus type vehicles operated over
freeways, and such other state roads with minimum pavement widths of 22 feet,
except those roads or portions of roads over which operation of 102-inch
buses is prohibited by order of the Director of Transportation.



      (3)   In excess of 132 inches for traction engines.



      (4)   In excess of 102 inches for recreational vehicles,
excluding safety devices and retracted awnings and other appurtenances of six
inches or less in width and except that the Director may prohibit the
operation of 102-inch recreational vehicles on designated state highways or
portions of highways.



      (5)   In excess of 102 inches, including load, for all other
vehicles, except that the Director may prohibit the operation of 102-inch
vehicles on such state highways or portions of state highways as the Director
designates.



   (C)   No such vehicle shall have a length:



      (1)   In excess of 66 feet for passenger bus type vehicles and
articulated passenger bus type vehicles operated by a regional transit
authority pursuant to R.C. §§ 306.30 through 306.54.



      (2)   In excess of 45 feet for all other passenger bus type
vehicles.



      (3)   In excess of 53 feet for any semitrailer when operated
in a commercial tractor- semitrailer combination, with or without load,
except that the Director may prohibit the operation of any such commercial
tractor-semitrailer combination on such state highways or portions of state
highways as the Director designates.



      (4)   In excess of 28.5 feet for any semitrailer or trailer
when operated in a commercial tractor-semitrailer-trailer or commercial
tractor-semitrailer-semitrailer combination, except that the Director may
prohibit the operation of any such commercial tractor-semitrailer-trailer or
commercial tractor-semitrailer-semitrailer combination on such state highways
or portions of state highways as the Director designates.



      (5)   (a)   In excess of 97 feet for drive-away saddlemount
vehicle transporter combinations and drive-away saddlemount with fullmount
vehicle transporter combinations when operated on any interstate, United
States route, or state route, including reasonable access travel on all other
roadways for a distance not to exceed one road mile from any interstate,
United States route, or state route, not to exceed three saddlemounted
vehicles, but which may include one fullmount;



         (b)   In excess of 75 feet for drive-away saddlemount
vehicle transporter combinations and drive-away saddlemount with fullmount
vehicle transporter combinations when operated on any roadway not designated
as an interstate, United States route, or state route, not to exceed three
saddlemounted vehicles, but which may include one fullmount.



      (6)   In excess of 65 feet for any other combination of
vehicles coupled together, with or without load, except as provided in
division (C)(3) and (C)(4), and in division (E) below.



      (7)   In excess of 45 feet for recreational vehicles.



      (8)   In excess of 50 feet for all other vehicles, except
trailers and semitrailers, with or without load.



   (D)   No such vehicle shall have a height in excess of 13.5 feet,
with or without load.



   (E)   An automobile transporter or boat transporter shall be allowed
a length of 65 feet, and a stinger-steered automobile transporter or
stinger-steered boat transporter shall be allowed a length of 75 feet, except
that the load thereon may extend no more than four feet beyond the rear of
such vehicles and may extend no more than three feet beyond the front of such
vehicles, and except further that the Director may prohibit the operation of
a stinger-steered automobile transporter, stinger-steered boat transporter,
or a B-train assembly on any state highway or portion of any state highway
that the Director designates.



   (F)   (1)   The widths prescribed in division (B) of this section
shall not include side mirrors, turn signal lamps, marker lamps, handholds
for cab entry and egress, flexible fender extensions, mud flaps, splash and
spray suppressant devices, and load-induced tire bulge.



      (2)   The widths prescribed in division (B)(5) of this section
shall not include automatic covering devices, tarp and tarp hardware, and
tiedown assemblies, provided these safety devices do not extend more than
three inches from either side of the vehicle.



      (3)   The lengths prescribed in divisions (C)(2) through
(C)(7) shall not include safety devices, bumpers attached to the front or
rear of such bus or combination, non-property carrying devices or components
that do not extend more than 24 inches beyond the rear of the vehicle and are
needed for loading or unloading, B-train assembly used between the first and
second semitrailer of a commercial tractor-semitrailer-semitrailer
combination, energy conservation devices as provided in any regulations
adopted by the Secretary of the United States Department of Transportation,
or any noncargo-carrying refrigerator equipment attached to the front of
trailers and semitrailers. In special cases, vehicles that dimensions exceed
those prescribed by this section may operate in accordance with rules adopted
by the Director.



   (G)   (1)   This section does not apply to fire engines, fire
trucks, or other vehicles or apparatus belonging to the municipality or to
the volunteer fire department thereof or used by such department in the
discharge of its functions. This section does not apply to vehicles and pole
trailers used in the transportation of wooden and metal poles, nor to the
transportation of pipes or well-drilling equipment, nor to farm machinery and
equipment.



      (2)   The owner or operator of any vehicle, machinery, or
equipment not specifically enumerated in this section but the dimensions of
which exceed the dimensions provided by this section, when operating the same
on the highways and streets of the municipality, shall comply with the rules
of the Director governing such movement. Any person adversely affected shall
have the same right of appeal as provided in R.C. Chapter 119.



      (3)   This section does not require the municipality or any
railroad or other private corporation to provide sufficient vertical
clearance to permit the operation of such vehicle, or to make any changes in
or about existing structures now crossing streets, roads, and other public
thoroughfares.



   (H)   As used in this section, RECREATIONAL VEHICLE has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.



(R.C. § 5577.05)



   (I)   No person shall violate any rule or regulation promulgated by
the Director of Transportation in accordance with R.C. § 5577.05.



(R.C. § 5577.06)



   (J)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor
on a first offense; on a second or subsequent offense, such person is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 5577.99(C))



§ 74.48  STATEMENT OF GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT.



   (A)   No person shall issue or aid in issuing any bill of lading or
other document of like nature in lieu thereof, which bill or document is to
accompany a shipment of goods or property by truck, trailer, semitrailer,
commercial tractor, or any other commercial vehicle used for the
transportation of property, the gross weight of which, with load, exceeds
three tons, with intent to defraud by misrepresentation thereon the weight of
such goods of property to be so transported.



   (B)   Any driver or operator of a commercial car, trailer or
semitrailer may obtain from any person, firm, partnership, corporation or
association, including the owner, lessee, or operator of such commercial car,
trailer or semitrailer, owning and operating sealed scales in this state, a
written “statement of gross vehicle weight” showing the gross weight of
the vehicle including the cargo on the vehicle, the name and address of the
person issuing the statement, and the date and place where the vehicle and
its cargo were weighed. The driver or operator of the commercial car, trailer
or semitrailer shall retain such statement of gross vehicle weight on his or
her person, and any law enforcement officer may request that such driver or
operator exhibit it to him or her. If, upon examining the statement of gross
vehicle weight, the law enforcement officer has reason to believe that the
information contained therein is correct in every respect, he or she shall
indorse it with his or her name and the date and place where it was exhibited
to him or her. The law enforcement officer may then permit such driver or
operator to proceed without weighing by a law enforcement officer. No person
shall willfully issue a written statement of gross vehicle weight and
knowingly give any false information in such statement.



(R.C. § 5577.10)



   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section shall be fined
not more than $5,000 or imprisoned for not less than 30 days nor more than
six months, or both.



(R.C. § 5577.99(D))



§ 74.49  WHEEL PROTECTORS REQUIRED ON HEAVY COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.



   (A)   No person shall drive or operate, or cause to be driven or
operated, any commercial car, trailer, or semitrailer, used for the
transportation of goods or property, the gross weight of which, with load,
exceeds three tons, upon the public highways, streets, bridges, and culverts
within the municipality, unless such vehicle is equipped with suitable metal
protectors or substantial flexible flaps on the rearmost wheels of such
vehicle or combination of vehicles to prevent, as far as practicable, the
wheels from throwing dirt, water, or other materials on the windshields of
following vehicles. Such protectors or flaps shall have a ground clearance of
not more than one-third of the distance from the center of the rearmost axle
to the center of the flaps under any conditions of loading of the vehicle,
and they shall be at least as wide as the tires they are protecting. If the
vehicle is so designed and constructed that such requirements are
accomplished by means of fenders, body construction, or other means of
enclosure, then no such protectors or flaps are required. Rear wheels not
covered at the top by fenders, bodies, or other parts of the vehicle shall be
covered at the top by protective means extending at least to the center line
of the rearmost axle.



(R.C. § 5577.11) 



   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than $25.



(R.C. § 5577.99(E))



§ 74.50  LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES; PROSECUTION; APPLICATION OF MONIES.



   Any person violating any law relating to or regulating the use of the
improved public roads shall be liable for all damage resulting to any such
street, highway, bridge or culvert by reason of such violation. In case of
any injury to such street, highway, bridge or culvert, such damages shall be
collected by civil action for recovery of such damages brought by the proper
authorities of the municipality. All damages collected under this section
shall be paid into the treasury of the municipality and credited to any fund
for the repairs of streets, highways, roads, bridges or culverts.



(R.C. § 5577.12)



§ 74.51  WEIGHT EXCEPTIONS FOR CERTAIN VEHICLES.



   (A)   As used in this section:



      COAL TRUCK. A truck transporting coal from the site where it is
mined when the truck is operated in accordance with this section.



      FARM COMMODITIES. Includes livestock, bulk milk, corn, soybeans,
tobacco and wheat.



      FARM MACHINERY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.



      FARM TRUCK. A truck used in the transportation from a farm of
farm commodities when the truck is operated in accordance with this section.



      LOG TRUCK. A truck used in the transportation of timber from the
site of its cutting when the truck is operated in accordance with this
section.



      SOLID WASTE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3743.01.



      SOLID WASTE HAUL VEHICLE. A vehicle hauling solid waste for which
a bill of lading has not been issued.



   (B)   (1)   Notwithstanding R.C. §§ 5577.02 and 5577.04, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the following vehicles under
the described conditions may exceed by no more than 7.5% the weight
provisions of R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, and no penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, shall be imposed:



         (a)   A coal truck transporting coal, from the place of
production to the first point of delivery where title to the coal is
transferred;



         (b)   A farm truck or farm machinery transporting farm
commodities, from the place of production to the first point of delivery
where the commodities are weighed and title to the commodities is transferred;



         (c)   A log truck transporting timber, from the site of
its cutting to the first point of delivery where the timber is transferred;



         (d)   A solid waste haul vehicle hauling solid waste,
from the place of production to the first point of delivery where the solid
waste is disposed of or title to the solid waste is transferred.



      (2)   In addition, if any of the vehicles listed in division
(B)(1) of this section and operated under the conditions described in that
division does not exceed by more than 7.5% the gross vehicle weight
provisions of R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, and does not exceed the wheel or axle-load limits of
those sections by more than 7.5%, no penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, for a wheel or axle
overload shall be imposed.



   (C)   If any of the vehicles listed in division (B)(1) of this
section and operated under the conditions described in that division exceeds
the weight provisions of R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, by more than the percentage allowance of
either divisions (B)(1) or (B)(2) of this section, both of the following
apply without regard to the allowance provided by this division (B) of this
section:



      (1)   The applicable penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or
any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;



      (2)   The civil liability imposed by R.C. § 5577.12, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



   (D)   (1)   Division (B) of this section does not apply to the
operation of a farm truck, log truck, or farm machinery transporting farm
commodities during the months of February and March.



      (2)   Regardless of when the operation occurs, division (B) of
this section does not apply to the operation of a vehicle on either of the
following:



         (a)   A highway that is part of the interstate system;



         (b)   A highway, road, or bridge that is subject to
reduced maximum weights under R.C. § 4513.33, 5577.07, 5577.071, 5577.08,
5577.09, or 5591.42, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



(R.C. § 5577.042)



   (E)   Notwithstanding R.C. §§ 5577.02 and 5577.04, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the following vehicles under
the described conditions may exceed by no more than 7.5% the weight
provisions of R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, and no penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, shall be imposed:



      (1)   A surface mining truck transporting minerals from the
place where the minerals are loaded to any of the following:



         (a)   The construction site where the minerals are
discharged;



         (b)   The place where title to the minerals is
transferred;



         (c)   The place of processing.



      (2)   A vehicle transporting hot mix asphalt material from the
place where the material is first mixed to the paving site where the material
is discharged;



      (3)   A vehicle transporting concrete from the place where the
material is first mixed to the site where the material is discharged;



      (4)   A vehicle transporting manure, turf, sod, or silage from
the site where the material is first produced to the first place of delivery;



      (5)   A vehicle transporting chips, sawdust, mulch, bark,
pulpwood, biomass, or firewood from the site where the product is first
produced or harvested to first point where the product is transferred.



   (F)   In addition, if any of the vehicles listed in division (E) of
this section and operated under the conditions described in that division do
not exceed by more than 7.5% the gross vehicle weight provisions of R.C. §§
5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and
do not exceed the wheel or axle-load limits of those sections by more than
7.5%, no penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, for a wheel or axle overload shall be imposed.



   (G)   If any of the vehicles listed in division (E) of this section
and operated under the conditions described in that division exceed the
weight provisions of R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, by more than the percentage allowance of
either divisions (E) or (F) of this section, both of the following apply
without regard to the allowance provided by division (E) or (F) of this
section:



      (1)   The applicable penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or
any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;



      (2)   The civil liability imposed by R.C. § 5577.12, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



   (H)   Divisions (E) and (F) of this section do not apply to the
operation of a vehicle listed in division (E) of this section on either of
the following:



      (1)   A highway that is part of the interstate system;



      (2)   A highway, road, or bridge that is subject to reduced
maximum weights under R.C. § 4513.33, 5577.07, 5577.071, 5577.08, 5577.09,
or 5591.42, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



(R.C. § 5577.043)



   (I)   Notwithstanding R.C. §§ 5577.02 and 5577.04, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, a vehicle fueled solely by
compressed natural gas or liquid natural gas may exceed by not more than
2,000 pounds the gross vehicle weight provisions of R.C. §§ 5577.01 to
5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or the axle
load limits of those sections.



   (J)   If a vehicle described in division (I) of this section exceeds
the weight provisions of R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, by more than the allowance provided for in
division (I) of this section, both of the following apply:



      (1)   The applicable penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or
any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;



      (2)   The civil liability imposed by R.C. § 5577.12, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



   (K)   Division (I) of this section does not apply to the operation
of a vehicle on either of the following:



      (1)   A highway that is part of the interstate system;



      (2)   A highway, road, or bridge that is subject to reduced
maximum weights under R.C. § 4513.33, 5577.07, 5577.071, 5577.08, 5577.09,
or 5591.42, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



(R.C. § 5577.044)



CHAPTER 75:  BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES, AND OFF-ROAD VEHICLES



Section




General Provisions




   75.01   Bicycles; application of Title VII



   75.02   Operation of motorized bicycle



   75.021   Electric bicycles



   75.03   Rules for bicycles, motorcycles, and snowmobiles



   75.04   Prohibition against attaching bicycles and sleds to vehicles



   75.05   Riding bicycles; motorcycles abreast



   75.06   Equipment of bicycles



   75.07   Right-of-way of pedestrians; parking bicycles



   75.08   Bicycle licensing



   75.09   Operation of go-karts prohibited




Snowmobiles, Off-Highway Motorcycles, and All-Purpose Vehicles




   75.25   Definitions



   75.26   Equipment



   75.27   Code application; prohibited operation



   75.28   Permitted operation



   75.29   Licensing requirements of operator



   75.30   Maintenance of vehicles for hire



   75.31   Accident reports



   75.32   Impounding of vehicle



   75.33   Local control within police power



   75.34   Registration of vehicles



   75.35   [Reserved]



   75.36   Certificate of title; prohibitions



   75.37   Parking of snowmobiles



   75.38   Snow emergency



   75.39   Regulation of motorized foot scooters and scooters



Cross-reference:



   Operation restricted for mini-trucks and low-speed, under-speed, or
utility vehicles, see § 73.141



Statutory reference:



   Bicycle regulations to be consistent with state law, see R.C. §
4511.07(A)(8)



   Protective eye devices required for motorcycle operators and
passengers; helmets required for persons under 18 years of age, see O.A.C. §
4501-17-01



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 75.01  BICYCLES; APPLICATION OF TITLE VII.



   (A)    The provisions of this title that are applicable to bicycles
and electric bicycles apply whenever a bicycle or electric bicycle is
operated upon any highway or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles or electric bicycles.



   (B)   Except as provided in division (D) of this section, a bicycle
operator or electric bicycle operator who violates any provisions of this
title described in division (A) of this section that is applicable to
bicycles or electric bicycles may be issued a ticket, citation, or summons by
a law enforcement officer for the violation in the same manner as the
operator of a motor vehicle would be cited for the same violation. A person
who commits any such violation while operating a bicycle or electric bicycle
shall not have any points assessed against the person’s driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, or probationary
license under R.C. § 4510.036.



   (C)   Except as provided in division (D) of this section, in the
case of a violation of any provision of this title described in division (A)
of this section by a bicycle operator, electric bicycle operator, or motor
vehicle operator when the trier of fact finds that the violation by the motor
vehicle operator endangered the lives of bicycle riders or electric bicycle
riders at the time of the violation, the court, notwithstanding any provision
of the Ohio Revised Code to the contrary, may require the bicycle operator,
electric bicycle operator, or motor vehicle operator to take and successfully
complete a bicycling skills course approved by the court in addition to or in
lieu of any penalty otherwise prescribed by this Traffic Code or the Ohio
Revised Code for that violation.



   (D)   Divisions (B) and (C) of this section do not apply to
violations of R.C. § 4511.19, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.



(R.C. § 4511.52)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 75.02  OPERATION OF MOTORIZED BICYCLE.



   (A)   No person shall operate a motorized bicycle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking, unless all of the following conditions are met:



      (1)   The person is 14 or 15 years of age and holds a valid
probationary motorized bicycle license issued after the person has passed the
test provided for in this section, or the person is 16 years of age or older
and holds either a valid commercial driver's license issued under R.C.
Chapter 4506 or a driver's license issued under R.C. Chapter 4507 or a valid
motorized bicycle license issued after the person has passed the test
provided for in this section, except that if a person is 16 years of age, has
a valid probationary motorized bicycle license and desires a motorized
bicycle license, the person is not required to comply with the testing
requirements provided for in this section.



      (2)   The motorized bicycle is equipped in accordance with the
rules adopted under division (B) of this section and is in proper working
order.



      (3)   The person, if under 18 years of age, is wearing a
protective helmet on the person's head with the chin strap properly fastened
and the motorized bicycle is equipped with a rearview mirror.



      (4)   The person operates the motorized bicycle when
practicable within three feet of the right edge of the roadway obeying all
traffic rules applicable to vehicles.



   (B)   The Director of Public Safety, subject to R.C. Chapter 119,
shall adopt and promulgate rules concerning protective helmets, the equipment
of motorized bicycles, and the testing and qualifications of persons who do
not hold a valid driver's or commercial driver's license. The test shall be
as near as practicable to the examination required for a motorcycle
operator's endorsement under R.C. § 4507.11. The test shall also require the
operator to give an actual demonstration of the operator's ability to operate
and control a motorized bicycle by driving one under the supervision of an
examining officer.



   (C)   Every motorized bicycle license expires on the birthday of the
applicant in the fourth year after the date it is issued, but in no event
shall any motorized bicycle license be issued for a period longer than four
years.



   (D)   No person operating a motorized bicycle shall carry another
person upon the motorized bicycle.



   (E)   The protective helmet and rearview mirror required by division
(A)(3) of this section shall, on and after January 1, 1985, conform with
rules adopted by the Director under division (B) of this section.



   (F)   Each probationary motorized bicycle license or motorized
bicycle license shall be laminated with a transparent plastic material.



   (G)   Whoever violates division (A), (D), or (E) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4511.521)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Suspension of probationary motorized bicycle license by the state, see
R.C. § 4510.34



§ 75.021  ELECTRIC BICYCLES.



   (A)   (1)   On and after January 1, 2020, manufacturers and
distributors of electric bicycles shall permanently affix a label, in a
prominent location, to each electric bicycle. The label shall specify whether
the electric bicycle is a class 1, class 2, or class 3 electric bicycle, the
top assisted speed that the electric bicycle is capable of reaching, and the
motor wattage of the electric bicycle.



      (2)   No person shall modify an electric bicycle in a manner
that changes the top assisted speed that the electric bicycle is capable of
reaching unless the person also modifies the label required under division
(A)(1) of this section to reflect the modification.



   (B)   (1)   The manufacturer of an electric bicycle shall ensure
that the electric bicycle complies with the equipment and manufacturing
requirements for bicycles established by the consumer product safety
commission under 16 C.F.R. §§ 1512 et seq.



      (2)   The manufacturer shall manufacture all class 1 electric
bicycles and class 3 electric bicycles so that when the rider ceases pedaling
the electric motor ceases to provide assistance. The manufacturer shall
manufacture all class 2 electric bicycles so that when the rider applies the
brakes or releases or activates a switch or similar mechanism the electric
motor ceases to provide assistance.



      (3)   All class 3 electric bicycles shall be equipped with a
speedometer that displays the speed of the electric bicycle in miles per hour.



   (C)   (1)   The operation of a class 1 electric bicycle and a
class 2 electric bicycle is permitted on a path set aside for the exclusive
use of bicycles or on a shared-use path, unless the county, township,
municipal corporation, other local authority, or state agency as defined in
R.C. § 1.60 with control over the path by resolution, ordinance, or rule
prohibits the use of a class 1 electric bicycle or class 2 electric bicycle
on such a path.



      (2)   No person shall operate a class 3 electric bicycle on a
path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles or a shared-use path unless
that path is within or adjacent to a highway or the county, township,
municipal corporation, or local authority, or state agency as defined in R.C.
§ 1.60 with control over the path by resolution, ordinance, or rule
authorizes the use of a class 3 electric bicycle on such a path.



      (3)   No person shall operate a class 1 electric bicycle, a
class 2 electric bicycle, or a class 3 electric bicycle on a path that is
intended to be used primarily for mountain biking, hiking, equestrian use, or
other similar uses, or any other single track or natural surface trail that
has historically been reserved for non-motorized use, unless the county,
township, municipal corporation, other local authority, or state agency as
defined in R.C. § 1.60 with control over the path by resolution, ordinance,
or rule authorizes the use of a class 1 electric bicycle, a class 2 electric
bicycle, or a class 3 electric bicycle on such a path.



   (D)   (1)   No person under 16 years of age shall operate a class
3 electric bicycle; however, a person under 16 years of age may ride as a
passenger on a class 3 electric bicycle that is designed to accommodate
passengers.



      (2)   No person shall operate or be a passenger on a class 3
electric bicycle unless the person is wearing a protective helmet that meets
the standards established by the Consumer Product Safety Commission or the
American Society for Testing and Materials.



   (E)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division,
whoever operates an electric bicycle in a manner that is prohibited under
division (C) of this section and whoever violates division (D) of this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of
a misdemeanor of the third degree.



      (2)   The offenses established under division (E)(1) of this
section are strict liability offenses and strict liability is a culpable
mental state for purposes of R.C. § 2901.20. The designation of these
offenses as strict liability offenses shall not be construed to imply that
any other offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is
not a strict liability offense.



(R.C. § 4511.522)



§ 75.03  RULES FOR BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES, AND SNOWMOBILES.



   (A)   For purposes of this section, SNOWMOBILE has the same meaning
as given that term in R.C. § 4519.01.



   (B)   (1)   No person operating a bicycle or electric bicycle
shall ride other than upon or astride the permanent and regular seat attached
thereto or carry any other person upon the bicycle or electric bicycle other
than upon a firmly attached and regular seat thereon, and no person shall
ride upon a bicycle or electric bicycle other than upon such a firmly
attached and regular seat.



      (2)   No person operating a motorcycle shall ride other than
upon or astride the permanent and regular seat or saddle attached thereto, or
carry any other person upon the motorcycle other than upon a firmly attached
and regular seat or saddle thereon, and no person shall ride upon a
motorcycle other than upon such a firmly attached and regular seat or saddle.



      (3)   No person shall ride upon a motorcycle that is equipped
with a saddle other than while sitting astride the saddle, facing forward,
with one leg on each side of the motorcycle.



      (4)   No person shall ride upon a motorcycle that is equipped
with a seat other than while sitting upon the seat.



      (5)   No person operating a bicycle or electric bicycle shall
carry any package, bundle, or article that prevents the driver from keeping
at least one hand upon the handlebars.



      (6)   No bicycle, electric bicycle, or motorcycle shall be
used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is
designed and equipped. No motorcycle shall be operated on a highway when the
handlebars rise higher than the shoulders of the operator when the operator
is seated in the operator’s seat or saddle.



   (C)   (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(3) of this
section, no person shall operate or be a passenger on a snowmobile or
motorcycle without using safety glasses or other protective eye device.
Except as provided in division (C)(3) of this section, no person who is under
the age of 18 years, or who holds a motorcycle operator’s endorsement or
license bearing a “novice” designation that is currently in effect as
provided in R.C. § 4507.13, shall operate a motorcycle on a highway, or be a
passenger on a motorcycle, unless wearing a protective helmet on the
person’s head, and no other person shall be a passenger on a motorcycle
operated by such a person unless similarly wearing a protective helmet. The
helmet, safety glasses, or other protective eye device shall conform with
rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety. The provisions of this
paragraph or a violation thereof shall not be used in the trial of any civil
action.



      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (C)(3) of this
section, no person shall operate a motorcycle with a valid temporary
instruction permit and temporary instruction permit identification card
issued by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles pursuant to R.C. § 4507.05 unless
the person, at the time of such operation, is wearing on the person’s head
a protective helmet that conforms with rules adopted by the Ohio Director of
Public Safety.



         (b)   No person shall operate a motorcycle with a valid
temporary instruction permit and temporary instruction permit identification
card issued by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles pursuant to R.C. § 4507.05 in
any of the following circumstances:



            1.   At any time when lighted lights are required
by R.C. § 4513.03(A)(1);



            2.   While carrying a passenger;



            3.   On any limited access highway or heavily
congested roadway.



      (3)   Divisions (C)(1) and (C)(2)(a) of this section do not
apply to a person who operates or is a passenger in an autocycle or
cab-enclosed motorcycle when the occupant compartment top is in place
enclosing the occupants.



   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the
carrying of a child in a seat or trailer that is designed for carrying
children and is firmly attached to the bicycle or electric bicycle.



   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates division (B) or (C)(1) or (C)(2) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor
vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates division (B) or (C)(1) or (C)(2)
of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within
one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates division
(B) or (C)(1) or (C)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.53)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 75.04  PROHIBITION AGAINST ATTACHING BICYCLES AND SLEDS TO VEHICLES.



   (A)   (1)    No person riding upon any bicycle, electric bicycle,
coaster, roller skates, sled, or toy vehicle shall attach the same or self to
any vehicle upon a roadway.



      (2)   No operator shall knowingly permit any person riding
upon any bicycle, electric bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, or toy
vehicle to attach the same or self to any vehicle while it is moving upon a
roadway.



      (3)   This section does not apply to towing a disabled vehicle.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.54)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 75.05  RIDING BICYCLES; MOTORCYCLES ABREAST.



   (A)    Every person operating a bicycle or electric bicycle upon a
roadway shall ride as near to the right side of the roadway as practicable
obeying all traffic rules applicable to vehicles and exercising due care when
passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.



   (B)   Persons riding bicycles or electric bicycles or motorcycles
upon a roadway shall ride not more than two abreast in a single lane, except
on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles,
electric bicycles, or motorcycles.



   (C)   This section does not require a person operating a bicycle or
electric bicycle to ride at the edge of the roadway when it is unreasonable
or unsafe to do so. Conditions that may require riding away from the edge of
the roadway include when necessary to avoid fixed or moving objects, parked
or moving vehicles, surface hazards, or if it otherwise is unsafe or
impracticable to do so, including if the lane is too narrow for the bicycle
or electric bicycle and an overtaking vehicle to travel safely side by side
within the lane.



   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (E)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.55)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 75.06  EQUIPMENT OF BICYCLES.



   (A)   Every bicycle when in use at the times specified in R.C. §
4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance shall be equipped
with the following:



      (1)   A lamp mounted on the front of either the bicycle or the
operator that shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least
500 feet to the front and 300 feet to the sides. A generator-powered lamp
that emits light only when the bicycle is moving may be used to meet this
requirement.



      (2)   A red reflector on the rear that shall be visible from
all distances from 100 feet to 600 feet to the rear when directly in front of
lawful lower beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle;



      (3)   A lamp emitting either flashing or steady red light
visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear shall be used in addition to
the red reflector. If the red lamp performs as a reflector in that it is
visible as specified in division (A)(2) of this section, the red lamp may
serve as the reflector and a separate reflector is not required.



   (B)    Additional lamps and reflectors may be used in addition to
those required under division (A) of this section, except that red lamps and
red reflectors shall not be used on the front of the bicycle or electric
bicycle and white lamps and white reflectors shall not be used on the rear of
the bicycle or electric bicycle.



   (C)   A bicycle or electric bicycle may be equipped with a device
capable of giving an audible signal, except that a bicycle or electric
bicycle shall not be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a bicycle or
electric bicycle any siren or whistle.



   (D)   Every bicycle and electric bicycle shall be equipped with an
adequate brake when used on a street or highway.



   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.56)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 75.07  RIGHT-OF-WAY OF PEDESTRIANS; PARKING BICYCLES.



   (A)   Pedestrians on sidewalks or in marked crosswalks shall have
the right-of-way at all times over persons riding bicycles.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to park a bicycle in a motor vehicle
parking space on a street, or in any other prohibited area.



(Ord. 71-4-2, passed 5-4-71)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 75.08  BICYCLE LICENSING.



   (A)   No person who resides within the corporate limits of the
village shall ride or propel a bicycle upon any of the streets, alleys, or
public grounds on the village unless the bicycle has been licensed as
hereinafter provided.



   (B)   The owner of any bicycle, who desires to ride or propel the
bicycle upon any of the streets, alleys or public grounds in the village,
shall first procure a license for the bicycle from the village to be issued
by the Chief of Police, and shall pay a three year license fee in the amount
of $1.



   (C)   All bicycle licenses issued under the provisions of this
section shall expire on the first day of July of every third year regardless
of the date of issue, and in the event any licensed bicycle is sold, the
licensee shall promptly notify the Chief of Police of the name of the new
owner, but no new license shall be required for the owner until the
expiration of the present license.



   (D)   The Chief of Police is hereby empowered to refuse a license
for any bicycle that does not meet the requirements of the laws of the State
of Ohio governing equipment of bicycles.



   (E)   No rental agency shall offer any bicycle for rent to be used
upon the streets, alleys or public grounds in the village which he or she
does not own without the express consent of the owner of the bicycle.



   (F)   It is a misdemeanor for any person to do any act prohibited or
fail to perform any act required in this section or in § 75.07, and any
parent or guardian who shall knowingly authorize or permit any child or ward
to violate any of the provisions of this section or § 75.07 shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor. Every person in violation of any provision of this section
or § 75.07 shall be punished by a fine as set forth in § 70.99 or by
impounding such person's bicycle for a period not to exceed 30 days.



(Ord. 71-4-2, passed 5-4-71; Am. Ord. 96-3-2, passed  - -96)



§ 75.09  OPERATION OF GO-KARTS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to operate a go-kart on any street, alley
or other public property within the village.



   (B)   Any person violating this section shall be fined not more than
$50 for the first violation and $300 for the second violation.



(Ord. 76-2-4, passed 2-17-76)



SNOWMOBILES, OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLES, AND ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLES



§ 75.25  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLE. Any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for
cross-country travel on land and water, or on more than one type of terrain,
and steered by wheels or caterpillar treads, or any combination thereof,
including vehicles that operate on a cushion of air, vehicles commonly known
as all-terrain vehicles, all season vehicles, mini-bikes and trail bikes. The
term does not include a utility vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4501.01 or any
vehicle principally used in playing golf, any motor vehicle or aircraft
required to be registered under R.C. Chapter 4503 or R.C. Chapter 4561, and
any vehicle excepted from definition as a motor vehicle by R.C. § 4501.01(B).



   DEALER. Any person or firm engaged in the business of manufacturing or
selling snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, or all-purpose vehicles at
wholesale or retail, or who rents, leases or otherwise furnishes snowmobiles,
off-highway motorcycles, or all-purpose vehicles for hire.



   ELECTRONIC and ELECTRONIC RECORD. Have the same meanings as in R.C. §
4501.01.



   ELECTRONIC DEALER. A dealer whom the Registrar of Motor Vehicles
designates under R.C. § 4519.511.



   INTERSTATE HIGHWAY. Any part of the interstate system of highways as
defined in subsection (e), 90 Stat. 431 (1976), 23 U.S.C. § 103, as amended.



   LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAY OR FREEWAY. Have the same meanings as in R.C. §
5511.02.



   MINI-TRUCK. A vehicle that has four wheels, is propelled by an electric
motor with a rated power of 7,500 watts or less or an internal combustion
engine with a piston displacement capacity of 660 cubic centimeters or less,
has a total dry weight of 900 to 2,200 pounds, contains an enclosed cabin and
a seat for the vehicle operator, resembles a pickup truck or van with a cargo
area or bed located at the rear of the vehicle, and was not originally
manufactured to meet federal motor vehicle safety standards.



   OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLE. Every motorcycle, as defined in R.C. §
4511.01, that is designed to be operated primarily on lands other than a
street or highway.



   OPERATOR. Any person who operates or is in actual physical control of a
snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle.



   OWNER. Any person or firm, other than a lienholder or dealer, having
title to a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle, or
other right to the possession thereof.



   PROOF OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
4509.01.



   SNOWMOBILE. Any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for use on
snow or ice, and steered by skis, runners or caterpillar treads.



   STATE HIGHWAY and STATE ROUTE. Have the same meanings as in R.C. §
4511.01.



   STREET or HIGHWAY. Have the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.



(R.C. § 4519.01) 



§ 75.26  EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   In addition to any rules or regulations promulgated by the
Ohio Director of Public Safety pursuant to R.C. § 4519.20 and R.C. Chapter
119, equipment of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, and all-purpose
vehicles shall include but not necessarily be limited to requirements for the
following items of equipment:



      (1)   At least one headlight having a minimum candlepower of
sufficient intensity to reveal persons and objects at a distance of at least
100 feet ahead under normal atmospheric conditions during hours of darkness;



      (2)   At least one red tail light having a minimum candlepower
of sufficient intensity to be plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to
the rear under normal atmospheric conditions during hours of darkness;



      (3)   Every snowmobile, while traveling on packed snow, shall
be capable of carrying a driver who weighs 175 pounds or more, and, while
carrying such driver, be capable of stopping in no more than 40 feet from an
initial steady speed of 20 miles per hour, or locking its traction belt; and



      (4)   A muffler system capable of precluding the emission of
excessive smoke or exhaust fumes, and of limiting the engine noise of
vehicles. On snowmobiles manufactured after January 1, 1973, such requirement
shall include sound dampening equipment such that noise does not exceed 82
decibels on the “A” scale at 50 feet as measured according to SAE J192
(September 1970).



   (B)   No person shall operate any snowmobile, off-highway
motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle in violation of this section, except that
equipment specified in division (A)(1) and (A)(2) of this section shall not
be required on snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, or all-purpose vehicles
operated during the daylight hours.



(R.C. § 4519.20(A), (B))



   (C)   No person shall sell, offer for sale, lease, rent or otherwise
furnish for hire in this municipality any new snowmobile, off-highway
motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle that fails to comply with any rule adopted
by the Ohio Director of Public Safety under R.C. § 4519.20 after the
effective date of the rule.



(R.C. § 4519.22(A))



   (D)   Every operator and passenger of a snowmobile shall wear eye
protection and a safety helmet while the vehicle is in operation. This
applies regardless of age or experience in the operation of a snowmobile.



(Ord. 79-2-2, passed 2-20-79)



   (E)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division,
whoever violates division (B) of this section shall be fined not more than
$50.  If the offender within the preceding year previously has committed a
violation of division (B) of this section or of R.C. § 4519.20(B), whoever
violates division (B) of this section shall be fined not less than $15 nor
more than $100, imprisoned not more than three days, or both.



(R.C. § 4519.20(C)) 



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates division (C) of this section shall be fined not more than $50.  If
the offender within the preceding year previously has committed a violation
of division (C) of this section or of R.C. § 4519.22(A), whoever violates
this section shall be fined not less than $15 nor more than $100, imprisoned
not more than three days, or both.



(R.C. § 4519.22(B))



   (F)   Whoever violates division (D) of this section shall be fined
not more than $50 for the first offense and subject to the judgement of the
court for the second or subsequent offense.



(Ord. 79-2-2, passed 2-20-79)



§ 75.27  CODE APPLICATION; PROHIBITED OPERATION.



   (A)   The applicable provisions of this traffic code apply to the
operation of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, and all-purpose vehicles,
except that no person shall operate a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or
all-purpose vehicle as follows:



      (1)   On any state highway, including a limited access highway
or freeway or the right-of-way thereof, except for emergency travel during
such time and in such manner as the Ohio Director of Public Safety designates
or except as authorized by R.C. § 4519.41(F);



      (2)   On any private property, or in any nursery or planting
area, without the permission of the owner or other person having the right to
possession of the property;



      (3)   On any land or waters controlled by the state, except at
those locations where a sign has been posted permitting such operation;



      (4)   On the tracks or right-of-way of any operating railroad;



      (5)   While transporting any firearm, bow or other implement
for hunting that is not unloaded and securely encased;



      (6)   For the purpose of chasing, pursuing, capturing or
killing any animal or wild fowl; or



      (7)   During the time from sunset to sunrise, unless
displaying lighted lights as required by R.C. § 4519.20 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $50
nor more than $500, imprisoned not less than 3 nor more than 30 days, or both.



(R.C. § 4519.40)



Cross-reference:



   Operation restricted for mini-trucks and low-speed, under-speed, or
utility vehicles, see § 73.141



§ 75.28  PERMITTED OPERATION.



   Snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, and all-purpose vehicles may be
operated as follows:



   (A)   To make a crossing of a highway, other than a highway as
designated in R.C. § 4519.40(A)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, whenever the crossing can be made in safety and will not interfere
with the movement of vehicular traffic approaching from any direction on the
highway, and provided that the operator yields the right-of-way to any
approaching traffic that presents an immediate hazard;



   (B)   On highways in the county or township road systems whenever
the local authority having jurisdiction over such highways so permits;



   (C)   Off and alongside street or highway for limited distances from
the point of unloading from a conveyance to the point at which the
snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle is intended and
authorized to be operated;



   (D)   On the berm or shoulder of a highway, other than a highway as
designated in R.C. § 4519.40(A)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, when the terrain permits such operation to be undertaken safely
and without the necessity of entering any traffic lane;



   (E)   On the berm or shoulder or a county or township road, while
traveling from one area of operation of the snowmobile, off-highway
motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle to another such area.



   (F)   For snowmobiles without metal studded tracks and all-purpose
vehicles, on state highways located on an island in Lake Erie, including
limited access highways and freeways, between the first day of November and
the thirtieth day of April, provided that all of the following conditions
apply:



      (1)   The operator has a valid driver’s license as required
under R.C. § 4519.44.



      (2)   The snowmobile or all-purpose vehicle is in compliance
with rules governing safety equipment adopted under R.C. § 4519.20.



      (3)   The owner of the snowmobile or all-purpose vehicle
maintains proof of financial responsibility for both on-road and off-road use
of the snowmobile or all-purpose vehicle.



      (4)   The operator obeys all traffic rules and regulations.



(R.C. § 4519.41)



   (G)   On streets not to exceed 25 miles per hour and on alleys not
to exceed 15 miles per hour. The use of streets and alleys will be for the
exclusive use for the snowmobiles to travel the shortest route to outside the
village corporation limit, from their starting point, and entering from
outside the village limits to their destination or passing through the
village.



   (H)   On the owners' or operators' personal private property.



   (I)   Divisions (F) and (G) will not relieve the operator from
obeying § 75.27.



   (J)   It shall be unlawful to operate any all-terrain vehicle on any
street or alley, in any park, or on any other public land.



(Ord. 79-2-2, passed 2-20-79)



§ 75.29  LICENSING REQUIREMENTS OF OPERATOR.



   (A)    No person who does not hold a valid, current motor vehicle
driver's or commercial driver's license, motorcycle operator's endorsement or
probationary license, issued under R.C. Chapter 4506 or R.C. Chapter 4507 or
a valid, current driver’s license issued by another jurisdiction, shall
operate a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle on any
street or highway in this municipality, on any portion of the right-of-way
thereof, or on any public land or waters.



   (B)   No person who is less than 16 years of age shall operate a
snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle on any land or
waters other than private property or waters owned by or leased to the
person's parent or guardian, unless accompanied by another person who is 18
years of age or older, and who holds a license as provided in division (A) of
this section, except that the Ohio Department of Natural Resources may permit
such operation on state controlled land under its jurisdiction when such
person is less than 16 years of age and is accompanied by a parent or
guardian who is a licensed driver 18 years of age or older.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $50
nor more than $500, imprisoned not less than 3 nor more than 30 days, or both.



(R.C. § 4519.44)



§ 75.30  MAINTENANCE OF VEHICLES FOR HIRE.



   (A)   Any dealer who rents, leases or otherwise furnishes a
snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle for hire shall
maintain the vehicle in safe operating condition. No dealer, or agent or
employee of a dealer, shall rent, lease or otherwise furnish a snowmobile,
off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle for hire to any person who
does not hold a license as required by R.C. § 4519.44(A) or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, or to any person whom the dealer or an agent
or employee of the dealer has reasonable cause to believe is incompetent to
operate the vehicle in a safe and lawful manner.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than
$100 nor more than $500.



(R.C. § 4519.45)



§ 75.31  ACCIDENT REPORTS.



   (A)   The operator of a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or
all-purpose vehicle involved in any accident resulting in bodily injury to or
death of any person or damage to the property of any person in excess of $100
shall report the accident within 48 hours to the Chief of Police, and within
30 days shall forward a written report of the accident to the Ohio Registrar
of Motor Vehicles on a form prescribed by the Registrar. If the operator is
physically incapable of making the reports and there is another participant
in the accident not so incapacitated, the participant shall make the reports.
In the event there is no other participant, and the operator is other than
the owner, the owner, within the prescribed periods of time, shall make the
reports.



   (B)   Any law enforcement officer or other person authorized by R.C.
§§ 4519.42 and 4519.43 who investigates or receives information of an
accident involving a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose
vehicle shall forward to the Registrar a written report of the accident
within 48 hours.



(R.C. § 4519.46)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 75.32  IMPOUNDING OF VEHICLE.



   (A)   Whenever a person is found guilty of operating a snowmobile,
off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle in violation of any rule
authorized to be adopted under R.C. § 4519.21 or 4519.42, the trial judge of
any court of record, in addition to or independent of any other penalties
provided by law, may impound for not less than 60 days the certificate of
registration and license plate, if applicable, of that snowmobile,
off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle. The court shall send the
impounded certificate of registration and license plate, if applicable, to
the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, who shall retain the certificate of
registration and license plate, if applicable, until the expiration of the
period of impoundment.



   (B)   If a court impounds the certificate of registration and
license plate of an all-purpose vehicle pursuant to R.C. § 2911.21, the
court shall send the impounded certificate of registration and license plate
to the Registrar, who shall retain them until the expiration of the period of
impoundment.



(R.C. § 4519.47) 



§ 75.33  LOCAL CONTROL WITHIN POLICE POWER.



   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall prevent the municipality
from regulating the operation of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycle, and
all-purpose vehicles on streets and highways and other public property under
municipal jurisdiction, and within the reasonable exercise of the police
power, except that no registration or licensing of any snowmobile,
off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle required to be registered or
titled under R.C. Chapter 4519 shall be required.



(R.C. § 4519.48) 



§ 75.34  REGISTRATION OF VEHICLES.



   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B), (C) and (D) of
this section, no person shall operate any snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle,
or all-purpose vehicle within this municipality unless the snowmobile,
off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle is registered and numbered in
accordance with R.C. §§ 4519.03 and 4519.04.



      (2)   Except as provided in R.C. § 4511.215 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, no registration is required for
a mini-truck that is operated within this state. A mini-truck may be operated
only in accordance with R.C. § 4511.215 and R.C. § 4519.401, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



   (B)   (1)   No registration is required for a snowmobile or
off-highway motorcycle that is operated exclusively upon lands owned by the
owner of the snowmobile or off-highway motorcycle, or on lands to which the
owner of the snowmobile or off-highway motorcycle has a contractual right.



      (2)   No registration is required for an all-purpose vehicle
that is used primarily for agricultural purposes when the owner qualifies for
the current agricultural use valuation tax credit, unless it is to be used on
any public land, trail, or right-of-way.



      (3)   Any all-purpose vehicle exempted from registration under
division (B)(2) of this section and operated for agricultural purposes may
use public roads and rights-of-way when traveling from one farm field to
another, when such use does not violate R.C. § 4519.41.



      (4)   No registration is required for a snowmobile or
all-purpose vehicle that is operated on a state highway as authorized by R.C.
§ 4519.41(F).



   (C)   No registration is required for a snowmobile, off-highway
motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in this state by a resident
of another state whenever that state has in effect a registration law similar
to R.C. Chapter 4519 and the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or
all-purpose vehicle is properly registered under that state’s law. Any
snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in
this state by a resident of a state not having a registration law similar to
R.C. Chapter 4519 shall comply with R.C. § 4519.09.



   (D)   No registration is required for a snowmobile, off-highway
motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in this municipality by the
United States, another state or a political subdivision thereof, but the
snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle shall display the
name of the owner thereon.



   (E)   The owner or operator of any all-purpose vehicle operated or
used upon the waters in this municipality shall comply with R.C. Chapter 1547
and R.C. Chapter 1548 relative to the operation of watercraft.



   (F)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section shall be fined
not less than $50 nor more than $100.



(R.C. § 4519.02)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Destruction or disposal of vehicle; transfer of ownership; change of
address; loss of certificate, see R.C. § 4519.05



   Registration of emergency vehicles, see R.C. § 4519.08



   Registration procedure, see R.C. § 4519.03



   Temporary license placards and fees, see R.C. § 4519.10



   Temporary operating permit for certain nonresidents, see R.C. § 4519.09



§ 75.35  [RESERVED].



§ 75.36  CERTIFICATE OF TITLE; PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Operate in this state an off-highway motorcycle or
all-purpose vehicle without having a certificate of title for the off-highway
motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle if such a certificate is required by R.C.
Chapter 4519 to be issued for the off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle, or, if a physical certificate of title has not been issued for it,
operate an off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle knowing that the
ownership information related to the motorcycle or vehicle has not been
entered into the automated title processing system by a Clerk of a Court of
Common Pleas.



      (2)   Operate in this municipality an off-highway motorcycle
or all-purpose vehicle is a certificate of title to the off-highway
motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle has been issued and then has been canceled.



      (3)   Fail to surrender any certificate of title upon
cancellation of it by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles and notice of the
cancellation as prescribed in R.C. Chapter 4519.



      (4)   Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a Clerk of
a Court of Common Pleas as provided in R.C. Chapter 4519, in case of the
destruction or dismantling of, or change in, the off-highway motorcycle or
all-purpose vehicle described in the certificate of title.



      (5)   Violate any provision of R.C. §§ 4519.51 to 4519.70
for which no penalty is otherwise provided or any lawful rules adopted
pursuant to those sections.



      (6)   Operate in this state an off-highway motorcycle or
all-purpose vehicle knowing that the certificate of title to or ownership of
the motorcycle or vehicle as otherwise reflected in the automated title
processing system has been canceled.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than
$200, imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both.



(R.C. § 4519.66) 



Statutory reference:



   Certificate of title: rules and procedures, see R.C. §§ 4519.51 et
seq.



   Stolen vehicles and restrictions on sale or transfer, felony
provisions, see R.C. § 4519.67



§ 75.37  PARKING OF SNOWMOBILES.



   At no time shall a snowmobile be left parked or unattended on any
village streets, alleys or sidewalks.



(Ord. 79-2-2, passed 2-20-79)



§ 75.38  SNOW EMERGENCY.



   In the event of a declared snow emergency by the Mayor, the Mayor will
have the authority to lift any and all regulations of this chapter regarding
snowmobiles to insure the health and safety of all persons in the village as
to aid and assist in emergency and rescue operations.



(Ord. 79-2-2, passed 2-20-79)



§ 75.39  REGULATION OF MOTORIZED FOOT SCOOTERS AND SCOOTERS.



   (A)   Definitions.



      (1)   MOTORIZED FOOT SCOOTER. 



         (a)   A device with no more than two 10-inch or smaller
diameter wheels that has handlebars, is designed to be stood upon by the
operator, and is powered by an electric motor that is capable of propelling
the device with or without human propulsion.



         (b)   For purposes of this section, a motor-driven
cycle, a moped, an electric-assisted bicycle, or a motorcycle is not a
motorized foot scooter.



      (2)   MOTOR SCOOTER.  Under this section, any vehicle defined
as a motor scooter by R.C. § 4511.01.



   (B)   Prohibitions.



      (1)   Motor scooters.



         (a)   Motor scooters are prohibited from operating on
the public streets, alleys, and public parking lots unless they are in
compliance with Ohio's required safety equipment standards, property titled
and registered with the State of Ohio. The operator of the motor scooter must
be properly licensed.



         (b)   Motor scooters are prohibited from operating upon
public sidewalks.



      (2)   Motorized foot scooters.



         (a)   Motorized foot scooters are prohibited from
operating upon any public street, except for the purpose of crossing a street
in a crosswalk or in the absence of a crosswalk as near to the intersection
as possible.



         (b)   Motorized foot scooters will be permitted to
operate upon public sidewalks, alleys and public parking lots.



         (c)   Motorized foot scooters may not be operated at any
time from a half hour after sunset to a half hour before sunrise without
reflectors of a type approved by the State of Ohio for the nighttime
operation of bicycles.



         (d)   Operators of motorized foot scooter are required
to wear a U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) approved bicycle
helmet.



         (e)   Motorized foot scooters are to yield the
right-of-way to pedestrians on the sidewalks.



   (C)   Penalty.  Whoever violates division (B)(1) is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor on the first offense, and a misdemeanor of the third degree
on each subsequent offense, and whoever violates any other provision of the
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined up to $150.



(Ord. 04-06-02, passed 7-20-04)



CHAPTER 76:  PARKING REGULATIONS



Section



   76.01   Prohibition against parking on highways



   76.02   Condition when motor vehicle left unattended



   76.03   Police may remove illegally parked vehicle



   76.04   Parking prohibitions



   76.05   Parking near curb; privileges for persons with disabilities



   76.06   Parking on private property in violation of posted
prohibition



   76.07   Selling, washing or repairing vehicle upon roadway



   76.08   Truck loading zones



   76.09   Bus stops and taxicab stands



   76.10   Parking in alleys and narrow streets; exceptions



   76.11   Registered owner prima facie liable for unlawful parking



   76.12   Waiver



   76.13   Parking after snowfall



   76.14   Parking restriction for commercial and heavy vehicles



   76.15   Disabled motor vehicles



   76.16   Parking in excess of 72 hours



Cross-reference:



   Unclaimed and abandoned vehicles, see Ch. 95



   Unlawful furnishing of prescription to enable persons to be issued
handicapped parking placards or license plates, see § 138.17



Statutory reference:



   Noncriminal parking infractions, local option to create, see R.C.
Chapter 4521



§ 76.01  PROHIBITION AGAINST PARKING ON HIGHWAYS.



   (A)   (1)   Upon any highway, no person shall stop, park, or
leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the paved or
main traveled part of the highway if it is practicable to stop, park, or so
leave such vehicle off the paved or main traveled part of the highway. In
every event a clear and unobstructed portion of the highway opposite such
standing vehicle shall be left for the free passage of other vehicles, and a
clear view of such stopped vehicle shall be available from a distance of 200
feet in each direction upon such highway.



      (2)   This section does not apply to the driver of any vehicle
which is disabled while on the paved or improved or main traveled portion of
a highway in such manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid
stopping and temporarily leaving the disabled vehicle in such position.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.66)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 76.02  CONDITION WHEN MOTOR VEHICLE LEFT UNATTENDED.



   (A)   (1)   No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle
shall permit it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine,
locking the ignition, removing the key from the ignition, effectively setting
the parking brake, and, when the motor vehicle is standing upon any grade,
turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the highway.



      (2)   The requirements of this section relating to the
stopping of the engine, locking of the ignition, and removing the key from
the ignition of a motor vehicle do not apply to any of the following:



         (a)   A motor vehicle that is parked on residential
property;



         (b)   A motor vehicle that is locked, regardless of
where it is parked;



         (c)   An emergency vehicle;



         (d)   A public safety vehicle.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.661)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 76.03  POLICE MAY REMOVE ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLE.



   (A)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a
highway in violation of R.C. § 4511.66 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, such officer may move such vehicle, or require the
driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to move the same, to a
position off the paved or improved or main traveled part of such highway.



   (B)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon
any highway, bridge, or causeway, or in any tunnel, where such vehicles
constitutes an obstruction to traffic, such officer may provide for the
removal of such vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety.



(R.C. § 4511.67)



§ 76.04  PARKING PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   No person shall stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary
to avoid conflict with other traffic or to comply with the provisions of this
title, or while obeying the directions of a police officer or a
traffic-control device, in any of the following places:



      (1)   On a sidewalk, except as provided in division (B) of
this section;



      (2)   In front of a public or private driveway;



      (3)   Within an intersection;



      (4)   Within ten feet of a fire hydrant;



      (5)   On a crosswalk;



      (6)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;



      (7)   Within 30 feet of, and upon the approach to, any
flashing beacon, stop sign, or traffic- control device;



      (8)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30
feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone,
unless a different length is indicated by a traffic-control device;



      (9)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad
crossing;



      (10)   Within 20 feet of a driveway entrance to any fire
station and, on the side of the street opposite the entrance to any fire
station, within 75 feet of the entrance when it is properly posted with signs;



      (11)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or
obstruction when such standing or parking would obstruct traffic;



      (12)   Alongside any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street;



      (13)   Upon any bridge or elevated structure upon a highway,
or within a highway tunnel;



      (14)   At any place where signs prohibit stopping;



      (15)   Within one foot of another parked vehicle;



      (16)   On the roadway portion of a freeway, expressway, or
thruway.



   (B)   A person shall be permitted, without charge or restriction, to
stand or park on a sidewalk a motor-driven cycle or motor scooter that has an
engine not larger than 150 cubic centimeters, or a bicycle or electric
bicycle, provided that the motor-driven cycle, motor scooter, bicycle or
electric bicycle does not impede the normal flow of pedestrian traffic. This
division does not authorize any person to operate a vehicle in violation of
R.C. § 4511.711, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.68)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 76.05  PARKING NEAR CURB; PRIVILEGES FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES.



   (A)   Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there is
an adjacent curb shall be stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of the
vehicle parallel with and not more than 12 inches from the right-hand curb,
unless it is impossible to approach so close to the curb; in such case the
stop shall be made as close to the curb as possible and only for the time
necessary to discharge and receive passengers or to load or unload
merchandise. Local authorities by ordinance may permit angle parking on any
roadway under their jurisdiction, except that angle parking shall not be
permitted on a state route within the municipality unless an unoccupied
roadway width of not less than 25 feet is available for free- moving traffic.



   (B)   Local authorities by ordinance may permit parking of vehicles
with the left-hand wheels adjacent to and within 12 inches of the left-hand
curb of a one-way roadway.



   (C)   (1)   (a)   Except as provided in division (C)(1)(b) of
this section, no vehicle shall be stopped or parked on a road or highway with
the vehicle facing in a direction other than the direction of travel on that
side of the road or highway.



         (b)   The operator of a motorcycle may back the
motorcycle into an angled parking space so that when the motorcycle is parked
it is facing in a direction other than the direction of travel on the side of
the road or highway.



      (2)   The operator of a motorcycle may back the motorcycle
into a parking space that is located on the side of, and parallel to, a road
or highway. The motorcycle may face any direction when so parked. Not more
than two motorcycles at a time shall be parked in a parking space as
described in division (C)(2) of this section irrespective of whether or not
the space is metered.



   (D)   Notwithstanding any statute or any rule, regulation,
resolution, or ordinance, air compressors, tractors, trucks, and other
equipment, while being used in the construction, reconstruction,
installation, repair, or removal of facilities near, on, over, or under a
street or highway, may stop, stand, or park where necessary in order to
perform such work, provided a flagperson is on duty or warning signs or
lights are displayed as may be prescribed by the Director of Transportation.



   (E)   Special parking locations and privileges for persons with
disabilities that limit or impair the ability to walk, also known as
handicapped parking spaces or disability parking spaces, shall be provided
and designated by all political subdivisions and by the state and all
agencies and instrumentalities thereof  at all offices and facilities where
parking is provided, whether owned, rented, or leased, and at all publicly
owned parking garages. The locations shall be designated through the posting
of an elevated sign, whether permanently affixed or movable, imprinted with
the international symbol of access and shall be reasonably close to exits,
entrances, elevators, and ramps. All elevated signs posted in accordance with
this division and R.C. § 3781.111(C) shall be mounted on a fixed or movable
post, and the distance from the ground to the bottom edge of the sign shall
measure not less than five feet. If a new sign or a replacement sign
designating a special parking location is posted on or after October 14,
1999, there also shall be affixed upon the surface of that sign or affixed
next to the designating sign a notice that states the fine applicable for the
offense of parking a motor vehicle in the special designated parking location
if the motor vehicle is not legally entitled to be parked in that location.



   (F)   (1)   (a)   No person shall stop, stand, or park any
motor vehicle at special parking locations provided under division (E) of
this section, or at special clearly marked parking locations provided in or
on privately owned parking lots, parking garages, or other parking areas and
designated in accordance with that division, unless one of the following
applies:



            1.   The motor vehicle is being operated by or for
the transport of a person with a disability that limits or impairs the
ability to walk and is displaying a valid removable windshield placard or
special license plates; or



            2.   The motor vehicle is being operated by or for
the transport of a handicapped person and is displaying a parking card or
special handicapped license plates.



         (b)   Any motor vehicle that is parked in a special
marked parking location in violation of division (F)(1)(a)1. or (F)(1)(a)2.
of this section may be towed or otherwise removed from the parking location
by the law enforcement agency of the municipality. A motor vehicle that is so
towed or removed shall not be released to its owner until the owner presents
proof of ownership of the motor vehicle and pays all towing and storage fees
normally imposed by the municipality for towing and storing motor vehicles.
If the motor vehicle is a leased vehicle, it shall not be released to the
lessee until the lessee presents proof that that person is the lessee of the
motor vehicle and pays all towing and storage fees normally imposed by the
municipality for towing and storing motor vehicles.



         (c)   If a person is charged with a violation of
division (F)(1)(a)1. or (F)(1)(a)2. of this section, it is an affirmative
defense to the charge that the person suffered an injury not more than 72
hours prior to the time the person was issued the ticket or citation and
that, because of the injury, the person meets at least one of the criteria
contained in R.C. § 4503.44(A)(1).



      (2)    No person shall stop, stand, or park any motor vehicle
in an area that is commonly known as an access aisle, which area is marked by
diagonal stripes and is located immediately adjacent to a special parking
location provided under division (E) of this section or at a special clearly
marked parking location provided in or on a privately owned parking lot,
parking garage, or other parking area and designated in accordance with that
division.



   (G)   When a motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport
of a person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk and
is displaying a removable windshield placard or a temporary removable
windshield placard or special license plates, or when a motor vehicle is
being operated by or for the transport of a handicapped person, and is
displaying a parking card or special handicapped license plates, the motor
vehicle is permitted to park for a period of two hours in excess of the legal
parking period permitted by local authorities, except where local ordinances
or police rules provide otherwise or where the vehicle is parked in such a
manner as to be clearly a traffic hazard.



   (H)   No owner of an office, facility, or parking garage where
special parking locations are required to be designated in accordance with
division (E) of this section shall fail to properly mark the special parking
locations in accordance with that division or fail to maintain the markings
of the special locations, including the erection and maintenance of the fixed
or movable signs.



   (I)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require a person
or organization to apply for a removable windshield placard or special
license plates if the parking card or special license plates issued to the
person or organization under prior law have not expired or been surrendered
or revoked.



   (J)   As used in this section:



      HANDICAPPED PERSON means any person who has lost the use of one
or both legs or one or both arms, who is blind, deaf, or so severely
handicapped as to be unable to move without the aid of crutches or a
wheelchair, or whose mobility is restricted by a permanent cardiovascular,
pulmonary, or other handicapping condition.



      PERSON WITH A DISABILITY THAT LIMITS OR IMPAIRS THE ABILITY TO
WALK has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4503.44.



      SPECIAL LICENSE PLATES and REMOVABLE WINDSHIELD PLACARD mean any
license plates or removable windshield placard or temporary removable
windshield placard issued under R.C. §§ 4503.41 or 4503.44, and also mean
any substantially equivalent license plates or removable windshield placard
or temporary removable windshield placard issued by a state, district,
country, or sovereignty.



   (K)   Penalty.



      (1)   Whoever violates division (A) or (C) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates division (F)(1)(a)1. or
(F)(1)(a)2. of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished
as provided in division (K)(2)(a) and (b) of this section.  Except as
otherwise provided in division (K)(2)(a) of this section, an offender who
violates division (F)(1)(a)1. or (F)(1)(a)2. of this section shall be fined
not less than $250 nor more than $500. An offender who violates division
(F)(1)(a)1. or (F)(1)(a)2. of this section shall be fined not more than $100
if the offender, prior to sentencing, proves either of the following to the
satisfaction of the court:



            1.   At the time of the violation of division
(F)(1)(a)1. of this section, the offender or the person for whose transport
the motor vehicle was being operated had been issued a removable windshield
placard that then was valid or special license plates that then were valid
but the offender or the person neglected to display the placard or license
plates as described in division (F)(1)(a)1. of this section.



            2.   At the time of the violation of division
(F)(1)(a)2. of this section, the offender or the person for whose transport
the motor vehicle was being operated had been issued a parking card that then
was valid or special handicapped license plates that then were valid but the
offender or the person neglected to display the card or license plates as
described in division (F)(1)(a)2. of this section.



         (b)   In no case shall an offender who violates division
(F)(1)(a)1. or (F)(1)(a)2. be sentenced to any term of imprisonment.



         (c)   An arrest or conviction for a violation of
division (F)(1)(a)1. or (F)(1)(a)2. of this section does not constitute a
criminal record and need not be reported by the person so arrested or
convicted in response to any inquiries contained in any application for
employment, license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection with
the person's appearance as a witness.



         (d)   The clerk of the court shall pay every fine
collected under divisions (K)(2) and (K)(3) of this section to the
municipality. Except as provided in division (K)(2) of this section, the
municipality shall use the fine moneys it receives under divisions (K)(2) and
(K)(3) of this section to pay the expenses it incurs in complying with the
signage and notice requirements contained in division (E) of this section.
The municipality may use up to 50% of each fine it receives under divisions
(K)(2) and (K)(3) of this section to pay the costs of educational, advocacy,
support, and assistive technology programs for persons with disabilities, and
for public improvements within the municipality that benefit or assist
persons with disabilities, if governmental agencies or nonprofit
organizations offer the programs.



      (3)   Whoever violates division (F)(2) of this section shall
be fined not less than $250 nor more than $500. In no case shall an offender
who violates division (F)(2) of this section be sentenced to any term of
imprisonment. An arrest or conviction for a violation of division (F)(2) of
this section does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported
by the person so arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries contained
in any application for employment, license, or other right or privilege, or
made in connection with the person’s appearance as a witness.



      (4)   Whoever violates division (H) of this section shall be
punished as follows:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (K)(4) of
this section, the offender shall be issued a warning.



         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (H) of this section or of a
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to that division, the
offender shall not be issued a warning but shall be fined not more than $25
for each parking location that is not properly marked or whose markings are
not properly maintained.



(R.C. § 4511.69)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Cross-reference:



   Unlawful furnishing of prescription to enable persons to be issued
handicapped parking placards or license plates, see § 138.17



Statutory reference:



   Buildings, access for disabled persons, see R.C. § 3781.111



§ 76.06  PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY IN VIOLATION OF POSTED PROHIBITION.



   (A)   If an owner of private property posts on the property in a
conspicuous manner a prohibition against parking on the property or
conditions and regulations under which parking is permitted, no person shall
do either of the following:



      (1)   Park a vehicle on the property without the owner's
consent;



      (2)   Park a vehicle on the property in violation of any
condition or regulation posted by the owner.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4511.681)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Cross-reference:



   Towing from private property, requirements, see § 95.01



§ 76.07  SELLING, WASHING OR REPAIRING VEHICLE UPON ROADWAY.



   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon any roadway for the
principal purpose of:



   (A)   Displaying such vehicle for sale; or



   (B)   Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs
necessitated by an emergency.



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 76.08  TRUCK LOADING ZONES.



   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length
of time, other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and
loading of materials, in any place marked as a truck loading zone during
hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case
shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes.



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 76.09  BUS STOPS AND TAXICAB STANDS.



   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus
in a bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when any such stop
or stand has been officially designated and appropriately posted, except that
the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the
purpose of, and while actually engaged in, loading or unloading passengers
when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to
enter or about to enter such zone, and then only for a period not to exceed
three minutes, if such stopping is not prohibited therein by posted signs.



   (B)   No operator of a bus shall stop, stand or park such vehicle
upon any street or other public way at any place for the purpose of loading
or unloading passengers or their baggage other than at a bus stop so
designated and posted as such, except in case of an emergency.



   (C)   No operator of a bus shall fail to enter a bus stop on a
street or other public way in such a manner that the bus when stopped to load
or unload passengers or baggage is in a position with the right front wheel
of such vehicle not further than 18 inches from the curb and the bus
approximately parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the movement of
other vehicular traffic.



   (D)   No operator of a taxicab shall stand or park such vehicle upon
any street or other public way at any place other than in a taxicab stand so
designated and posted as such. This provision shall not prevent the operator
of a taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or
parking provisions at any place for the purpose of, and while actually
engaged in, the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers.



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 76.10  PARKING IN ALLEYS AND NARROW STREETS; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street,
other than an alley, in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave
available less than 10 feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of
vehicular traffic, except that a driver may stop temporarily during the
actual loading or unloading of passengers or when directed to by a police
officer or traffic control signal.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided by law, no person shall stop,
stand or park a vehicle within an alley except while actually loading and
unloading, and then only for a period not to exceed 30 minutes.



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 76.11  REGISTERED OWNER PRIMA FACIE LIABLE FOR UNLAWFUL PARKING.



   In any hearing on a charge of illegally parking a motor vehicle,
testimony that a vehicle bearing a certain license plate was found unlawfully
parked as prohibited by the provisions of this Traffic Code, and further
testimony that the record of the Ohio Registrar of Motor Vehicles shows that
the license plate was issued to the defendant, shall be prima facie evidence
that the vehicle which was unlawfully parked, was so parked by the defendant.
A certified registration copy, showing such fact, from the Registrar shall be
proof of such ownership.



§ 76.12  WAIVER.



   Any person charged with a violation of any provision of this chapter
for which payment of a prescribed fine may be made, may pay such sum in the
manner prescribed on the issued traffic ticket. Such payment shall be deemed
a plea of guilty, waiver of court appearance and acknowledgment of conviction
of the alleged offense and may be accepted in full satisfaction of the
prescribed penalty for such alleged violation. Payment of the prescribed fine
need not be accepted when laws prescribe that a certain number of such
offenses shall require court appearance.



§ 76.13  PARKING AFTER SNOWFALL.



   (A)   No owner or operator of a motor vehicle shall fail to move the
motor vehicle owned, operated, or under their control from village streets as
hereinafter designated upon notice.



   (B)   No owner or operator of a motor vehicle shall park the same
upon the following streets after an accumulation of four inches of snow or
after the Mayor has declared a snow emergency:



      (1)   Fourth from Paris to Ohio;



      (2)   Main from First to Seventh;



      (3)   Hanover from Third to Fifth;



      (4)   Lincoln Drive.



   (C)   The Mayor may, in his or her discretion, declare a snow
emergency at any time that he or she determines the accumulation of snow
unnecessarily interferes with the cleaning of streets and free flow of
traffic. The Mayor may declare an emergency as to all streets or he or she
may designate specific streets.



   (D)   It is declared a minor misdemeanor for any owner or person in
control of a motor vehicle to fail to remove the same from a village street
that is parked in violation of division (A) of this section, upon being
notified by any village police officer or employee that the vehicle is being
parked in violation of this section.



   (E)   Any vehicle parked in violation of division (A) of this
section may be towed by authorized agents of the village and stored at either
Dahlinghaus Garage or Hausfeld Motors. All towing and storage charges shall
be paid by the owner or person in control of the motor vehicle as a condition
to regaining possession thereof.



   (F)   The Police Department shall keep a record of any vehicle towed
and their location.



(Ord. 85-11-4, passed 12-17-85)



§ 76.14  PARKING RESTRICTION FOR COMMERCIAL AND HEAVY VEHICLES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for nay owner or operator to stop, park
or leave standing on a street or alley any commercial tractor or semi
trailer, or any trailer or motor vehicle of any kind having a gross vehicle
weight of more than 6,000 pounds or having more than two axles, at any time,
except:



      (1)   When making pickups or deliveries, but only for a
reasonable time and at a point reasonably near to the property being so
serviced;



      (2)   When providing construction services pursuant to a
building permit, during the course of such service;



      (3)   When making repairs or improvements to property, during
the reasonable course of their completion;



      (4)   When providing emergency services;



      (5)   When parked for less than one hour.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any such
tractor, semi-trailer, or motor vehicle to cause or allow the tractor,
trailer or motor vehicle to be moved to a different location within the
village for the purpose of circumventing this section.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any commercial
tractor or semi-trailer, or any trailer or motor vehicle of any kind having a
gross weight more than 6,000 pounds or having more than two axles, at any
time within the village, except:



      (1)   When making pickups or deliveries, but only for the
purpose of transporting the items being picked up or delivered to and from a
point reasonably near the property being serviced;



      (2)   When providing construction services pursuant to a
building permit, or when making repairs or improvements to properly, for the
purpose of traveling to or from the work site during the course of such
services;



      (3)   When operating on streets or roads designated as state
highways or truck routes;



      (4)   When providing emergency services;



      (5)   When going to or from parking or standing permitted by
division (A).



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor
and shall be fined up to $100.



(Ord. 01-10-01, passed  - -01)



§ 76.15  DISABLED MOTOR VEHICLES.



   (A)   Any car, disabled or otherwise remaining continuously in the
same place on public streets, alleys, park lands, parking lots or any other
public property for more than 48 hours is hereby declared a public  nuisance.



   (B)   All disabled motor vehicles shall be removed from public
streets, alleys, park lands, parking lots and any other public property
within 48 hours of becoming disabled.



   (C)   Any disabled motor vehicle not removed as required in division
(B) above, shall be removed from such public place at the expense of the
owner thereof.  In addition, such owner may be charged reasonable storage
fees.



   (D)   Any car that is not operable for any reason shall be
considered disabled. Any car with a flat tire or tires shall be considered as
not in operable condition.



   (E)   Whoever  violates this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.



(Ord. 74-2-4, passed 4-2-74; Am. Ord. 10-01-01, passed 2-2-10)



§ 76.16  PARKING IN EXCESS OF 72 HOURS.



   (A)   No person shall stop or leave standing any vehicle upon the
public streets or alleys within the village or upon any municipal parking lot
within the village or upon any property owned by the village for a period in
excess of 72 hours.



   (B)   Any person who has parked a vehicle upon public streets,
alleys of the village or in a municipal parking lot, or upon
municipally-owned property, must wait 72 hours before they may stop, park or
leave standing a vehicle on that same street or alley or the municipal
parking lot or property owned by the village.



   (C)   This section is not intended to change the restriction on
parking in business districts and other parts of the village where an
ordinance regulates parking in a specific location in the village.



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.



(Ord. 10-01-01, passed 2-2-10)



CHAPTER 77:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   One-way streets



   II.   Speed limits



   III.   Stop intersections



   IV.   Traffic-control signals



   V.   School zones



   VI.   No passing zones



   VII.   Truck routes



SCHEDULE I.  ONE-WAY STREETS.



   (A)   Traffic shall travel only in the direction indicated on the
following streets.



 

Street
 
Direction
 
Location
 
Ord. No.
 
Date Passed


Clay Street
 
East
 
 
 
79-12-3
 
12-18-79


Mechler Street
 
East
 
Between Hanover and Lincoln Streets
 
99-8-4
 
- -99


North Lincoln Drive
 
North
 
 
 
72-10-2
 
10- -72


South Lincoln Drive
 
South
 
 
 
72-10-2
 
10- -72


Washington Street
 
South
 
 
 
79-12-3
 
12-18-79


Alleys
 
 
 
Between Frankfort and Hanover Street, one-way off Fourth Street
 
76-
 
12-7-76



 



   (B)   Whoever violates any provision of this schedule is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100.



(Am. Ord. 15-09-02, passed 10-20-15)



SCHEDULE II.  SPEED LIMITS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle on the
following streets in excess of the speeds indicated.



 

Street
 
Location
 
Speed Limit
 
Ord. No.
 
Passage Date




First Street
 
From Main Street to the canal
 
25 m.p.h.
 
97-4-1
 
- -97


Four Seasons Park
 
All portions of the west drive to Four Seasons Park
 
15 m.p.h.
 
18-07-01
 
7-3-18


Paris Street
 
 
 
25 m.p.h.
 
93-5-1
 
- -93


Seventh Street
 
From east property line of the high school west along Seventh Street to a
point that would represent the western property line of the middle school
 
20 m.p.h.
 
03-08-02
 
8-12-03


State Route 66
 
From First Street to the south corporation limit
 
35 m.p.h.
 
84-6-1
 
6-7-84


State Route 119 West
 
Within the corporate limits and west of State Route 66
 
45 m.p.h.
 
15-08-02
 
9-15-15


West First Street
 
Between the west corporation line and the canal
 
35 m.p.h.
 
99-5-
 
- -99




 



   (B)   Whoever violates any provision of this schedule is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100.



SCHEDULE III.  STOP INTERSECTIONS.



   (A)   Four-way stop intersections. The following are designated
four-way stop intersections.



 



Cleveland and Third Streets
 

85-

 

10-15-85



Fifth and Garfield Streets
 

77-7-1

 

8-16-77



Fifth and Lincoln Streets
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Frankfort and Fifth Streets
 

81-10-4

 

- -81



Hamilton and Third Streets
 

99-3-3

 

- -99



Hamilton and Fifth Streets
 
18-11-02
 
12-4-18


Hanover and Fifth Streets
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Hanover and Seventh Streets
 

70-

 

-5-70



Hanover and Third Streets
 

2000-1

 

- -00



Parkview Drive and Settlers Lane / Harvest Court
 

12-05-02

 

6-19-12



Second and Lincoln Streets
 

07-10-01

 

11-20-07



Sixth and Cleveland Streets
 

91-5-1

 

5-7-91



Sixth and Frankfort Streets
 

72-5-5

 

5-20-72



Sixth and Hanover Streets
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Sixth and Lincoln Streets
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Sycamore Court, Settlers Lane and Parkview Drive
 

98-6-5

 

- -98



Third and Frankfort Streets
 

07-08-04

 

10-2-07



Third and Lincoln Streets
 

72-5-6

 

5-20-72



Webster Street and First Streets
 

14-11-02

 

11-18-14





 



   (B)   Stop signs.  Stop signs shall be erected at the following
intersections and all traffic shall stop before entering the intersection
from the street indicated.



 

Stop Street
 
Direction
 
At Intersection With
 
Ord. No.
 
Passage Date




Access road to WWTP
 
Northbound
 
First Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Access road from Woehrmyer Commercial Subdivision
 
North and Southbound
 
Access drive from S.R. 66
 

05-01-02

 

1-18-05



Bensman Road
 
Westbound
 
State Route 66
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Boulder Lane
 
Southbound
 
First Street
 

91-6-1

 

- -91



Canal Road
 
North and Southbound
 
Cleveland Street
 

71-1-3

 

4-6-71



Cleveland Street
 
Northbound
 
Seventh Street
 

87-3-1

 

4- -87



Cleveland Street
 
Northbound
 
Fifth Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Cleveland Street
 
Southbound
 
Fifth Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Cleveland Street
 
Southbound
 
First Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Columbia Drive
 
Eastbound
 
State Route 66
 
18-09-01
 
9-4-18


Community Park Drive
 
Southbound
 
Seventh Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Crestwood Drive
 
Southbound
 
Fourth Street
 

77-11-1

 

11-1-77



Eagle Drive
 
Westbound
 
State Route 66
 

91-6-1

 

- -91



Executive Parkway
 
Northbound
 
First Street
 

97-10-2

 

- -97



Fieldcrest Road
 
Southbound
 
Greenhills Drive
 

00-3-2

 

3-7-00



Fifth Street
 
Westbound
 
Hanover Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Fifth Street
 
Eastbound
 
State Route 66
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Fifth Street
 
Westbound
 
State Route 66
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Fifth Street
 
Eastbound
 
Hamilton Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



First Street
 
Eastbound
 
Main Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



First Street
 
Westbound
 
Main Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Four Seasons Park Access Road
 
Southbound
 
Seventh Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Frankfort Street
 
Northbound
 
Seventh Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Frankfort Street
 
Southbound
 
Second Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Frankfort Street
 
Northbound
 
Second Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Frankfort Street
 
Southbound
 
First Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Garfield Street
 
Northbound
 
Seventh Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Garfield Street
 
Northbound
 
Sixth Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Garfield Street
 
Southbound
 
Sixth Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Garfield Street
 
Southbound
 
Fourth Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Garfield Street
 
Northbound
 
Fourth Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Garfield Street
 
Southbound
 
Third Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Garfield Street
 
Northbound
 
Third Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Garfield Street
 
Southbound
 
First Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Green Hill Drive
 
Eastbound
 
State Route 66
 

97-9-1

 

- -97



Hamilton Street
 
Northbound
 
Seventh Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Hamilton Street
 
Northbound
 
Fourth Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Hamilton Street
 
Southbound
 
Fourth Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Hanover Street
 
Southbound
 
First Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Harvest Court
 
Southbound
 
Parkview Drive
 

91-6-1

 

- -91



Independence Avenue
 
Southbound
 
Eagle Drive
 

91-6-1

 

- -91



Industrial Park Drive
 
Eastbound
 
Canal Road
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Jackson Street
 
Southbound
 
Fourth Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Jackson Street
 
Eastbound
 
Garfield Street
 

17-07-01

 

8-1-17



Jefferson Street
 
Southbound
 
Third Street
 

75-9-3

 

- -75



Jefferson Street
 
Northbound and Southbound
 
Fourth Street
 

75-

 

5-6-75



Lakewood Drive
 
Southbound
 
First Street
 

91-6-1

 

- -91



Lakewood Drive
 
Northbound
 
Third Street
 

91-6-1

 

- -91



Lincoln Drive
 
Southbound
 
Fourth Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Lincoln Drive
 
Northbound
 
Fourth Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Lincoln Drive
 
 
Fourth Street
 
15-09-03
 
10-20-15


Lincoln Street
 
Northbound
 
Seventh Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Lincoln Street
 
Southbound
 
Second Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Lincoln Street
 
Northbound
 
Second Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Lincoln Street
 
Southbound
 
First Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Madyson Avenue
 
 
 
Park Place Drive
 

05-01-02

 

1-18-05



Meadow Court
 
Eastbound
 
Fieldcrest Road
 

00-3-2

 

3-7-00



Melcher Street
 
Eastbound
 
Lincoln Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Miami and Erie Road
 
Northbound
 
State Route 119
 

98-6-5

 

- -98



Midway Drive
 
Eastbound
 
State Route 66
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



N. Lincoln Drive
 
Westbound
 
Lincoln Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



N. Lincoln Drive
 
 
Lincoln Street
 
15-09-03
 
10-20-15


New Business Park Road
 
 
Fourth Street
 

12-06-01

 

6-19-12



Northcrest Drive
 
Westbound
 
Miami-Erie Road
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Oak Drive
 
Westbound
 
Paris Street
 

97-9-6

 

- -97



Ohio Street
 
Northbound
 
Seventh Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Ohio Street
 
Northbound
 
Fourth Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Ohio Street
 
Southbound
 
Fourth Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Ohio Street
 
Northbound
 
First Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Ohio Street
 
Southbound
 
First Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Ohio Street
 
Southbound
 
Industrial Park Drive
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Park Place Drive
 
 
 
Paris Street and Hamilton Street
 

05-01-02

 

1-18-05



Parkview Drive
 
Eastbound
 
State Route 66
 

91-6-1

 

- -91



Paris Street
 
Northbound
 
Seventh Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Paris Street
 
Northbound
 
Fourth Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Paris Street
 
Southbound
 
Fourth Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Paris Street
 
Southbound
 
First Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



S. Lincoln Drive
 
Westbound
 
Lincoln Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



S. Lincoln Drive
 
 
Lincoln Street
 
15-09-03
 
10-20-15


Second Street
 
Eastbound
 
Garfield Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Second Street
 
Eastbound
 
Main Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Second Street
 
Westbound
 
Main Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Second Street
 
Eastbound
 
Hanover Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Second Street
 
Westbound
 
Hanover Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Second Street
 
Eastbound
 
Cleveland Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Second Street
 
Westbound
 
Ohio Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Settlers Lane
 
Northbound
 
Parkview Drive east
 

91-6-1

 

- -91



Sixth Street
 
Eastbound
 
State Route 66
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Sixth Street
 
Westbound
 
State Route 66
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Sixth Street
 
Westbound
 
Ohio Street
 

17-07-01

 

8-1-17



Southgate Drive
 
Westbound
 
State Route 66
 

91-6-1

 

- -91



Stadium Drive
 
Northbound
 
Parkview Drive
 

91-6-1

 

- -91



Stallo Road
 
Southbound
 
First Street
 

75-

 

5-6-75



Stallo Road
 
Northbound
 
Third Street
 

75-

 

5-6-75



State Route 119
 
Eastbound
 
State Route 66
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Stonegate Drive
 
Southbound
 
Seventh Street
 
18-09-01
 
9-4-18


Third Street
 
Eastbound
 
Frankfort Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Third Street
 
Westbound
 
Frankfort Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Third Street
 
Westbound
 
Main Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Third Street
 
Eastbound
 
Main Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Third Street
 
Eastbound
 
Paris Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Third Street
 
Westbound
 
Ohio Street
 

87-

 

11-20-87



Washington Street
 
Eastbound
 
Garfield Street
 

17-07-01

 

8-1-17



Webster Street
 
Southbound
 
First Street
 
14-11-02
 
11-18-14


Webster Street
 
Northbound
 
Fourth Street
 

99-8-4

 

- -99



Webster Street
 
Southbound
 
Third Street
 

99-8-4; 17-07-01

 

- -99; 8-1-17



Webster Street
 
 
 
Park Place Drive
 

05-01-02

 

1-18-05



Woehrmyer Commercial Subdivision, southernmost access road
 
 
 
S.R. 66
 

05-01-02

 

1-18-05



Wooden Shoe Drive
 
Eastbound
 
Cleveland Street
 

87-

 

11-20-87



Wooden Shoe Drive
 
Westbound
 
Ohio Street
 

87-

 

11-20-87



Alley running north and south along the canal
 
Northbound and Southbound
 
Second Street
 

99-8-3

 

- -99



Eagles Acres Development parking lot
 
Westbound
 
Entrance to State Route 66
 

79-8-1

 

8-7-79





 



   (C)   Penalty. Whoever violates this schedule is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $150.



(Ord. 05-01-02, passed 1-18-05)



SCHEDULE IV.  TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNALS.



   (A)   Electric traffic-control signals established. Traffic shall be
controlled by electric signals at the following intersections, and no person
shall violate the traffic control pattern of red for stopping, green for go
and yellow for caution.



 

Intersection
 
Hours of Operation
 
Ord. No.
 
Passage Date


Fourth Street and Cleveland Street
 
Between 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., except Sundays
 
66-
 
5-3-66


Fourth Street and Frankfort Street
 
Between 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., except Sundays
 
66-
 
5-3-66


Fourth and Hanover Streets
 
 
58-
 
3- -58


Fourth Street and Lincoln Drive
 
 
89-9-1
 
9-5-89


Fourth and Main Street
 
 
00-3-4
 
0.00



 



   (B)   Right turn on red prohibited. Right turns on red shall be
prohibited at the intersection of Fourth and Main Streets.



(Ord. 00-3-4, passed - -00)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Editor's Note:



   Some of the signals listed in the schedule operate on flash from 8:00
p.m. to 7:00 a.m.



SCHEDULE V.  SCHOOL ZONES.



   There shall be no driving of motor vehicles on the following streets
during the times indicated.



 

Street
 
Location
 
Times Prohibited
 
Ord. No.
 
Passage Date


Fifth Street
 
Between Lincoln Street and Hanover Street
 
Between 11:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. on school days
 
64-
 
3-3-64


Lincoln Street
 
Between Fifth Street and Lincoln Drive
 
Between 11:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. on school days
 
61-
 
9-5-61


Main Street
 
Between Fourth Street and Sixth Street (527 feet north of the monument box at
the intersection of Fifth and Main Streets, and 417 feet south from the
monument box at the intersection of Fifth and Main Streets
 
Between 11:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. on school days
 
99-8-4
 
- -99



 



Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE VI.  NO PASSING ZONES.



   The following are declared to be no passing zones.



 

Street
 
Location
 
Side
 
Ord. No.
 
Passage Date


Main Street
 
From Seventh Street to the north corporation line
 
both directions
 
80-1-5
 
1-22-80



 



Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE VII.  TRUCK ROUTES.



   (A)   The following streets and roads are defined as truck routes:



 

Street
 
Location




Cleveland Street
 
From First Street to Seventh Street


Executive Parkway
 
Entire street


First Street
 
West of Main Street to Ohio Street


Fourth Street
 
West of Main Street to Ohio Street


Industrial Drive
 
Entire street


Ohio Street
 
From Industrial Drive to Seventh Street


Seventh Street
 
West of Main Street to Ohio Street


All State Highways
 




 



   (B)   Whoever violates this schedule is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $100 for each
offense.



(Ord. 01-10-01, passed  - -01)



CHAPTER 78:  PARKING SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   Parking prohibited at all times



   II.   Parking prohibited at certain times



   III.   Handicapped parking



SCHEDULE I.  PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES.




   (A)   Parking is prohibited at all times in the following locations.




 

Street
 
Side
 
Location
 
Ord. No.
 
Date Passed




Cleveland Street
 
east
 
From its intersection with Fourth Street for a distance of approximately 200
feet to the Frank Stukenborg property
 
76-
 
- -76


Cleveland Street
 
west
 
From the north side of Fifth Street to the Minster Machine Company's north
property line
 
1967-3
 
2-7-67


Eagle Drive
 
both
 
From State Route 66 (Main Street) to Independence Avenue
 
79-
 
3- -79


Executive Drive
 
east
 
Beginning 500 feet from the south right-of-way line of First Street and
extending a distance south of 51 feet
 
15-09-01
 
10-20-15


First Street
 
south
 
Within the area 560 feet east of the centerline of State Route 66 (Main
Street)
 
05-01-03
 
1-18-05


Industrial Park Drive
 
south
 
Beginning 184 feet from the west right-of-way line of Ohio Street and
extending a distance west of 77 feet
 
15-09-01
 
10-20-15


Jackson Street
 
east
 
From Fourth Street northward for a distance of 363 feet
 
74-2-3
 
4-2-74


Lincoln Drive
 
west and south
 
 
81-10-3
 
12-3-81


North Lincoln Street
 
west
 
From the south right-of-way of Fifth Street to approximately 385 feet south
(school bus loading and unloading)
 
97-8-2
 
- -97


Ohio Street
 
east
 
Beginning 203 feet from the north right-of-way line of Industrial Park Drive
and extending a distance north of 50 feet
 
15-09-01
 
10-20-15


Ohio Street
 
east and west
 
Between Third Street and Fourth Street
 
92-2-1
 
3- -92


Seventh Street
 
north
 
Westward from Main Street to the east line of the Canal Road
 
74-2-3
 
4-2-74


Seventh Street
 
south
 
Westward from the centerline of Main Street for a distance of 140 feet
 
74-2-3
 
4-2-74


Seventh Street
 
south
 
From Cleveland Street eastward to the west edge of Canal Road
 
74-2-3
 
4-2-74


South Main Street
 
east
 
Between the south corporation line and the south line of First Street
 
88-7-3
 
7-25-88


South Main Street
 
west
 
No truck parking for a distance of 200 feet northward from the centerline of
First Street (“truck” shall not include pick-up trucks and vans)
 
89-
 
- -89


Southgate Drive
 
both
 
 
93-7-1
 
- -93


State Route 66
 
 
North of Seventh Street to the north corporation line of the village
 
76-9-
 
9-7-76




 



   (B)   Whoever violates this schedule is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100.



SCHEDULE II.  PARKING PROHIBITED AT CERTAIN TIMES.




   (A)   Parking is prohibited at the times indicated in the following
locations.




 

Street
 
Location
 
Time Prohibited
 
Ord. No.
 
Date Passed




Cleveland Street
 
East side, within the area 440 feet south of the centerline of Fifth Street
 
Monday through Friday, inclusive
 

93-8-2

 

8-13-93



Cleveland Street
 
East side, between Fifth Street and the north edge of the Minster Machine
Company parking lot
 
Between 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
 

1962-

 

5-9-62



Cleveland Street
 
West side, between the first and second driveways south of Fourth Street
 
From 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
 

85-10-1

 

10-1-85



East Fourth Street
 
North side, beginning 20 feet from the east right-of-way line of the
north-south alley between Hanover Street and Lincoln Street and extending a
distance east of 90 feet
 
15 minute parking zone between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
 

09-02-04; 17-07-05

 

3-3-09; 8-1-17



Fifth Street
 
Between the intersection of Hanover Street eastward to the alley
 
15 minute parking
 

03-8-1

 

8-26-03



Lincoln Street
 
West side, between Fifth Street and Lincoln Drive
 
During school hours
 

1961-2

 

9-5-61



South Main Street
 
West side, beginning 290 feet from the south right-of-way line of Third
Street and extending a distance south of 40 feet
 
Between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
 

11-03-01

 

4-5-11



West Fourth Street
 
North side, beginning 240 feet from the west right-of-way line of Hanover
Street between and extending a distance west of 20 feet
 
Two hour parking zone between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
 

12-07-01

 

8-7-12



 
 
 
 
 
 


 






 



   (B)   Whoever violates this schedule is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100.



SCHEDULE III.  HANDICAPPED PARKING.



   It is unlawful to park any vehicle in the following areas as provided
by § 76.05.



 


Street

 

Side

 

Location

 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed



North Hanover Street
 

east

 
Beginning 187 feet from the north right-of-way line of Fifth Street and
ending 214 feet north of the right-of-way line of Fifth Street
 

05-06-05

 

7-19-05



North Hanover Street
 

east

 
Beginning 126 feet from the north right-of-way line of Melcher Street and
will end at a location 146 feet north of the right-of-way of Melcher Street
 

09-02-03

 

3-3-09




 



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



      Chapter




         90.   INTOXICATING LIQUORS





         91.   JUNK MOTOR VEHICLES





         92.   NUISANCES





         93.   PARKS AND RECREATION





         94.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS





         95.   ANIMALS





         96.   EXTERIOR MAINTENANCE CODE





         97.   RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT





         98.   SMALL CELL TECHNOLOGY IN THE RIGHT-OF-WAY




CHAPTER 90:  INTOXICATING LIQUORS



Section



   90.01   Definitions



   90.02   Exemptions from chapter



   90.03   Restrictions applicable to sale of beer and intoxicating
liquor for consumption on the premises



   90.04   Restrictions on sale of beer and liquor



   90.05   Permit required; activities prohibited without permit



   90.06   Illegal transportation prohibited



   90.07   Open container prohibited; exception



   90.08   Underage person shall not purchase intoxicating liquor or
beer



   90.09   Prohibitions; minors under 18 years; low-alcohol beverages



   90.10   Alcohol vaporizing devices prohibited



   90.11   Misrepresentation to obtain alcoholic beverage for a minor
prohibited



   90.12   Misrepresentation by a minor under 21 years



   90.13   Sale to underage persons prohibited



   90.14   Posting of card



   90.15   Good faith acceptances of spurious identification



   90.16   Consumption in motor vehicle prohibited



   90.17   Hours of sale or consumption



   90.18   Obstructing search of premises prohibited



   90.19   Illegal possession of intoxicating liquor prohibited



   90.20   Sale or possession of diluted liquor and refilled containers
prohibited



   90.21   Keeping place where beer or intoxicating liquors are sold in
violation of law



   90.22   Intoxicating liquors shall not be sold in brothels



   90.23   Use of intoxicating liquor in a public dance hall
prohibited; exceptions



   90.24   Poisonously adulterated liquors



   90.25   Tavern keeper permitting rioting or drunkenness



   90.26   Notice of action to prohibit liquor business



   90.27   Procedure when injunction violated



   90.28   Liquor transaction scans



   90.29   Affirmative defenses



 



   90.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Driving while intoxicated or drugged, implied consent, see §§ 73.01
and 73.011



Statutory reference:



   Liquor permits, see R.C. Chapter 4303



   Local option elections, see R.C. §§ 4301.32 et seq.



§ 90.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALCOHOL.  Ethyl alcohol, whether rectified or diluted with water or
not, whatever its origin may be, and includes synthetic ethyl alcohol.  The
term does not include denatured alcohol and wood alcohol.



   AT RETAIL.  For use or consumption by the purchaser and not for resale.



   BEER. 



      (1)   Includes all beverages brewed or fermented wholly or in
part from malt products and containing 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume.



      (2)   Beer, regardless of the percent of alcohol by volume, is
not intoxicating liquor for purposes of this code, the Ohio Revised Code, or
any rules adopted under it.



   CIDER.  All liquids that are fit to use for beverage purposes that
contain 0.5% of alcohol by volume, but not more than 6% of alcohol by weight
that are made through the normal alcoholic fermentation of the juice of
sound, ripe apples, including, without limitation, flavored, sparkling, or
carbonated cider and cider made from pure condensed apple must.



   CLUB.  A corporation or association of individuals organized in good
faith for social, recreational, benevolent, charitable, fraternal, political,
patriotic, or athletic purposes, which is the owner, lessor, or occupant of a
permanent building or part of a permanent building operated solely for such
purposes, membership in which entails the prepayment of regular dues, and
includes the place so operated.



   COMMUNITY FACILITY.  Means either of the following:



      (1)   Any convention, sports or entertainment facility or
complex, or any combination of these, that is used by or accessible to the
general public and that is owned or operated in whole or in part by the
state, a state agency, or a political subdivision of the state or that is
leased from, or located on property owned by or leased from, the state, a
state agency, a political subdivision of the state, or a convention
facilities authority created pursuant to R.C. § 351.02;



      (2)   An area designated as a community entertainment district
pursuant to R.C. § 4301.80.



   CONTROLLED ACCESS ALCOHOL AND BEVERAGE CABINET.  A closed container,
either refrigerated, in whole or in part, or nonrefrigerated, access to the
interior of which is restricted by means of a device that requires the use of
a key, magnetic card, or similar device and from which beer, intoxicating
liquor, other beverages, or food may be sold.



   HOTEL.  The same meaning as in R.C. § 3731.01, subject to the
exceptions mentioned in R.C. § 3731.03.



   INTOXICATING LIQUOR and LIQUOR.   All liquids and compounds, other
than beer, containing 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume which are fit to use
for beverage purposes, from whatever source and by whatever process produced,
by whatever name called, and whether they are medicated, proprietary, or
patented.  INTOXICATING LIQUOR and LIQUOR include cider and alcohol, and all
solids and confections which contain 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume.



   LOW-ALCOHOL BEVERAGE.  Any brewed or fermented malt product or any
product made from the fermented juices of grapes, fruits, or other
agricultural products that contains either no alcohol or less than 0.5% of
alcohol by volume.  The beverages described in this definition do not
include a soft drink such as root beer, birch beer, or ginger beer.



   MANUFACTURE.  All processes by which beer or intoxicating liquor is
produced, whether by distillation, rectifying, fortifying, blending,
fermentation, brewing, or in any other manner.



   MANUFACTURER.  Any person engaged in the business of manufacturing
beer or intoxicating liquor.



   MIXED BEVERAGES.   Include bottled and prepared cordials, cocktails,
highballs, and solids and confections that are obtained by mixing any type of
whiskey, neutral spirits, brandy, gin or other distilled spirits with, or
over, carbonated or plain water, pure juices from flowers and plants, and
other flavoring materials.  The completed product shall contain not less
than 0.5% of alcohol by volume and not more than 21% of alcohol by volume.



   NIGHTCLUB.  A place habitually operated for profit, where food is
served for consumption on the premises, and one or more forms of amusement
are provided or permitted for a consideration that may be in the form of a
cover charge or may be included in the price of the food and beverages, or
both, purchased by patrons.



   PERSON.  Includes firms and corporations.



   PHARMACY.  An establishment as defined in R.C. § 4729.01, that is
under the management or control of a licensed pharmacist in accordance with
R.C. § 4729.27.



   RESTAURANT.  A place located in a permanent building provided with
space and accommodations wherein, in consideration of the payment of money,
hot meals are habitually prepared, sold, and served at noon and evening, as
the principal business of the place.  The term does not include pharmacies,
confectionery stores, lunch stands, nightclubs, and filling stations.



   SALE and SELL.  The exchange, barter, gift, offer for sale, sale,
distribution, and delivery of any kind, and the transfer of title or
possession of beer and intoxicating liquor either by constructive or actual
delivery by any means or devices whatever, including the sale of beer or
intoxicating liquor by means of a controlled access alcohol and beverage
cabinet pursuant to R.C. § 4301.21.  Such terms do not include the mere
solicitation of orders for beer or intoxicating liquor from the holders of
permits issued by the Division of Liquor Control authorizing the sale of the
beer or intoxicating liquor, but no solicitor shall solicit any orders until
the solicitor has been registered with the Division pursuant to R.C. §
4303.25.



   SALES AREA OR TERRITORY. An exclusive geographic area or territory that
is assigned to a particular A or B permit holder and that either has one or
more political subdivisions as its boundaries or consists of an area of land
with readily identifiable geographic boundaries. SALES AREA OR TERRITORY does
not include, however, any particular retail location in an exclusive
geographic area or territory that had been assigned to another A or B permit
holder before April 9, 2001.



   SEALED CONTAINER.  Any container having a capacity of not more than
128 fluid ounces, the opening of which is closed to prevent the entrance of
air.



   SPIRITUOUS LIQUOR.  All intoxicating liquors containing more than 21%
of alcohol by volume.



   VEHICLE.  All means of transportation by land, by water, or by air,
and everything made use of in any way for such transportation.



   WHOLESALE DISTRIBUTOR and DISTRIBUTOR.  A person engaged in the
business of selling to retail dealers for purposes of resale.



   WINE.  All liquids fit to use for beverage purposes containing not
less than 0.5% of alcohol by volume and not more than 21% of alcohol by
volume, which is made from the fermented juices of grapes, fruits, or other
agricultural products.  Except as provided in R.C. § 4301.01(B)(3), the
term does not include cider.



(R.C. §§ 4301.01, 4301.244)



§ 90.02  EXEMPTIONS FROM CHAPTER.



   The provisions of this chapter do not prevent the following:



   (A)   The storage of intoxicating liquor in bonded warehouses,
established in accordance with the Acts of Congress and under the regulation
of the United States, located in the municipality, or the transportation of
intoxicating liquor to or from bonded warehouses of the United States
wherever located.



   (B)   A bona fide resident of this state who is the owner of a
warehouse receipt from obtaining or transporting to the resident’s
residence for the resident’s own consumption and not for resale spirituous
liquor stored in a government bonded warehouse in this state or in another
state prior to December 1933, subject to such terms as are prescribed by the
Division of Liquor Control.



   (C)   The manufacture of cider from fruit for the purpose of making
vinegar, and nonintoxicating cider and fruit juices for use and sale.



   (D)   A licensed physician or dentist from administering or
dispensing intoxicating liquor or alcohol to a patient in good faith in the
actual course of the practice of the physician’s or dentist’s profession.



   (E)   The sale of alcohol to physicians, dentists, druggists,
veterinary surgeons, manufacturers, hospitals, infirmaries, or medical or
educational institutions using the alcohol for medicinal, mechanical,
chemical or scientific purposes.



   (F)   The sale, gift, or keeping for sale by druggists and others of
any of the medicinal preparations manufactured in accordance with the
formulas prescribed by the United States Pharmacopoeia and National
Formulary, patent or proprietary preparations, and other bona fide medicinal
and technical preparations, which contain no more alcohol than is necessary
to hold the medicinal agents in solution and to preserve the same, which are
manufactured and sold as medicines and not as beverages, are unfit for use
for beverage purposes, and the sale of which does not require the payment of
a United States liquor dealer's tax.



   (G)   The manufacture and sale of tinctures or of toilet, medicinal
and antiseptic preparations and solutions not intended for internal human use
nor to be sold as beverages, and which are unfit for beverage purposes, if
upon the outside of each bottle, box, or package of which there is printed in
English, conspicuously and legibly, the quantity by volume of alcohol in the
preparation or solution.



   (H)   The manufacture and keeping for sale of the food products
known as flavoring extracts when manufactured and sold for cooking, culinary
or flavoring purposes, and which are unfit for use for beverage purposes.



   (I)   The lawful sale of wood alcohol or of ethyl alcohol for
external use when combined with other substances as to make it unfit for
internal use.



   (J)   The manufacture, sale, and transport of ethanol or ethyl
alcohol for use as fuel. As used in this division, ETHANOL has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 5733.46.



   (K)   The purchase and importation into the municipality or the
purchase at wholesale from A or B permit holders in this state of beer and
intoxicating liquor for use in manufacturing processes of nonbeverage food
products under terms prescribed by the Division, provided that the terms
prescribed by the Division shall not increase the cost of the beer or
intoxicating liquor to any person, firm or corporation purchasing and
importing it into this municipality or purchasing it from an A or B permit
holder for that use.



   (L)   Any resident of this state or any member of the armed forces
of the United States who has attained the age of 21 years from bringing into
this municipality for personal use and not for resale not more than one liter
of spirituous liquor in any 30 day period, and the same is free of any tax
consent fee when the resident or member of the armed forces physically
possesses and accompanies the spirituous liquor on returning from a foreign
country, another state, or an insular possession of the United States.



   (M)   Persons at least 21 years of age who collect ceramic
commemorative bottles containing spirituous liquor that have unbroken federal
tax stamps on them from selling or trading the bottles to other collectors.
The bottles shall originally have been purchased at retail from the Division,
legally imported under division (L) of this section, or legally imported
pursuant to a supplier registration issued by the Division. The sales shall
be for the purpose of exchanging a ceramic commemorative bottle between
private collectors and shall not be for the purpose of selling the spirituous
liquor for personal consumption. The sale or exchange authorized by this
division shall not occur on the premises of any permit holder, shall not be
made in connection with the business of any permit holder, and shall not be
made in connection with any mercantile business.



   (N)   The sale of beer or intoxicating liquor without a liquor
permit at a private residence, not more than five times per calendar year at
a residence address, at an event that has the following characteristics:



      (1)   The event is for a charitable, benevolent, or political
purpose, but shall not include any event the proceeds of which are for the
profit or gain of any individual;



      (2)   The event has in attendance not more than 50 people;



      (3)   The event shall be for a period not to exceed 12 hours;



      (4)   The sale of beer and intoxicating liquor at the event
shall not take place between 2:30 a.m. and 5:30 a.m.;



      (5)   No person under 21 years of age shall purchase or
consume beer or intoxicating liquor at the event and no beer or intoxicating
liquor shall be sold to any person under 21 years of age at the event; and



      (6)   No person at the event shall sell or furnish beer or
intoxicating liquor to an intoxicated person.



   (O)   The possession or consumption of beer or intoxicating liquor
by a person who is under 21 years of age and who is a student at an
accredited college or university, provided that both of the following apply:



      (1)   The person is required to taste and expectorate the beer
or intoxicating liquor for a culinary, food service, or hospitality course.



      (2)   The person is under the direct supervision of the
instructor of the culinary, food service, or hospitality course.



(R.C. § 4301.20)



§ 90.03  RESTRICTIONS APPLICABLE TO SALE OF BEER AND INTOXICATING LIQUOR
FOR CONSUMPTION ON THE PREMISES.



   (A)   The sale of beer or intoxicating liquor for consumption on the
premises is subject to the following restrictions, in addition to those
imposed by the rules and orders of the Division of Liquor Control:



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C.
Chapter 4301, beer or intoxicating liquor may be served to a person not
seated at a table unless there is reason to believe that the beer or
intoxicating liquor so served will be consumed by a person under 21 years of
age.



      (2)   Beer or intoxicating liquor may be served by a hotel in
the room of a bona fide guest, and may be sold by a hotel holding a D-5a
permit, or a hotel holding a D-3 or D-5 permit that otherwise meets all of
the requirements for holding a D-5a permit, by means of a controlled access
alcohol and beverage cabinet that shall be located only in the hotel room of
a registered guest.  A hotel may sell beer or intoxicating liquor as
authorized by its permit to a registered guest by means of a controlled
access alcohol and beverage cabinet in accordance with the following
requirements:



         (a)   Only a person 21 years of age or older who is a
guest registered to stay in a guestroom shall be provided a key, magnetic
card, or other similar device necessary to obtain access to the contents of a
controlled access alcohol and beverage cabinet in that guestroom.



         (b)   The hotel shall comply with R.C. § 4301.22, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, in connection with the
handling, restocking, and replenishing of the beer and intoxicating liquor in
the controlled access alcohol and beverage cabinet.



         (c)   The hotel shall replenish or restock beer and
intoxicating liquor in any controlled access alcohol and beverage cabinet
only during the hours during which the hotel may serve or sell beer and
intoxicating liquor.



         (d)   The registered guest shall verify in writing that
the guest has read and understands the language that shall be posted on the
controlled access alcohol and beverage cabinet as required by division
(A)(2)(e) of this section.



         (e)   A hotel authorized to sell beer and intoxicating
liquor pursuant to division (A)(2) of this section shall post on the
controlled access alcohol and beverage cabinet, in conspicuous language, the
following notice:



“The alcoholic beverages contained in this cabinet shall not be removed
from the premises.”



         (f)   The hotel shall maintain a record of each sale of
beer or intoxicating liquor made by the hotel by means of a controlled access
alcohol and beverage cabinet for any period in which the permit holder is
authorized to hold the permit pursuant to R.C. §§ 4303.26 and 4303.27 and
any additional period during which an applicant exercises its right to appeal
a rejection by the Division of Liquor Control to renew a permit pursuant to
R.C. § 4303.271.  The records maintained by the hotel shall comply with
both of the following:



            1.   Include the name, address, age, and signature
of each hotel guest who is provided access by the hotel to a controlled
access alcohol and beverage cabinet pursuant to division (A)(2)(a) of this
section;



            2.   Be made available during business hours to
authorized agents of the Division of Liquor Control pursuant to R.C. §
4301.10(A)(6) or to enforcement agents of the Department of Public Safety
pursuant to R.C. §§ 5502.13 to 5502.19.



         (g)   The hotel shall observe all other applicable rules
adopted by the Division of Liquor Control and the Liquor Control Commission.



      (3)   The seller shall not require the purchase of food with
the purchase of beer or intoxicating liquor; nor shall the seller of beer or
intoxicating liquor give away food of any kind in connection with the sale of
beer or intoxicating liquor, except as authorized by rule of the state Liquor
Control Commission.



      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 4301.62(C)(8),
the seller shall not permit the purchaser to remove beer or intoxicating
liquor so sold from the premises.



      (5)   A hotel authorized to sell beer and intoxicating liquor
pursuant to division (A)(2) of this section shall provide a registered guest
with the opportunity to refuse to accept a key, magnetic card, or other
similar device necessary to obtain access to the contents of a controlled
access alcohol and beverage cabinet in that guest room.  If a registered
guest refuses to accept such key, magnetic card, or other similar device, the
hotel shall not assess any charges on the registered guest for use of the
controlled access alcohol and beverage cabinet in that guest room.



(R.C. § 4301.21)



   (B)   Whoever violates division (A)(4) of this section is guilty of
a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 4301.99(C))  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.04  RESTRICTIONS ON SALE OF BEER AND LIQUOR.



   (A)   Restrictions on sales.  Sales of beer and intoxicating liquor
under all classes of permits and from liquor stores are subject to the
following restrictions, in addition to those imposed by the rules or orders
of the state Division of Liquor Control.



      (1)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or
in R.C. Chapter 4301, no beer or intoxicating liquor shall be sold to any
person under 21 years of age.



         (b)   No low-alcohol beverage shall be sold to any
person under 18 years of age.  No permit issued by the Division shall be
suspended, revoked, or cancelled because of a violation of this subdivision
(A)(1)(b).



         (c)   No intoxicating liquor shall be handled by any
person under 21 years of age, except that a person 18 years of age or older
employed by a permit holder may handle or sell beer or intoxicating liquor in
sealed containers in connection with wholesale or retail sales, and any
person 19 years of age or older employed by a permit holder may handle
intoxicating liquor in open containers when acting in the capacity of a
server in a hotel, restaurant, club, or night club, as defined in R.C. §
4301.01, or in the premises of a D-7 permit holder.  This section does not
authorize persons under 21 years of age to sell intoxicating liquor across a
bar.  Any person employed by a permit holder may handle beer or intoxicating
liquor in sealed containers in connection with manufacturing, storage,
warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading, or unloading, and may
handle beer or intoxicating liquor in open containers in connection with
cleaning tables or handling empty bottles or glasses.



      (2)   No permit holder and no agent or employee of a permit
holder shall sell or furnish beer or intoxicating liquor to an intoxicated
person.



      (3)   (a)   No sales of intoxicating liquor shall be made
after 2:30 a.m. on Sunday, except under either of the following circumstances:



            1.   Intoxicating liquor may be sold on Sunday
under authority of a permit that authorizes Sunday sale.



            2.   Spiritous liquor may be sold on Sunday by any
person awarded an agency contract under R.C. § 4301.17 if the sale of
spiritous liquor is authorized in the applicable precinct as the result of an
election on question (B)(1) or (B)(2) of R.C. § 4301.351 and if the agency
contract authorizes the sale of spiritous liquor on Sunday.



         (b)   This section does not prevent the municipality
from adopting a closing hour for the sale of intoxicating liquor earlier than
2:30 a.m. on Sunday or to provide that no intoxicating liquor may be sold
prior to that hour on Sunday.



      (4)   (a)   No holder of a permit shall give away any beer
or intoxicating liquor of any kind at any time in connection with the permit
holder's business. However, with the exception of an A-1-A permit holder that
also has been issued an A-2 or A-2f permit, an A-1-A, A-1c, or D permit
holder may provide to a paying customer not more than a total of four tasting
samples of beer, wine, or spirituous liquor, as authorized by the applicable
permit, in any twenty-four-hour period. The permit holder shall provide the
tasting samples free of charge, at the permit holder’s expense, only to a
person who is 21 years of age or older. The person shall consume the tasting
samples on the premises of the permit holder. A distributor is not
responsible for the costs of providing tasting samples authorized under
division (D) of this section.



         (b)   As used in division (A)(4) of this section:



            TASTING SAMPLE. Means one of the following, as
applicable:



               a.   An amount not to exceed two ounces of
beer;



               b.   An amount not to exceed two ounces of
wine;



               c.   An amount not to exceed a quarter ounce
of spirituous liquor.



            D PERMIT HOLDER. Means a person that has been issued
a D-1, D-2, D-2x, D-3, D-3a, D-3 x, D-4, D-5, D-5a, D-5c, D-5d, D-5e, D-5f,
D-5g, D-5h, D-5i, D-5j, D-5k, D-5l, D-5m, D-5n, D-5o, D-6, or D-7 permit.



      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, no retail
permit holder shall display or permit the display on the outside of any
licensed retail premises, on any lot of ground on which the licensed premises
are situated, or on the exterior of any building of which the licensed
premises are a part, any sign, illustration, or advertisement bearing the
name, brand name, trade name, trademark, designation, or other emblem of, or
indicating the manufacturer, producer, distributor, place of manufacture,
production, or distribution of, any beer or intoxicating liquor.  Signs,
illustrations, or advertisements bearing the name, brand name, trade name,
trademark, designation, or other emblem of or indicating the manufacturer,
producer, distributor, place of manufacture, production, or distribution of
beer or intoxicating liquor may be displayed and permitted to be displayed on
the interior or in the show windows of any licensed premises, if the
particular brand or type of product so advertised is actually available for
sale on the premises at the time of that display.  The Liquor Control
Commission shall determine by rule the size and character of those signs,
illustrations, or advertisements.



      (6)   No retail permit holder shall possess on the licensed
premises any barrel or other container from which beer is drawn, unless there
is attached to the spigot or other dispensing apparatus the name of the
manufacturer of the product contained in the barrel or other container,
provided that if the beer is served at a bar, the manufacturer's name or
brand shall appear in full view of the purchaser.  The Commission shall
regulate the size and character of the devices provided for in this section.



      (7)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, no sale
of any gift certificate shall be permitted whereby beer or intoxicating
liquor of any kind is to be exchanged for the certificate, unless the gift
certificate can be exchanged only for food, and beer or intoxicating liquor,
for on-premises consumption and the value of the beer or intoxicating liquor
does not exceed more than 30% of the total value of the gift certificate. 
The sale of gift certificates for the purchase of beer, wine, or mixed
beverages shall be permitted for the purchase of beer, wine, or mixed
beverages for off-premises consumption.  Limitations on the use of a gift
certificate for the purchase of beer, wine, or mixed beverages for
off-premises consumption may be expressed by clearly stamping or typing on
the face of the certificate that the certificate may not be used for the
purchase of beer, wine, or mixed beverages for on-premises consumption.



(R.C. § 4301.22)



   (B)   Division (A)(1) not modified or affected.  The provisions of
R.C. §§ 4301.633  through 4301.637, or substantially equivalent municipal
ordinances, shall not be deemed to modify or affect division (A)(1) of this
section or R.C. § 4301.22(A).



(R.C. § 4301.638)



   (C)   Penalties.



      (1)   Whoever violates divisions (A)(1)(b) or (A)(3) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 4301.99(B))



      (2)   Whoever violates divisions (A)(1)(a), (A)(1)(c) or
(A)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4301.99(D), (H))  Penalty, see § 90.99



Statutory reference:



   Suspension of beer and liquor sales during emergency, see R.C. §
4301.251



§ 90.05  PERMIT REQUIRED; ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED WITHOUT PERMIT.



   (A)   Permit required.



      (1)   No person personally or by the person's clerk, agent, or
employee, shall manufacture, manufacture for sale, offer, keep, or possess
for sale, furnish or sell, or solicit the purchase or sale of any beer or
intoxicating liquor in this state, transport, or import, or cause to be
transported or imported any beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol in or into
this municipality for delivery, use or sale, unless the person has fully
complied with R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303 or is the holder of a permit issued
by the Division of Liquor Control and in force at the time.



      (2)   No manufacturer, supplier, wholesale distributor, broker
or retailer of beer or intoxicating liquor, or other person shall employ,
retain or otherwise utilize any person in this state to act as an employee,
agent, solicitor or salesperson, or act in any other representative capacity
to sell, solicit, take orders or receive offers to purchase or expressions of
interest to purchase beer or intoxicating liquor from any person, at any
location other than a liquor permit premises, except as specifically
authorized by R.C. Chapter 4301 or R.C. Chapter 4303 or rules adopted
thereunder. No function, event or party shall take place at any location
other than a liquor permit premises where any person acts in any manner to
sell, solicit, take orders or receive offers to purchase or expressions of
intent to purchase beer or intoxicating liquor to or from any person, except
as specifically authorized by R.C. Chapter 4301 or R.C. Chapter 4303 or rules
adopted thereunder.



(R.C. § 4303.25)



   (B)   Activities prohibited without permit.



      (1)   No person, personally or by the person's clerk, agent,
or employee, who is not the holder of an A permit issued by the Division of
Liquor Control, in force at the time, and authorizing the manufacture of beer
or intoxicating liquor, or who is not an agent or employee of the Department
authorized to manufacture beer or intoxicating liquor, shall manufacture any
beer or intoxicating liquor for sale, or shall manufacture spirituous liquor.



      (2)   No person, personally or by the person's clerk, agent,
or employee, who is not the holder of an A, B, C, D, E, F, G, I, or S permit
issued by the Department, in force at the time, and authorizing the sale of
beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol, or who is not an agent or employee of
the Department or the Tax Commissioner authorized to sell beer, intoxicating
liquor, or alcohol, shall sell, keep, or possess beer, intoxicating liquor,
or alcohol for sale to any persons other than those authorized by this
chapter and R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303 to purchase any beer or intoxicating
liquor, or sell any alcohol at retail.  This division does not apply to or
affect the sale or possession for sale of any low-alcohol beverage.



      (3)   No person, personally or by the person's clerk, agent,
or employee, who is the holder of a permit issued by the Department, shall
sell, keep, or possess for sale any intoxicating liquor not purchased from
the Department or from the holder of a permit issued by the Department
authorizing the sale of intoxicating liquor, unless the same has been
purchased with the special consent of the Department.  The Department shall
revoke the permit of any person convicted of a violation of this division.



(R.C. § 4301.58)



   (C)   Penalty.  Whoever violates division (B) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 4301.99(C))  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.06  ILLEGAL TRANSPORTATION PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person, who is not the holder of an H permit shall
transport beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol in this municipality.  This
section does not apply to the transportation and delivery of beer, alcohol,
or intoxicating liquor purchased or to be purchased from the holder of a
permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control, in force at the time, and
authorizing the sale and delivery of the beer, alcohol, or intoxicating
liquor so transported, or to the transportation and delivery of beer,
intoxicating liquor, or alcohol purchased from the Department or the Tax
Commissioner, or purchased by the holder of an A or B permit outside this
state, and transported within this municipality by them in their own trucks
for the purpose of sale under their permits.



(R.C. § 4301.60)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.



(R.C. § 4301.99(C))



§ 90.07  OPEN CONTAINER PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.



   (A)   As used in this section:



      CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINE. Means a vehicle registered under R.C. §
4503.24.



      HIGHWAY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.



      MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.



      STREET. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.



   (B)   No person shall have in the person’s possession an opened
container of beer or intoxicating liquor in any of the following
circumstances:



      (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(1)(e) of this
section, in a state liquor store;



      (2)   Except as provided in division (C) of this section, on
the premises of the holder of any permit issued by the Division of Liquor
Control;



      (3)   In any other public place;



      (4)   Except as provided in division (D) or (E) of this
section, while operating or being a passenger in or on a motor vehicle on any
street, highway, or other public or private property open to the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking;



      (5)   Except as provided in division (D) or (E) of this
section, while being in or on a stationary motor vehicle on any street,
highway, or other public or private property open to the public for purposes
of vehicular travel or parking.



   (C)   (1)   A person may have in the person's possession an
opened container of any of the following:



         (a)   Beer or intoxicating liquor that has been lawfully
purchased for consumption on the premises where bought from the holder of an
A-1-A, A-2, A-2f, A-3a, D-1, D-2, D-3, D-3a, D-4, D-4a, D-5, D-5a, D-5b,
D-5c, D-5d, D-5e, D-5f, D-5g, D-5h, D-5i, D-5j, D-5k, D-5l, D-5m, D-5n, D-5o,
D-7, D-8, E, F, F-2, F-5, F-7, or F-8 permit;



         (b)   Beer, wine, or mixed beverages served for
consumption on the premises by the holder of an F-3 permit, wine served as a
tasting sample by an A-2 permit holder or S permit holder for consumption on
the premises of a farmers market for which an F-10 permit has been issued, or
wine served for consumption on the premises by the holder of an F-4 or F-6
permit;



         (c)   Beer or intoxicating liquor consumed on the
premises of a convention facility as provided in R.C. § 4303.201;



         (d)   Beer or intoxicating liquor to be consumed during
tastings and samplings approved by rule of the Liquor Control Commission;



         (e)   Spiritous liquor to be consumed for purposes of a
tasting sample, as defined in R.C. § 4301.171.



      (2)   A person may have in the person's possession on an F
liquor permit premises an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor
that was not purchased from the holder of the F permit if the premises for
which the F permit is issued is a music festival and the holder of the F
permit grants permission for that possession on the premises during the
period for which the F permit is issued.  As used in this division (C)(2),
MUSIC FESTIVAL means a series of outdoor live musical performances extending
for a period of at least three consecutive days and located on an area of
land of at least 40 acres.



      (3)   (a)   A person may have in the person’s possession
on a D-2 liquor permit premises an opened or unopened container of wine that
was not purchased from the holder of the D-2 permit if the premises for which
the D-2 permit is issued is an outdoor performing arts center, the person is
attending an orchestral performance, and the holder of the D-2 permit grants
permission for the possession and consumption of wine in certain
predesignated areas of the premises during the period for which the D-2
permit is issued.



         (b)   As used in division (C)(3)(a) of this section:



            ORCHESTRAL PERFORMANCE means a concert comprised of a
group of not fewer than 40 musicians playing various musical instruments.



            OUTDOOR PERFORMING ARTS CENTER means an outdoor
performing arts center that is located on not less than 150 acres of land and
that is open for performances from the first day of April to the last day of
October of each year.



      (4)   A person may have in the person’s possession an opened
or unopened container of beer or intoxicating liquor at an outdoor location
at which the person is attending an orchestral performance as defined in
division (C)(3)(b) of this section if the person with supervision and control
over the performance grants permission for the possession and consumption of
beer or intoxicating liquor in certain predesignated areas of that outdoor
location.



      (5)   (a)   A person may have in the person’s possession
on an F-9 liquor permit premises an opened or unopened container of beer or
intoxicating liquor that was not purchased from the holder of the F-9 permit
if the person is attending either of the following:



            1.   An orchestral performance and the F-9 permit
holder grants permission for the possession and consumption of beer or
intoxicating liquor in certain predesignated areas of the premises during the
period for which the F-9 permit is issued;



            2.   An outdoor performing arts event or
orchestral performance that is free of charge and the F-9 permit holder
annually hosts not less than 25 other events or performances that are free of
charge on the permit premises.



         (b)   As used in division (C)(5) of this section,
ORCHESTRAL PERFORMANCE has the same meaning as in division (C)(3)(b) of this
section.



      (6)   (a)   A person may have in the person’s possession
on the property of an outdoor motorsports facility an opened or unopened
container of beer or intoxicating liquor that was not purchased from the
owner of the facility if both of the following apply:



            1.   The person is attending a racing event at the
facility; and



            2.   The owner of the facility grants permission
for the possession and consumption of beer or intoxicating liquor on the
property of the facility.



         (b)   As used in division (C)(6)(a) of this section:



            OUTDOOR MOTORSPORTS FACILITY. An outdoor racetrack to
which all of the following apply:



               a.   It is 2.4 miles or more in length.



               b.   It is located on 200 acres or more of
land.



               c.   The primary business of the owner of
the facility is the hosting and promoting of racing events.



               d.   The holder of a D-1, D-2, or D-3 permit
is located on the property of the facility.



            RACING EVENT.A motor vehicle racing event sanctioned
by one or more motor racing sanctioning organizations.



      (7)   (a)   A person may have in the person's possession an
opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor at an outdoor location within
an outdoor refreshment area created under R.C. § 4301.82 if the opened
container of beer or intoxicating liquor was purchased from an A-1, A-1-A,
A-1c, A-2, A-2f, D class, or F class permit holder to which both of the
following apply:



            1.   The permit holder’s premises is located
within the outdoor refreshment area.



            2.   The permit held by the permit holder has an
outdoor refreshment area designation.



         (b)   Division (C)(7) of this section does not authorize
a person to do either of the following:



            1.   Enter the premises of an establishment within
an outdoor refreshment area while possessing an opened container of beer or
intoxicating liquor acquired elsewhere;



            2.   Possess an opened container of beer or
intoxicating liquor while being in or on a motor vehicle within an outdoor
refreshment area, unless the motor vehicle is stationary and is not being
operated in a lane of vehicular travel or unless the possession is otherwise
authorized under division (D) or (E) of this section.



         (c)   As used in division (C)(7) of this section, "D
class permit holder" does not include a D-6 or D-8 permit holder.



      (8)   (a)   A person may have in the person’s possession
on the property of a market, within a defined F-8 permit premises, an opened
container of beer or intoxicating liquor that was purchased from a D permit
premises that is located immediately adjacent to the market if both of the
following apply:



            1.   The market grants permission for the
possession and consumption of beer and intoxicating liquor within the defined
F-8 permit premises;



            2.   The market is hosting an event pursuant to an
F-8 permit and the market has notified the division of liquor control about
the event in accordance with R.C. § 4303.208(A)(3).



         (b)   As used in division (C)(8) of this section, MARKET
means a market, for which an F-8 permit is held, that has been in operation
since 1860.



   (D)   This section does not apply to a person who pays all or a
portion of the fee imposed for use of a chauffeured limousine pursuant to a
prearranged contract or the guest of the person, when all of the following
apply:



      (1)   The person or guest is a passenger in the limousine.



      (2)   The person or guest is located in the limousine, but is
not occupying a seat in the front compartment of the limousine where the
operator of the limousine is located.



      (3)   The limousine is located on any street, highway, or
other public or private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking.



   (E)   An opened bottle of wine that was purchased from the holder of
a permit that authorizes the sale of wine for consumption on the premises
where sold is not an opened container for the purposes of this section if
both of the following apply:



      (1)   The opened bottle of wine is securely resealed by the
permit holder or an employee of the permit holder before the bottle is
removed from the premises. The bottle shall be secured in such a manner that
it is visibly apparent if the bottle has been subsequently opened or tampered
with.



      (2)   The opened bottle of wine that is resealed in accordance
with division (E)(1) of this section is stored in the trunk of a motor
vehicle or, if the motor vehicle does not have a trunk, behind the last
upright seat or in an area not normally occupied by the driver or passengers
and not easily accessible by the driver.



   (F)   (1)   Except if an ordinance or resolution is enacted or
adopted under division (F)(2) of this section, this section does not apply to
a person who, pursuant to a prearranged contract, is a passenger riding on a
commercial quadricycle when all of the following apply:



         (a)   The person is not occupying a seat in the front of
the commercial quadricycle where the operator is steering or braking.



         (b)   The commercial quadricycle is being operated on a
street, highway, or other public or private property open to the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking.



         (c)   The person has in their possession on the
commercial quadricycle an opened container of beer or wine.



         (d)   The person has in their possession on the
commercial quadricycle not more than either 36 ounces of beer or 18 ounces of
wine.



      (2)   The Legislative Authority may enact an ordinance or
adopt a resolution, as applicable, that prohibits a passenger riding on a
commercial quadricycle from possessing an opened container of beer or wine.



      (3)   As used in this section, COMMERCIAL QUADRICYCLE means a
vehicle that has fully-operative pedals for propulsion entirely by human
power and that meets all of the following requirements:



         (a)   It has four wheels and is operated in a manner
similar to a bicycle.



         (b)   It has at least five seats for passengers.



         (c)   It is designed to be powered by the pedaling of
the operator and the passengers.



         (d)   It is used for commercial purposes.



         (e)   It is operated by the vehicle owner or an employee
of the owner.



   (G)   (1)   This section does not apply to a person that has in
the person’s possession an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor
on the premises of a market if the beer or intoxicating liquor has been
purchased from a D liquor permit holder that is located in the market.



      (2)   As used in division (G) of this section, MARKET means an
establishment that:



         (a)   Leases space in the market to individual vendors,
not less than 50% of which are retail food establishments or food service
operations licensed under R.C. Chapter 3717;



         (b)   Has an indoor sales floor area of not less than
22,000 square feet;



         (c)   Hosts a farmer’s market on each Saturday from
April through December.



(R.C. § 4301.62)



   (H)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4301.99(A)



§ 90.08  UNDERAGE PERSON SHALL NOT PURCHASE INTOXICATING LIQUOR OR BEER.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C.
Chapter 4301, no person under the age of 21 years shall purchase beer or
intoxicating liquor.



(R.C. § 4301.63)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $25
nor more than $100.  The court imposing a fine for a violation of this
section may order that the fine be paid by the performance of public work at
a reasonable hour rate established by the court.  The court shall designate
the time within which the public work shall be completed.



(R.C. § 4301.99(E))



§ 90.09  PROHIBITIONS; MINORS UNDER 18 YEARS; LOW-ALCOHOL BEVERAGES.



   (A)   As used in this section, UNDERAGEPERSON means a person under
18 years of age.



   (B)   No underage person shall purchase any low-alcohol beverage.



   (C)   No underage person shall order, pay for, share the cost of, or
attempt to purchase any low- alcohol beverage.



   (D)   No person shall knowingly furnish any false information as to
the name, age, or other identification of any underage person for the purpose
of obtaining or with the intent to obtain any low- alcohol beverage for an
underage person, by purchase or as a gift.



   (E)   No underage person shall knowingly show or give false
information concerning his or her name, age, or other identification for the
purpose of purchasing or otherwise obtaining any low-alcohol beverage in any
place in this municipality.



   (F)   No person shall sell or furnish any low-alcohol beverage to,
or buy any low-alcohol beverage for, an underage person, unless given by a
physician in the regular line of his or her practice or given for established
religious purposes, or unless the underage person is accompanied by a parent,
spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian.



   (G)   (1)   No person who is the owner or occupant of any public
or private place shall knowingly allow any underage person to remain in or on
the place while possessing or consuming any low-alcohol beverage, unless the
low-alcohol beverage is given to the person possessing or consuming it by
that person's parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal
guardian, and the parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal
guardian is present when the person possesses or consumes the low-alcohol
beverage.



      (2)   An owner of a public or private place is not liable for
acts or omissions in violation of division (G)(1) that are committed by a
lessee of that place, unless the owner authorizes or acquiesces in the
lessee's acts or omissions.



   (H)   No permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control shall be
suspended, revoked, or cancelled because of a violation of either division
(F) or (G).



   (I)   No underage person shall knowingly possess or consume any
low-alcohol beverage in any public or private place, unless he or she is
accompanied by a parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal
guardian, or unless the low-alcohol beverage is given by a physician in the
regular line of his or her practice or given for established religious
purposes.



   (J)   No parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal
guardian of an underage person shall knowingly permit the underage person to
violate this section.



(R.C. § 4301.631)



   (K)   (1)   Whoever violates any provision of this section for
which no other penalty is provided is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.



(R.C. § 4301.99(B))



      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section shall be
fined not less than $25 nor more than $100.  The court imposing a fine for a
violation of division (B) of this section may order that the fine be paid by
the performance of public work at a reasonable hour rate established by the
court.  The court shall designate the time within which the public work
shall be completed.



(R.C. § 4301.99(E))  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.10  ALCOHOL VAPORIZING DEVICES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   As used in this section, ALCOHOL VAPORIZING DEVICE means a
machine or other device that mixes beer or intoxicating liquor with pure
oxygen or any other gas to produce a vaporized product for the purpose of
consumption by inhalation.



   (B)   No person shall sell or offer for sale an alcohol vaporizing
device.



   (C)   No person shall purchase or use an alcohol vaporizing device.



(R.C. § 4301.65)



   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is
guilty of misdemeanor of the third degree. For a second or subsequent
violation occurring within a period of five consecutive years after the first
violation, a person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 4301.99(J))



      (2)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty
of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4301.99(A))



§ 90.11  MISREPRESENTATION TO OBTAIN ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE FOR A MINOR
PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C.
Chapter 4301, no person shall knowingly furnish any false information as to
the name, age, or other identification of any person under 21 years of age,
for the purpose of obtaining, or with the intent to obtain, beer or
intoxicating liquor for a person under 21 years of age, by purchase, or as a
gift.



(R.C. § 4301.633)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.



(R.C. § 4301.99(C))



§ 90.12  MISREPRESENTATION BY A MINOR UNDER 21 YEARS.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C.
Chapter 4301, no person under the age of 21 years shall knowingly show or
give false information concerning his or her name, age, or other
identification for the purpose of purchasing or otherwise obtaining beer or
intoxicating liquor in any place in this municipality where beer or
intoxicating liquor is sold under a permit issued by the Division of Liquor
Control, or sold by the Division of Liquor Control.



(R.C. § 4301.634)



   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If, in committing a first
violation of division (A), the offender presented to the permit holder or his
or her employee or agent a false, fictitious, or altered identification card,
a false or fictitious driver's license purportedly issued by any state, or a
driver's license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than
$250 and not more than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment
of not more than six months.



      (2)   On a second violation in which, for the second time, the
offender presented to the permit holder or his or her employee or agent a
false, fictitious, or altered identification card, a false or fictitious
driver's license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver's license
issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than $500 nor
more than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more
than six months.  The court also may suspend the offender's driver's or
commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operation privilege or
deny the offender the opportunity to be issued a driver's or commercial
driver's license for a period not exceeding 60 days.



      (3)   On a third or subsequent violation in which, for the
third or subsequent time, the offender presented to the permit holder or his
or her employee or agent a false, fictitious, or altered identification card,
a false or fictitious driver’s license purportedly issued by any state, or
a driver’s license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less
than $500 nor more than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of
imprisonment of not more than six months. Except as provided in this
division, the court also may impose a class six suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or
nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. §
4510.02(A)(6), and the court may order that the suspension or denial remain
in effect until the offender attains the age of 21 years. The court, in lieu
of suspending the offender’s temporary instruction permit, probationary
driver’s license, or driver’s license, instead may order the offender to
perform a determinate number of hours of community service, with the court
determining the actual number of hours and the nature of the community
service the offender shall perform.



(R.C. § 4301.99(F))



§ 90.13  SALE TO UNDERAGE PERSONS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C.
Chapter 4301, no person shall sell beer or intoxicating liquor to an underage
person, shall buy beer or intoxicating liquor for an underage person, or
shall furnish it to an underage person unless given by a physician in the
regular line of the physician's practice or given for established religious
purposes or unless the underage person is supervised by a parent, spouse who
is not an underage person, or legal guardian. In proceedings before the
Liquor Control Commission, no permit holder, or no employee or agent of a
permit holder, charged with a violation of this division shall be charged,
for the same offense, with a violation of R.C. § 4301.22(A)(1) or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



   (B)   No person who is the owner or occupant of any public or
private place shall knowingly allow any underage person to remain in or on
the place while possessing or consuming beer or intoxicating liquor, unless
the intoxicating liquor or beer is given to the person possessing or
consuming it by that person's parent, spouse who is not an underage person,
or legal guardian and the parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or
legal guardian is present at the time of the person's possession or
consumption of the beer or intoxicating liquor. An owner of a public or
private place is not liable for acts or omissions in violation of this
division that are committed by a lessee of that place, unless the owner
authorizes or acquiesces in the lessee's acts or omissions.



   (C)   No person shall engage or use accommodations at a hotel, inn,
cabin, campground, or restaurant when the person knows or has reason to know
either of the following:



      (1)   That beer or intoxicating liquor will be consumed by an
underage person on the premises of the accommodations that the person engages
or uses, unless the person engaging or using the accommodations is the spouse
of the underage person and who is not an underage person, or is the parent or
legal guardian of all of the underage persons, who consume beer or
intoxicating liquor on the premises and that person is on the premises at all
times when beer or intoxicating liquor is being consumed by an underage
person.



      (2)   That a drug of abuse will be consumed on the premises of
the accommodations by any person, except a person who obtained the drug of
abuse pursuant to a prescription issued by a licensed health professionals
authorized to prescribe drugs and has the drug of abuse in the original
container in which it was dispensed to the person.



   (D)   (1)   No person is required to permit the engagement of
accommodations at any hotel, inn, cabin, or campground by an underage person
or for an underage person, if the person engaging the accommodations knows or
has reason to know that the underage person is intoxicated, or that the
underage person possesses any beer or intoxicating liquor and is not
supervised by a parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal
guardian who is or will be present at all times when the beer or intoxicating
liquor is being consumed by the underage person.



      (2)   No underage person shall knowingly engage or attempt to
engage accommodations at any hotel, inn, cabin, or campground by presenting
identification that falsely indicates that the underage person is 21 years of
age or older for the purpose of violating this section.



   (E)   (1)   No underage person shall knowingly order, pay for,
share the cost of, attempt to purchase, possess, or consume any beer or
intoxicating liquor in any public or private place.  No underage person
shall knowingly be under the influence of any beer or intoxicating liquor in
any public place.  The prohibitions set forth in this division against an
underage person knowingly possessing, consuming, or being under the influence
of any beer or intoxicating liquor shall not apply if the underage person is
supervised by a parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal
guardian, or the beer or intoxicating liquor is given by a physician in the
regular line of the physician's practice or given for established religious
purposes.



      (2)   (a)   If a person is charged with violating division
(E)(1) of this section in a complaint filed under R.C. § 2151.27, the court
may order the child into a diversion program specified by the court and hold
the complaint in abeyance pending successful completion of the diversion
program. A child is ineligible to enter into a diversion program under this
division if the child previously has been diverted pursuant to this division.
If the child completes the diversion program to the satisfaction of the
court, the court shall dismiss the complaint and order the child’s record
in the case sealed under R.C. §§ 2151.356 through 2151.358. If the child
fails to satisfactorily complete the diversion program, the court shall
proceed with the complaint.



         (b)   If a person is charged in a criminal complaint
with violating division (E)(1) of this section, R.C. § 2935.36 shall apply
to the offense, except that a person is ineligible for diversion under that
section if the person previously has been diverted pursuant to divisions
(E)(2)(a) or (E)(2)(b) of this section.  If the person completes the
diversion program to the satisfaction of the court, the court shall dismiss
the complaint and order the record in the case sealed under R.C. §
2953.52.  If the person fails to satisfactorily complete the diversion
program, the court shall proceed with the complaint.



   (F)   No parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal
guardian of a minor shall knowingly permit the minor to violate this section
or R.C. § 4301.63, 4301.633, or 4301.634, or any substantially equivalent
equivalent ordinance.



   (G)   The operator of any hotel, inn, cabin, or campground shall
make the provisions of this section available in writing to any person
engaging or using accommodations at the hotel, inn, cabin, or campground.



   (H)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



   DRUG OF ABUSE.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.011.



   HOTEL.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3731.01.



   LICENSED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL AUTHORIZED TO PRESCRIBE DRUGS and
PRESCRIPTION.  Have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.



   MINOR.  A person under the age of 18 years.



   UNDERAGE PERSON.  A person under the age of 21 years.



(R.C. § 4301.69)



   (I)   The provisions of R.C. §§ 4301.633 through 4301.637, or
substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, shall not be deemed to modify
or affect divisions (A) through (H) of this section or R.C. § 4301.69.



(R.C. § 4301.638)



   (J)   (1)   Except as provided in division (J)(2) of this
section, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.  If an offender who violates division (E)(1) of this section
was under the age of 18 years at the time of the offense and the offense
occurred while the offender was the operator of or a passenger in a motor
vehicle, the court, in addition to any other penalties it imposes upon the
offender, shall suspend the offender's temporary instruction permit or
probationary driver's license for a period of six months.  If the offender
is 15 years and 6 months of age or older and has not been issued a temporary
instruction permit or probationary driver's license, the offender shall not
be eligible to be issued such a license or permit for a period of six
months.  If the offender has not attained the age of 15 years and 6 months,
the offender shall not be eligible to be issued a temporary instruction
permit until the offender attains the age of 16 years.



(R.C. § 4301.99(C))



      (2)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor, shall be fined not less than $500 nor more than $1000, and
in addition to the fine, may be imprisoned for a definite term of not more
than six months.



(R.C. § 4301.99(I))



Statutory reference:



   Changes to law if federal uniform drinking age repealed or declared
unconstitutional, see R.C. § 4301.691



§ 90.14  POSTING OF CARD.



   (A)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 4301.691,
every place in this municipality where beer, intoxicating liquor, or any
low-alcohol beverage is sold for beverage purposes shall display at all
times, in a prominent place on the premises thereof, a printed card, which
shall be furnished by the Division of Liquor Control and which shall read
substantially as follows:



   WARNING TO PERSONS UNDER AGE



   If you are under the age of 21



      Under the statutes of the state of Ohio, if you order, pay for,
share the cost of, or attempt to purchase, or possess or consume beer or
intoxicating liquor in any public place, or furnish false information as to
name, age, or other identification, you are subject to a fine of up to
$1,000, or imprisonment up to 6 months, or both.



   If you are under the age of 18



      Under the statutes of the state of Ohio, if you order, pay for,
share the cost of, or attempt to purchase, or posses or consume, any type of
beer or wine that contains either no alcohol or less than one-half of one per
cent of alcohol by volume in any public place, or furnish false information
as to the name, age, or other identification, you are subject to a fine of up
to $250 or to imprisonment up to 30 days, or both.



      (2)   No person shall be subject to any criminal prosecution
or any proceedings before the Department or the Liquor Control Commission for
failing to display this card.  No permit issued by the Department shall be
suspended, revoked, or canceled because of the failure of the permit holder
to display this card.



   (B)   (1)   Every place in this municipality for which a D permit
has been issued under R.C. Chapter 4303 shall be issued a printed card by the
Division of Liquor Control that shall read substantially as follows:



   WARNING



   If you are carrying a firearm



      Under the statutes of Ohio, if you possess a firearm in any room
in which liquor is being dispensed in premises for which a D permit has been
issued under Chapter 4303 of the Revised Code, you may be guilty of a felony
and may be subjected to a prison term of up to one year.



      (2)   No person shall be subject to any criminal prosecution
or any proceedings before the Division of Liquor Control or the Liquor
Control Commission for failing to display this card.  No permit issued by
the Department shall be suspended, revoked, or canceled because of the
failure of the permit holder to display this card.



(R.C. § 4301.637)  Penalty, see § 90.99



Statutory reference:



   Carrying concealed weapon, felony, see R.C. § 2923.12



   Possessing firearm in liquor permit premises, exceptions, defenses, see
R.C. § 2923.121



§ 90.15  GOOD FAITH ACCEPTANCES OF SPURIOUS IDENTIFICATION.



   (A)   No permit holder, agent or employee of a permit holder, or any
other person may be found guilty of a violation of any section of this
chapter in which age is any element of the offense, if any court of record
finds all of the following:



      (1)   That the person buying, at the time of so doing,
exhibited to the permit holder, the agent or employee of the permit holder,
or the other person a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an
identification card as defined in R.C. § 4301.61, military identification
card issued by the United States Department of Defense, or a United States or
foreign passport, that displays a picture of the individual for whom the
license, card, or passport was issued and shows that the person buying was
then at least 21 years of age if the person was buying beer as defined in
R.C. § 4301.01 or intoxicating liquor, or that the person was then at least
18 years of age if the person was buying any low-alcohol beverage;



      (2)   That the permit holder, the agent or employee of the
permit holder, or the other person made a bona fide effort to ascertain the
true age of the person buying by checking the identification presented at the
time of the purchase to ascertain that the description on the identification
compared with the appearance of the buyer and that the identification
presented had not been altered in any way.



      (3)   That the permit holder, the agent or employee of the
permit holder, or the other person had reason to believe that the person
buying was of legal age.



   (B)   The defense provided by division (A) of this section is in
addition to the affirmative defense provided by § 90.29.



(R.C. § 4301.639(A), (C))



§ 90.16  CONSUMPTION IN MOTOR VEHICLE PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall consume any beer or intoxicating liquor in a
motor vehicle.  This section does not apply to persons described in R.C. §
4301.62(D) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



(R.C. § 4301.64)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree. If an offender who violates this section was under the age
of 18 years at the time of the offense, the court, in addition to any other
penalties it imposes upon the offender, may suspend the offender’s
temporary instruction permit, probationary driver’s license or driver’s
license for a period of not less than six months and not more than one year.
In lieu of suspending the offender’s temporary instruction permit,
probationary driver’s license, or driver’s license, the court instead may
require the offender to perform community service for a number of hours
determined by the court. If the offender is 15 years and six months of age or
older and has not been issued a temporary instruction permit or probationary
driver’s license, the offender shall not be eligible to be issued such a
license or permit for a period of six months. If the offender has not
attained the age of 15 years and six months, the offender shall not be
eligible to be issued a temporary instruction permit until the offender
attains the age of 16 years.



(R.C. § 4301.99(B))



§ 90.17  HOURS OF SALE OR CONSUMPTION.



   (A)   This section shall apply to the retail sale of beer, wine,
mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor.



   (B)   (1)   No beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor
shall be sold or delivered by an A-1, A-1C, A-2, B-1, B-2, B-4, B-5, C-1,
C-2, C-2X, D-1, D-2, D-2X, D-3 when issued without a D-3A, D-3X, D-4, D-5H,
D-5K, D-8, F, F-1, F-2, F-3, F-4, F-5, F-6, F-7, F-8, F-9, G, or I permit
holder from Monday to Saturday between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:30 a.m.
and on Sunday between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and Sunday midnight, unless
statutorily authorized otherwise.



      (2)   Consumption of beer, wine, mixed beverages, or
spirituous liquor is also prohibited during the above hours upon the premises
of the above permit holders who are authorized by their permit to sell beer,
wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor for on-premises consumption.



   (C)   (1)   No beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor
shall be sold or delivered by an A-1A, D-3 when issued with a D-3A, D-4A,
D-5, D-5A, D-5B, D-5C, D-5D, D-5E, D-5F, D-5G, D-5I, D-5J, D-5L, D-5M, D-5N,
D-5O, or D-7 permit holder from Monday to Saturday between the hours of 2:30
a.m. and 5:30 a.m. and on Sunday between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and Sunday
midnight, unless statutorily authorized otherwise.



      (2)   Consumption of beer, wine, mixed beverages, or
spirituous liquor is also prohibited during the above hours upon the premises
of the above permit holders who are authorized by their permit to sell beer,
wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor for on-premises consumption.



   (D)   Permit holders authorized to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages,
or spirituous liquor at retail who are not specifically identified in
divisions (B) or (C) above shall be subject to the provisions of division
(B), unless statutorily authorized otherwise.



   (E)   The hours on Sunday during which sales, delivery, or
consumption of alcoholic beverages may take place are established by statute,
but in no event shall they begin prior to 5:30 a.m.



(O.A.C. § 4301:1-1-49)



   (F)   No association, corporation, local unit of an association or
corporation, or D permit holder who holds an F-2 permit shall sell beer or
intoxicating liquor beyond the hours of sale allowed by the permit. This
division imposes strict liability on the holder of such permit and on any
officer, agent or employee of such permit holder.



(R.C. § 4303.202(D)(2))



   (G)   No F-8 permit holder shall sell beer or intoxicating liquor
beyond the hours of sale allowed by the permit.  This division imposes
strict liability on the holder of an F-8 permit and on any officer, agent or
employee of that permit holder.



(R.C. § 4303.208(C))



   (H)   Whoever violates divisions (F) or (G) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 4303.99(D))  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.18  OBSTRUCTING SEARCH OF PREMISES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall hinder or obstruct any agent or employee of
the Division of Liquor Control, any enforcement agent of the Department of
Public Safety or any officer of the law from making an inspection or search
of any place, other than a bona fide private residence, where beer or
intoxicating liquor is possessed, kept, sold, or given away.



(R.C. § 4301.66)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.



(R.C. § 4301.99(C))



   (C)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the
hindrance, obstruction, resistance, or interference alleged consisted of
constitutionally protected speech only.



§ 90.19  ILLEGAL POSSESSION OF INTOXICATING LIQUOR PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall have possession of any spirituous liquor, in
excess of one liter, in one or more containers, which was not purchased at
wholesale or retail from the Division of Liquor Control or otherwise lawfully
acquired pursuant to this chapter, R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303, or any other
intoxicating liquor or beer, in one or more containers, which was not
lawfully acquired pursuant to those chapters.



(R.C. § 4301.67)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 4301.99(B))



§ 90.20  SALE OR POSSESSION OF DILUTED LIQUOR AND REFILLED CONTAINERS
PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall sell, offer for sale, or possess with the
intent to sell intoxicating liquor in any original container which has been
diluted, refilled, or partly refilled.



(R.C. § 4301.68)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.



(R.C. § 4301.99(C))



§ 90.21  KEEPING PLACE WHERE BEER OR INTOXICATING LIQUORS ARE SOLD IN
VIOLATION OF LAW.



   (A)   No person shall keep a place where beer or intoxicating
liquors are sold, furnished, or given away in violation of law. The court, on
conviction for a subsequent violation of this section, shall order the place
where the beer or intoxicating liquor is sold, furnished, or given away to be
abated as a nuisance or shall order the person so convicted to give bond
payable to the state in the sum of $1,000, with sureties to the acceptance of
the court, that the person will not sell, furnish, or give away beer or
intoxicating liquor in violation of law and will pay all fines, costs, and
damages assessed against the person for that subsequent violation of this
section. The giving away of beer or intoxicating liquors, or any other device
to evade this section, constitutes unlawful selling.



   (B)   As used in this section, BEER has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 4301.01.



   (C)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any premises
for which a permit has been issued under R.C. Chapter 4303 while that permit
is in effect.



(R.C. § 4399.09)



   (D)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than
$100 nor more than $500 on a first offense and shall be fined not less than
$200 nor more than $500 on each subsequent offense.



(R.C. § 4399.99(B))



§ 90.22  INTOXICATING LIQUORS SHALL NOT BE SOLD IN BROTHELS.



   (A)   No person shall sell, exchange, or give away intoxicating
liquor in a brothel.



(R.C. § 4399.10)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than
$100 nor more than $500 and imprisoned not less than one nor more than six
months.



(R.C. § 4399.99(C))



§ 90.23  USE OF INTOXICATING LIQUOR IN A PUBLIC DANCE HALL PROHIBITED;
EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (A)(2) of
this section, no person who is the proprietor of, or who conducts, manages,
or is in charge of any public dance hall shall allow the use of any
intoxicating liquor or the presence of intoxicated persons in the public
dance hall or on the premises on which it is located.



      (2)   The prohibition against the use of any intoxicating
liquor contained in division (A)(1) of this section does not apply to
establishments that are holders of a D-1, D-2, D-3, D-4, or D-5 permit whose
principal business consists of conducting a hotel, a restaurant, a club, or a
nightclub, all as defined in R.C. § 4301.01.



(R.C. § 4399.14)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $25
nor more than $500, imprisoned not more than six months, or both.



(R.C. § 4399.99(D))



§ 90.24  POISONOUSLY ADULTERATED LIQUORS.



   (A)   No person, for the purpose of sale, shall adulterate
spirituous liquor, alcoholic liquor, or beer used or intended for drink or
medicinal or mechanical purposes, with cocculus indicus, vitriol, grains of
paradise, opium, alum, capsicum, copperas, laurel water, logwood, brazilwood,
cochineal, sugar of lead, aloes, glucose, tannic acid, or any other substance
that is poisonous or injurious to health, or with a substance not a necessary
ingredient in the manufacture of the spiritous liquor, alcoholic liquor, or
beer, or sell, offer, or keep for sale spiritous liquor, alcoholic liquor, or
beer that is so adulterated.



   (B)   In addition to the penalties provided in division (C) of this
section, a person convicted of violating this section shall pay all necessary
costs and expenses incurred in inspecting and analyzing spiritous liquor,
alcoholic liquor, or beer that is so adulterated, sold, kept, or offered for
sale.



(R.C. § 4399.15)



   (C)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $20
nor more than $100, imprisoned not less than 20 nor more than 60 days, or
both.



(R.C. § 4399.99(E))



§ 90.25  TAVERN KEEPER PERMITTING RIOTING OR DRUNKENNESS.



   (A)   No tavern keeper shall permit rioting, intoxication, or
drunkenness in or on his or her premises.



(R.C. § 4399.16)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $5
nor more than $100.



(R.C. § 4399.99(A))



§ 90.26  NOTICE OF ACTION TO PROHIBIT LIQUOR BUSINESS.



   Any party bringing an action to prohibit the operation of a business
under a liquor permit issued pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4303 shall, upon filing
the complaint in the action, notify the Division of Liquor Control of the
filing of the complaint.



(R.C. § 4303.40)



§ 90.27  PROCEDURE WHEN INJUNCTION VIOLATED.



   (A)   Any person subject to an injunction, temporary or permanent,
granted pursuant to R.C. § 3767.05(D) or (E) involving a condition described
in division (3) of the definition of “nuisance” in R.C. § 3767.01, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, shall obey the injunction.  If
the person violates the injunction, the court, or in vacation a judge
thereof, may summarily try and punish the violator.  The proceedings for
punishment for contempt shall be commenced by filing with the Clerk of the
Court from which the injunction issued, information under oath setting out
the alleged facts constituting the violation, whereupon the court shall cause
a warrant to issue under which the defendant shall be arrested.  The trial
may be had upon affidavits, or either party may demand the production and
oral examination of the witnesses.



(R.C. § 4301.74)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.



(R.C. § 4301.99(C))



§ 90.28  LIQUOR TRANSACTION SCANS.



   (A)   As used in this section and § 90.29:



   CARD HOLDER means any person who presents a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or an identification card to a permit holder, or an agent
or employee of a permit holder, for either of the purposes listed in under
divisions (1) or (2) of the definition for “transaction scan” in this
section.



   IDENTIFICATION CARD means an identification card issued under R.C. §§
4507.50 to 4507.52 or an equivalent identification card issued by another
state.



   PERMITHOLDER means the holder of a permit issued under R.C. Chapter
4303.



   TRANSACTIONSCAN means the process by which a permit holder or an agent
or employee of a permit holder checks, by means of a transaction scan device,
the validity of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an
identification card that is presented as a condition for doing either of the
following:



      (1)   Purchasing any beer, intoxicating liquor, or low-alcohol
beverage;



      (2)   Gaining admission to a premises that has been issued a
liquor permit authorizing the sale of beer or intoxicating liquor for
consumption on the premises where sold, and where admission is restricted to
persons 21 years of age or older.



   TRANSACTION SCAN DEVICE means any commercial device or combination of
devices used at a point of sale that is capable of deciphering in an
electronically readable format the information encoded on the magnetic strip
or bar code of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an
identification card.



   (B)   (1)   A permit holder or an agent or employee of a permit
holder may perform a transaction scan by means of a transaction scan device
to check the validity of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
identification card presented by a card holder for either of the purposes
listed in divisions (1) or (2) of the definition for “transaction scan”
in this section.



      (2)   If the information deciphered by the transaction scan
performed under division (B)(1) of this section fails to match the
information printed on the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
identification card presented by the card holder, or if the transaction scan
indicates that the information so printed is false or fraudulent, neither the
permit holder nor any agent or employee of the permit holder shall sell any
beer, intoxicating liquor, or low-alcohol beverage to the card holder.



      (3)   Division (B)(1) of this section does not preclude a
permit holder or an agent or employee of a permit holder from using a
transaction scan device to check the validity of a document other than a
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card, if the
document includes a bar code or magnetic strip that may be scanned by the
device, as a condition of a sale beer, intoxicating liquor, or a low-alcohol
beverage or of granting admission to a premises described in the definition
for “transaction scan” in this section.



   (C)   The Registrar of Motor Vehicles, with the approval of the
Liquor Control Commission, shall adopt, and may amend or rescind, rules in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 119 that do both of the following:



      (1)   Govern the recording and maintenance of information
described in R.C. § 4301.61(D)(1)(a) and (D)(1)(b), R.C. § 2925.57(D)(1)(a)
and (D)(1)(b), and R.C. § 2927.021(D)(1)(a) and (D)(1)(b);



      (2)   Ensure quality control in the use of transaction scan
devices under R.C. §§ 2925.57, 2925.58, 2927.021, 2927.022, 4301.61, and
4301.611.



   (D)   (1)   No permit holder or agent or employee of a permit
holder shall electronically or mechanically record or maintain any
information derived from a transaction scan, except for the following:



         (a)   The name and date of birth of the person listed on
the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card
presented by the card holder;



         (b)   The expiration date and identification number of
the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card
presented by the card holder.



      (2)   No permit holder or agent or employee of a permit holder
shall use the information that is derived from a transaction scan or that is
permitted to be recorded and maintained under division (D)(1) of this
section, except for purposes of R.C. § 4301.611, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.



      (3)   No permit holder or agent or employee of a permit holder
shall use a transaction scan device for a purpose other than a purpose listed
in divisions (1) or (2) of the definition for “transaction scan” in this
section.



      (4)   No permit holder or agent or employee of a permit holder
shall sell or otherwise disseminate the information derived from a
transaction scan to any third party, including but not limited to selling or
otherwise disseminating that information for any marketing, advertising, or
promotional activities, but a seller or agent or employee of a seller may
release that information pursuant to a court order or as specifically
authorized by R.C. § 4301.611, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, or another section of this code or the Ohio Revised Code.



   (E)   Nothing in this section or R.C. § 4301.611, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, relieves a permit holder or an
agent or employee of a permit holder of any responsibility to comply with any
other applicable local, state or federal laws or rules governing the sale of
beer, intoxicating liquor, or low-alcohol beverages.



   (F)   Whoever violates division (B)(2) or (D) of this section is
guilty of an illegal liquor transaction scan, and the court may impose upon
the offender a civil penalty of up to $1,000 for each violation.  The Clerk
of the Court shall pay each collected civil penalty to the County Treasurer
for deposit into the County Treasury.



(R.C. § 4301.61)



§ 90.29  AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES.



   (A)   A permit holder or an agent or employee of a permit holder may
not be found guilty of a charge of a violation of this chapter or any rule of
the Liquor Control Commission in which the age of the purchaser of any beer,
intoxicating liquor, or low-alcohol beverage is an element of the alleged
violation, if the permit holder, agent, or employee raises and proves as an
affirmative defense that all of the following occurred:



      (1)   A card holder attempting to purchase any beer,
intoxicating liquor, or low-alcohol beverage presented a driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or an identification card.



      (2)   A transaction scan of the driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or identification card that the card holder presented
indicated that the license or card was valid.



      (3)   The beer, intoxicating liquor, or low-alcohol beverage
was sold to the card holder in reasonable reliance upon the identification 
presented and the completed transaction scan.



   (B)   In determining whether a permit holder or an agent or employee
of a permit holder has proven the affirmative defense provided by division
(A) of this section, the Liquor Control Commission or the trier of fact in a
court of record shall consider any written policy that the permit holder has
adopted and implemented and that is intended to prevent violations of R.C.
§§ 4301.22(A)(1) or (2), 4301.63 to 4301.636, 4301.69, and 4301.691, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinances.  For purposes of division
(A)(3) of this section, the Commission or trier of fact shall consider that
reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and the completed
transaction scan may require a permit holder or an agent or employee of a
permit holder to exercise reasonable diligence to determine, and that the use
of a  transaction scan device does not excuse a permit holder or an agent or
employee of a permit holder from exercising reasonable diligence to
determine, the following:



      (1)   Whether a person to whom the permit holder or agent or
employee of a permit holder sells any beer or intoxicating liquor is 21 years
of age or older or sells low-alcohol beverage is 18 years of age or older;



      (2)   Whether the description and picture appearing on the
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented
by a card holder is that of the card holder.



   (C)   The affirmative defense provided by division (A) of this
section is in addition to the defense provided by R.C. § 4301.639, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



   (D)   In any hearing before the Liquor Control Commission and in any
criminal action in which the affirmative defense provided by division (A) of
this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a deputy registrar
who issued an identification card under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to 4507.52 shall be
permitted to submit certified copies of the records of that issuance in lieu
of the testimony of the personnel of or contractors with the Bureau of Motor
Vehicles in the hearing or action.



(R.C. § 4301.611)



§ 90.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no other
penalty has been provided is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. §§ 4301.70, 4301.99(A))



Statutory reference:



   Liquor Director to be notified of court decision regarding permit
holder, employee or agent, see R.C. § 4301.991



CHAPTER 91:  JUNK MOTOR VEHICLES



Section



   91.01   Impounding motor vehicle on private property; requirements



   91.02   Impounding abandoned motor vehicle on public property;
notice; disposition



   91.03   Disposition of vehicle ordered into storage



   91.04   Disposition of abandoned junk motor vehicles



   91.05   Abandonment of junk motor vehicle prohibited



   91.06   Junk motor vehicle; order to cover or remove; notice;
exceptions



   91.07   Prohibited placement of inoperable vehicles



§ 91.01  IMPOUNDING MOTOR VEHICLE ON PRIVATE PROPERTY; REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   (1)   The Sheriff or Chief of Police, upon complaint of any
person adversely affected, may order into storage any motor vehicle, other
than an abandoned junk motor vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4513.63, that has
been left on private residential or private agricultural property for at
least four hours without the permission of the person having the right to the
possession of the property. The Sheriff or Chief of Police, upon complaint of
a repair garage or place of storage, may order into storage any motor
vehicle, other than an abandoned junk motor vehicle, that has been left at
the garage or place of storage for a longer period than that agreed upon.
When ordering a motor vehicle into storage pursuant to this division, the
Sheriff or Chief of Police may arrange for the removal of the motor vehicle
by a towing service and shall designate a storage facility.



      (2)   A towing service towing a motor vehicle under division
(A)(1) of this section shall remove the motor vehicle in accordance with that
division. The towing service shall deliver the motor vehicle to the location
designated by the Sheriff or Chief of Police not more than two hours after
the time it is removed from the private property, unless the towing service
is unable to deliver the motor vehicle within two hours due to an
uncontrollable force, natural disaster, or other event that is not within the
power of the towing service.



      (3)   Subject to division (B) of this section, the owner of a
motor vehicle that has been removed pursuant to this division may recover the
vehicle only in accordance with division (D) of this section.



      (4)   As used in this section, PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY
means private property on which is located one or more structures that are
used as a home, residence, or sleeping place by one or more persons, if no
more than three separate households are maintained in the structure or
structures. The phrase does not include any private property on which is
located one or more structures that are used as a home, residence, or
sleeping place by two or more persons, if more than three separate households
are maintained in the structure or structures.



   (B)   (1)   If the owner or operator of a motor vehicle that has
been ordered into storage pursuant to division (A)(1) of this section arrives
after the motor vehicle has been prepared for removal, but prior to its
actual removal from the property, the towing service shall give the owner or
operator oral or written notification at the time of such arrival that the
vehicle owner or operator may pay a fee of not more than one-half of the fee
for the removal of the motor vehicle established by the Public Utilities
Commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25, in order to obtain release
of the motor vehicle. However, if the vehicle is within a municipal
corporation and the municipal corporation has established a vehicle removal
fee, the towing service shall give the owner or operator oral or written
notification that the owner or operator may pay not more than one-half of
that fee to obtain release of the motor vehicle. That fee may be paid by use
of a major credit card unless the towing service uses a mobile credit card
processor and mobile service is not available at the time of the transaction.



      (2)   Upon payment of the applicable fee, the towing service
shall give the vehicle owner or operator a receipt showing both the full
amount normally assessed and the actual amount received and shall release the
motor vehicle to the owner or operator. Upon its release, the owner or
operator immediately shall move it so that it is not on the private
residential or private agricultural property without the permission of the
person having the right to possession of the property, or is not at the
garage or place of storage without the permission of the owner, whichever is
applicable.



   (C)   (1)   The Sheriff and Chief of Police shall maintain a
record of motor vehicles that the Sheriff or Chief of Police orders into
storage pursuant to division (A)(1) of this section. The record shall include
an entry for each such motor vehicle that identifies the motor vehicle’s
license number, make, model, and color, the location from which it was
removed, the date and time of its removal, the telephone number of the person
from whom it may be recovered, and the address of the place to which it has
been taken and from which it may be recovered. The Sheriff or Chief of Police
shall provide any information in the record that pertains to a particular
motor vehicle to any person who, either in person or pursuant to a telephone
call, identifies self as the owner or operator of the motor vehicle and
requests information pertaining to its location.



      (2)   Any person who registers a complaint that is the basis
of the Sheriff’s or Police Chief’s order for the removal and storage of a
motor vehicle under division (A)(1) of this section shall provide the
identity of the law enforcement agency with which the complaint was
registered to any person who identifies self as the owner or operator of the
motor vehicle and requests information pertaining to its location.



   (D)   (1)   The owner or lienholder of a motor vehicle that is
ordered into storage pursuant to division (A)(1) of this section may reclaim
it upon both of the following:



         (a)   Payment of all applicable fees established by the
Public Utilities Commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25 or, if the
vehicle was towed within a municipal corporation that has established fees
for vehicle removal and storage, payment of all applicable fees established
by the municipal corporation.



         (b)   Presentation of proof of ownership, which may be
evidenced by a certificate of title to the motor vehicle, a certificate of
registration for the motor vehicle, or a lease agreement.



      (2)   When the owner of a vehicle towed under this section
retrieves the vehicle, the towing service or storage facility in possession
of the vehicle shall give the owner written notice that if the owner disputes
that the motor vehicle was lawfully towed, the owner may be able to file a
civil action under R.C. § 4513.611.



      (3)   Upon presentation of proof of ownership as required
under division (D)(1)(b) of this section, the owner of a motor vehicle that
is ordered into storage under division (A)(1) of this section may retrieve
any personal items from the motor vehicle without retrieving the vehicle and
without paying any fee. However, a towing service or storage facility may
charge an after-hours retrieval fee established by the Public Utilities
Commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25 if the owner retrieves the
personal items after hours, unless the towing service or storage facility
fails to provide the notice required under R.C. § 4513.69(B)(3), if
applicable. The owner of a motor vehicle shall not do either of the following:



         (a)   Retrieve any personal item that has been
determined by the Sheriff or Chief of Police, as applicable, to be necessary
to a criminal investigation;



         (b)   Retrieve any personal item from a vehicle if it
would endanger the safety of the owner, unless the owner agrees to sign a
waiver of liability.



      (4)   For purposes of division (D)(3) of this section,
“personal items” do not include any items that are attached to the motor
vehicle.



      (5)   If a motor vehicle that is ordered into storage pursuant
to division (A)(1) of this section remains unclaimed by the owner for 30
days, the procedures established by R.C. §§ 4513.61 and 4513.62 apply.



   (E)   (1)   No person shall remove, or cause the removal of, any
motor vehicle from any private residential or private agricultural property
other than in accordance with division (A)(1) of this section or R.C. §§
4513.61 to 4513.65.



      (2)   No towing service or storage facility shall fail to
comply with the requirements of this section.



   (F)   This section does not apply to any private residential or
private agricultural property that is established as a private tow-away zone
in accordance with division (H) of this section or R.C. § 4513.601.



   (G)   Whoever violates division (E) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.60)



   (H)   Private tow-away zones.



      (1)   The owner of a private property may establish a private
tow-away zone, but may do so only if all of the following conditions are
satisfied:



         (a)   The owner of the private property posts on the
property a sign, that is at least 18 inches by 24 inches in size, that is
visible from all entrances to the property, and that includes all of the
following information:



            1.   A statement that the property is a tow-away
zone;



            2.   A description of persons authorized to park
on the property. If the property is a residential property, the owner of the
private property may include on the sign a statement that only tenants and
guests may park in the private tow-away zone, subject to the terms of the
property owner. If the property is a commercial property, the owner of the
private property may include on the sign a statement that only customers may
park in the private tow-away zone. In all cases, if it is not apparent which
persons may park in the private tow-away zone, the owner of the private
property shall include on the sign the address of the property on which the
private tow-away zone is located or the name of the business that is located
on the property designated as a private tow-away zone.



            3.   If the private tow-away zone is not
enforceable at all times, the times during which the parking restrictions are
enforced;



            4.   The telephone number and the address of the
place from which a towed vehicle may be recovered at any time during the day
or night;



            5.   A statement that the failure to recover a
towed vehicle may result in the loss of title to the vehicle as provided in
R.C. § 4505.101(B).



            6.   In order to comply with the requirements of
division (H)(1)(a) of this section, the owner of a private property may
modify an existing sign by affixing to the existing sign stickers or an
addendum in lieu of replacing the sign.



         (b)   A towing service ensures that a vehicle towed
under this division (H) is taken to a location from which it may be recovered
that complies with all of the following:



            1.   It is located within 25 linear miles of the
location of the private tow- away zone, unless it is not practicable to take
the vehicle to a place of storage within 25 linear miles.



            2.   It is well-lighted.



            3.   It is on or within a reasonable distance of a
regularly scheduled route of one or more modes of public transportation, if
any public transportation is available in the municipal corporation or
township in which the private tow-away zone is located.



      (2)   (a)   If a vehicle is parked on private property that
is established as a private tow-away zone in accordance with division (H)(1)
of this section, without the consent of the owner of the private property or
in violation of any posted parking condition or regulation, the owner of the
private property may cause the removal of the vehicle by a towing service.
The towing service shall remove the vehicle in accordance with this division
(H). The vehicle owner and the operator of the vehicle are considered to have
consented to the removal and storage of the vehicle, to the payment of the
applicable fees established by the Public Utilities Commission in rules
adopted under R.C. § 4921.25, and to the right of a towing service to obtain
title to the vehicle if it remains unclaimed as provided in R.C. § 4505.101.
The owner or lienholder of a vehicle that has been removed under this
division (H), subject to division (H)(3) of this section, may recover the
vehicle in accordance with division (H)(7) of this section.



         (b)   If a municipal corporation requires tow trucks and
tow truck operators to be licensed, no owner of a private property located
within the municipal corporation shall cause the removal and storage of any
vehicle pursuant to division (H)(2) of this section by an unlicensed tow
truck or unlicensed tow truck operator.



         (c)   No towing service shall remove a vehicle from a
private tow-away zone except pursuant to a written contract for the removal
of vehicles entered into with the owner of the private property on which the
private tow-away zone is located.



      (3)   If the owner or operator of a vehicle that is being
removed under authority of division (H)(2) of this section arrives after the
vehicle has been prepared for removal, but prior to its actual removal from
the property, the towing service shall give the vehicle owner or operator
oral or written notification at the time of such arrival that the vehicle
owner or operator may pay a fee of not more than one-half of the fee for the
removal of the vehicle established by the Public Utilities Commission in
rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25 in order to obtain release of the
vehicle. That fee may be paid by use of a major credit card unless the towing
service uses a mobile credit card processor and mobile service is not
available at the time of the transaction. Upon payment of that fee, the
towing service shall give the vehicle owner or operator a receipt showing
both the full amount normally assessed and the actual amount received and
shall release the vehicle to the owner or operator. Upon its release, the
owner or operator immediately shall move the vehicle so that the vehicle is
not parked on the private property established as a private tow-away zone
without the consent of the owner of the private property or in violation of
any posted parking condition or regulation.



      (4)   (a)   Prior to towing a vehicle under division (H)(2)
of this section, a towing service shall make all reasonable efforts to take
as many photographs as necessary to evidence that the vehicle is clearly
parked on private property in violation of a private tow-away zone
established under division (H)(1) of this section. The towing service shall
record the time and date of the photographs taken under this division (H).
The towing service shall retain the photographs and the record of the time
and date, in electronic or printed form, for at least 30 days after the date
on which the vehicle is recovered by the owner or lienholder or at least two
years after the date on which the vehicle was towed, whichever is earlier.



         (b)   A towing service shall deliver a vehicle towed
under division (H)(2) of this section to the location from which it may be
recovered not more than two hours after the time it was removed from the
private tow-away zone, unless the towing service is unable to deliver the
motor vehicle within two hours due to an uncontrollable force, natural
disaster, or other event that is not within the power of the towing service.



      (5)   (a)   If an owner of a private property that is
established as a private tow-away zone in accordance with division (H)(1) of
this section causes the removal of a vehicle from that property by a towing
service under division (H)(2) of this section, the towing service, within two
hours of removing the vehicle, shall provide notice to the Sheriff or the
Police Department concerning all of the following:



            1.   The vehicle’s license number, make, model,
and color;



            2.   The location from which the vehicle was
removed;



            3.   The date and time the vehicle was removed;



            4.   The telephone number of the person from whom
the vehicle may be recovered;



            5.   The address of the place from which the
vehicle may be recovered.



         (b)   The Sheriff and Chief of Police shall maintain a
record of any vehicle removed from private property in the Sheriff’s or
Police Chief’s jurisdiction that is established as a private tow-away zone
of which the Sheriff or Police Chief has received notice under this division
(H). The record shall include all information submitted by the towing
service. The Sheriff or Police Chief shall provide any information in the
record that pertains to a particular vehicle to a person who, either in
person or pursuant to a telephone call, identifies self as the owner,
operator, or lienholder of the vehicle and requests information pertaining to
the vehicle.



      (6)   (a)   When a vehicle is removed from private property
in accordance with this division (H), within three business days of the
removal, the towing service or storage facility from which the vehicle may be
recovered shall cause a search to be made of the records of the Bureau of
Motor Vehicles to ascertain the identity of the owner and any lienholder of
the motor vehicle. The Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall ensure that such
information is provided in a timely manner. Subject to division (H)(6)(d) of
this section, the towing service or storage facility shall send notice to the
vehicle owner and any known lienholder as follows:



            1.   Within five business days after the Registrar
of Motor Vehicles provides the identity of the owner and any lienholder of
the motor vehicle, if the vehicle remains unclaimed, to the owner’s and
lienholder’s last known address by certified or express mail with return
receipt requested or by a commercial carrier service utilizing any form of
delivery requiring a signed receipt;



            2.   If the vehicle remains unclaimed 30 days
after the first notice is sent, in the manner required under division
(H)(6)(a)1. of this section;



            3.   If the vehicle remains unclaimed 45 days
after the first notice is sent, in the manner required under division
(H)(6)(a)1. of this section.



         (b)   Sixty days after any notice sent pursuant to
division (H)(6)(a) of this section is received, as evidenced by a receipt
signed by any person, or the towing service or storage facility has been
notified that delivery was not possible, the towing service or storage
facility, if authorized under R.C. § 4505.101(B), may initiate the process
for obtaining a certificate of title to the motor vehicle as provided in that
section.



         (c)   A towing service or storage facility that does not
receive a signed receipt of notice, or a notification that delivery was not
possible, shall not obtain, and shall not attempt to obtain, a certificate of
title to the motor vehicle under R.C. § 4505.101(B).



         (d)   With respect to a vehicle concerning which a
towing service or storage facility is not eligible to obtain title under R.C.
§ 4505.101, the towing service or storage facility need only comply with the
initial notice required under division (H)(6)(a)1. of this section.



      (7)   (a)   The owner or lienholder of a vehicle that is
removed under division (H)(2) of this section may reclaim it upon both of the
following:



            1.   Presentation of proof of ownership, which may
be evidenced by a certificate of title to the vehicle, a certificate of
registration for the motor vehicle, or a lease agreement;



            2.   Payment of the following fees:



               a.   All applicable fees established by the
Public Utilities Commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25, except
that the lienholder of a vehicle may retrieve the vehicle without paying any
storage fee for the period of time that the vehicle was in the possession of
the towing service or storage facility prior to the date the lienholder
received the notice sent under division (H)(6)(a)1. of this section;



               b.   If notice has been sent to the owner
and lienholder as described in division (H)(6) of this section, a processing
fee of $25.



         (b)   A towing service or storage facility in possession
of a vehicle that is removed under authority of division (H)(2) of this
section shall show the vehicle owner, operator, or lienholder who contests
the removal of the vehicle all photographs taken under division (H)(4) of
this section. Upon request, the towing service or storage facility shall
provide a copy of all photographs in the medium in which the photographs are
stored, whether paper, electronic, or otherwise.



         (c)   When the owner of a vehicle towed under this
section retrieves the vehicle, the towing service or storage facility in
possession of the vehicle shall give the owner written notice that if the
owner disputes that the motor vehicle was lawfully towed, the owner may be
able to file a civil action under R.C. § 4513.611.



         (d)   Upon presentation of proof of ownership, which may
be evidenced by a certificate of title to the vehicle, a certificate of
registration for the motor vehicle, or a lease agreement, the owner of a
vehicle that is removed under authority of division (H)(2) of this section
may retrieve any personal items from the vehicle without retrieving the
vehicle and without paying any fee. The owner of the vehicle shall not
retrieve any personal items from a vehicle if it would endanger the safety of
the owner, unless the owner agrees to sign a waiver of liability. For
purposes of division (H)(7)(d) of this section, “personal items” do not
include any items that are attached to the vehicle.



      (8)   No person shall remove, or cause the removal of, any
vehicle from private property that is established as a private tow-away zone
under this division (H) or store such a vehicle other than in accordance with
this division (H), or otherwise fail to comply with any applicable
requirement of this division (H).



      (9)   This section does not affect or limit the operation of
divisions (A) through (G) of this section, R.C. § 4513.60 or R.C. §§
4513.61 to 4613.65 as they relate to property other than private property
that is established as a private tow-away zone under division (H)(1) of this
section.



      (10)   Whoever violates division (H)(8) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



      (11)   As used in this section, “owner of a private
property” or “owner of the private property” includes, with respect to
a private property, any of the following:



         (a)   Any person who holds title to the property;



         (b)   Any person who is a lessee or sublessee with
respect to a lease or sublease agreement for the property;



         (c)   A person who is authorized to manage the property;



         (d)   A duly authorized agent of any person listed in
divisions (H)(11)(a) to (H)(11)(c) of this section.



(R.C. § 4513.601)



§ 91.02  IMPOUNDING ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE ON PUBLIC PROPERTY; NOTICE;
DISPOSITION.



   (A)   The County Sheriff or Chief of Police, within the Sheriff’s
or Chief’s respective territorial jurisdiction, or a state highway patrol
trooper, upon notification to the Sheriff or Chief of Police of such action
and of the location of the place of storage, may order into storage any motor
vehicle, including an abandoned junk motor vehicle as defined in R.C. §
4513.63, that:



      (1)   Has come into the possession of the Sheriff, Chief of
Police, or state highway patrol trooper as a result of the performance of the
Sheriff’s, Chief’s, or trooper’s duties; or



      (2)   Has been left on a public street or other property open
to the public for purposes of vehicular travel, or upon or within the
right-of-way of any road or highway, for 48 hours or longer without
notification to the Sheriff or Chief of Police of the reasons for leaving the
motor vehicle in such place. However, when such a motor vehicle constitutes
an obstruction to traffic it may be ordered into storage immediately unless
either of the following applies:



         (a)   The vehicle was involved in an accident and is
subject to R.C. § 4513.66, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance;



         (b)   The vehicle is a commercial motor vehicle. If the
vehicle is a commercial motor vehicle, the Sheriff, Chief of Police, or state
highway patrol trooper shall allow the owner or operator of the vehicle the
opportunity to arrange for the removal of the motor vehicle within a period
of time specified by the Sheriff, Chief of Police, or state highway patrol
trooper. If the Sheriff, Chief of Police, or state highway patrol trooper
determines that the vehicle cannot be removed within the specified period of
time, the Sheriff, Chief of Police, or state highway patrol trooper shall
order the removal of the vehicle.



      (3)   Subject to division (C) of this section, the Sheriff or
Chief of Police shall designate the place of storage of any motor vehicle so
ordered removed.



   (B)   If the Sheriff, Chief of Police, or a state highway patrol
trooper issues an order under division (A) of this section and arranges for
the removal of a motor vehicle by a towing service, the towing service shall
deliver the motor vehicle to the location designated by the Sheriff or Chief
of Police not more than two hours after the time it is removed.



   (C)   (1)   The Sheriff or Chief of Police shall cause a search
to be made of the records of the Bureau of Motor Vehicles to ascertain the
identity of the owner and any lienholder of a motor vehicle ordered into
storage by the Sheriff or Chief of Police, or by a state highway patrol
trooper within five business days of the removal of the vehicle. Upon
obtaining such identity, the Sheriff or Chief of Police shall send or cause
to be sent to the owner or lienholder at the owner’s or lienholder’s last
known address by certified mail with return receipt requested, notice that
informs the owner or lienholder that the motor vehicle will be declared a
nuisance and disposed of if not claimed within ten days of the date of
mailing of the notice.



      (2)   (a)   The owner or lienholder of the motor vehicle
may reclaim the motor vehicle upon payment of any expenses or charges
incurred in its removal and storage, and presentation of proof of ownership,
which may be evidenced by a certificate of title or memorandum certificate of
title to the motor vehicle, a certificate of registration for the motor
vehicle, or a lease agreement. Upon presentation of proof of ownership
evidenced as provided above, the owner of the motor vehicle also may retrieve
any personal items from the vehicle without retrieving the vehicle and
without paying any fee. However, a towing service or storage facility may
charge an after-hours retrieval fee established by the Public Utilities
Commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25 if the owner retrieves the
personal items after hours, unless the towing service or storage facility
fails to provide the notice required under R.C. § 4513.69(B)(3), if
applicable. However, the owner shall not do either of the following:



            1.   Retrieve any personal item that has been
determined by the Sheriff, Chief of Police, or a state highway patrol
trooper, as applicable, to be necessary to a criminal investigation;



            2.   Retrieve any personal item from a vehicle if
it would endanger the safety of the owner, unless the owner agrees to sign a
waiver of liability.



         (b)   For purposes of division (C)(2) of this section,
“personal items” do not include any items that are attached to the
vehicle.



      (3)   If the owner or lienholder of the motor vehicle reclaims
it after a search of the records of the Bureau of Motor Vehicles has been
conducted and after notice has been sent to the owner or lienholder as
described in this section, and the search was conducted by the place of
storage, and the notice was sent to the motor vehicle owner by the place of
storage, the owner or lienholder shall pay to the place of storage a
processing fee of $25, in addition to any expenses or charges incurred in the
removal and storage of the vehicle.



   (D)   If the owner or lienholder makes no claim to the motor vehicle
within ten days of the date of mailing of the notice, and if the vehicle is
to be disposed of at public auction as provided in R.C. § 4513.62 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the Sheriff or Chief of Police,
without charge to any party, shall file with the Clerk of Courts of the
county in which the place of storage is located an affidavit showing
compliance with the requirements of this section. Upon presentation of the
affidavit, the Clerk, without charge, shall issue a salvage certificate of
title, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances, to the Sheriff or Chief
of Police. If the vehicle is to be disposed of to a motor vehicle salvage
dealer or other facility as provided in R.C. § 4513.62 or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the Sheriff or Chief of Police shall execute
in triplicate an affidavit, as prescribed by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles,
describing the motor vehicle and the manner in which it was disposed of, and
that all requirements of this section have been complied with. The Sheriff or
Chief of Police shall retain the original of the affidavit for the
Sheriff’s or Chief’s records, and shall furnish two copies to the motor
vehicle salvage dealer or other facility. Upon presentation of a copy of the
affidavit by the motor vehicle salvage dealer, the Clerk of Courts, within 30
days of the presentation, shall issue to such owner a salvage certificate of
title, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances.



   (E)   Whenever a motor vehicle salvage dealer or other facility
receives an affidavit for the disposal of a motor vehicle as provided in this
section, the dealer or facility shall not be required to obtain an Ohio
certificate of title to the motor vehicle in the dealer’s or facility’s
own name if the vehicle is dismantled or destroyed and both copies of the
affidavit are delivered to the Clerk of Courts.



   (F)   No towing service or storage facility shall fail to comply
with this section.



(R.C. § 4513.61)



§ 91.03  DISPOSITION OF VEHICLE ORDERED INTO STORAGE.



   Unclaimed motor vehicles ordered into storage pursuant to §
91.01(A)(1) or § 91.02 shall be disposed of at the order of the Police Chief
to a motor vehicle salvage dealer or scrap metal processing facility as
defined in R.C. § 4737.05, or to any other facility owned by or under
contract with the municipality for the disposal of such motor vehicles, or
shall be sold by the Police Chief or licensed auctioneer at public auction
after giving public notice by advertisement, published once a week for two
successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the county or as
provided in R.C. § 7.16. Any monies accruing from the disposition of an
unclaimed motor vehicle that are in excess of the expenses resulting from the
removal and storage of the vehicle shall be credited to the general fund of
the municipality.



§ 91.04  DISPOSITION OF ABANDONED JUNK MOTOR VEHICLES.



   (A)   ABANDONED JUNK MOTOR VEHICLE means any motor vehicle meeting
all of the following requirements:



      (1)   The vehicle is left on private property for 48 hours or
longer without the permission of the person having the right to the
possession of the property, on a public street or other property open to the
public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking, or upon or within the
right-of-way of any road or highway for 48 hours or longer;



      (2)   The vehicle is three years old or older;



      (3)   The vehicle is extensively damaged, such damage
including but not limited to any of the following: missing wheels, tires,
motor, or transmission;



      (4)   The vehicle is apparently inoperable; and



      (5)   The vehicle has a fair market value of $1,500 or less.



   (B)   The Police Chief shall order any abandoned junk motor vehicle
to be photographed by a law enforcement officer.  The officer shall record
the make of motor vehicle, the serial number when available, and shall also
detail the damage or missing equipment to substantiate the value of $1,500 or
less.  The Police Chief shall thereupon immediately dispose of the abandoned
junk motor vehicle to a motor vehicle salvage dealer as defined in R.C. §
4738.01 or a scrap metal processing facility as defined in R.C. § 4737.05
which is under contract to the municipality, or to any other facility owned
by or under contract with the municipality for the destruction of such motor
vehicles.  The records and photographs relating to the abandoned junk motor
vehicle shall be retained by the law enforcement agency ordering the
disposition of such vehicle for a period of at least two years.  The law
enforcement agency shall execute in quadruplicate an affidavit, as prescribed
by the registrar of motor vehicles, describing the motor vehicle and the
manner in which it was disposed of, and that all requirements of R.C. §
4513.63 have been complied with, and, within 30 days of disposing of the
vehicle, shall sign and file the affidavit with the Clerk of Courts of the
county in which the motor vehicle was abandoned.  The Clerk of Courts
retains the original of the affidavit for the Clerk's files, furnishes one
copy thereof to the registrar, one copy to the motor vehicle salvage dealer
or other facility handling the disposal of the vehicle, and one copy to the
law enforcement agency ordering the disposal, who shall file such copy with
the records and photograph relating to the disposal.  Any monies arising
from the disposal of an abandoned junk motor vehicle shall be deposited in
the general fund of the municipality.



   (C)   Notwithstanding § 91.02, any motor vehicle meeting the
requirements of division (A)(2), (3) and (5) of this section which has
remained unclaimed by the owner or lienholder for a period of ten days or
longer following notification as provided in § 91.02 may be disposed of as
provided in this section.



(R.C. § 4513.63)



§ 91.05  ABANDONMENT OF JUNK MOTOR VEHICLE PROHIBITED.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall willfully leave an abandoned junk
motor vehicle as defined in § 91.04 on private property for more than 72
hours without the permission of the person having the right to the possession
of the property, or on a public street or other property open to the public
for purposes of vehicular travel or parking, or upon or within the
right-of-way of any road or highway for 48 hours or longer without
notification to the Police Chief of the reason for leaving the motor vehicle
in such place.



      (2)   For purposes of this section, the fact that a motor
vehicle has been so left without permission or notification is prima facie
evidence of abandonment.



      (3)   Nothing contained in §§ 91.01, 91.02 and 91.04 and
R.C. §§ 4513.60, 4513.61 and 4513.63 shall invalidate or prevent the
enactment of further provisions of municipal ordinances regulating or
prohibiting the abandonment of motor vehicles on streets, highways, public
property, or private property within the municipality.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor
and shall also be assessed any costs incurred by the municipality in
disposing of the abandoned junk motor vehicle that is the basis of the
violation, less any money accruing to the municipality from the disposal of
the vehicle.



(R.C. § 4513.64)



§ 91.06  JUNK MOTOR VEHICLE; ORDER TO COVER OR REMOVE; NOTICE; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   (1)   For purposes of this section, JUNK MOTOR VEHICLE
means any motor vehicle meeting the requirements of § 91.04(A)(2), (3), (4)
and (5) that is left uncovered in the open on private property for more than
72 hours with the permission of the person having the right to possession of
the property, except if the person is operating a junk yard or scrap metal
processing facility licensed under the authority of R.C. §§ 4737.05 through
4737.12, or otherwise regulated under authority of a political subdivision;
or if the property on which the motor vehicle is left is not subject to
licensure or regulation by any governmental authority, unless the person
having the right to the possession of the property can establish that the
motor vehicle is part of a bona fide commercial operation; or if the motor
vehicle is a collector's vehicle.



      (2)   The municipality shall not prevent a person from storing
or keeping, or restrict him or her in the method of storing or keeping, any
collector's vehicle on private property with the permission of the person
having the right to the possession of the property, except that the
municipality may require a person having such permission to conceal, by means
of buildings, fences, vegetation, terrain, or other suitable obstruction, and
unlicensed collector's vehicle stored in the open.



      (3)   The Police Chief, the Legislative Authority, or the
zoning authority may send notice, by certified mail with return receipt
requested, to the person having the right to the possession of the property
on which a junk motor vehicle is left, that within ten days of receipt of the
notice, the junk motor vehicle either shall be covered by being housed in a
garage or other suitable structure, or shall be removed from the property.



      (4)   No person shall willfully leave a junk motor vehicle
uncovered in the open for more than ten days after receipt of a notice as
provided in this section.  The fact that a junk motor vehicle is so left is
prima facie evidence of willful failure to comply with the notice, and each
subsequent period of 30 days that a junk motor vehicle continues to be so
left constitutes a separate offense.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.65)



§ 91.07  PROHIBITED PLACEMENT OF INOPERABLE VEHICLES.



   It shall be illegal to keep inoperable vehicles on the streets in the
village.



(Ord. 73-5-2, passed 6-19-73)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 92:  NUISANCES



Section




General Provisions




   92.01   Open burning prohibited



   92.02   Freestanding outdoor furnaces prohibited



   92.03   Littering prohibited




Weeds and Litter on Private Property




   92.10   Keeping down weeds



   92.11   Notice to owner to cut noxious weeds, remove litter; service



   92.12   Fees for service and return



   92.13   Procedure when owner fails to comply with notice



   92.14   Written return to County Auditor; amount as a lien upon
property




Fireworks




   92.25   Definitions



   92.26   Possession, sale, and use of fireworks



   92.27   Permit to use fireworks



   92.28   Manufacturing or wholesale sale without a license;
prohibitions



   92.29   Purchasers to comply with law; unauthorized purchases



   92.30   Exhibition without a license; prohibitions for exhibitions



   92.31   Unauthorized transportation or shipping



   92.32   Application of subchapter



   92.33   Arrest of offender; seizure and forfeiture of fireworks;
distribution of fines



   92.34   Safety requirements for fireworks showroom structures



 



   92.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 92.01  OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED.



   It shall be illegal for any person, partnership, corporation, or any
other entity to burn any material within the corporation limits of the
village. This shall include the use of all burn barrels, outside
incinerators, open burning, and any other type of outside burning.



(Ord. 70- , passed 9-1-70)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.02  FREESTANDING OUTDOOR FURNACES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Definition.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      FREESTANDING OUTDOOR FURNACE.  FREESTANDING OUTDOOR FURNACE
shall mean, but is not limited to, any device, apparatus or structure or any
part thereof,



         (a)   Designed to burn wood, or other fuel including,
but not limited to, coal, paper or agricultural products; and



         (b)   The unit is not located within a building intended
for habitation by humans or domestic animals; and



         (c)   Which is installed for the primary purpose of
combustion of such fuel to produce heat, energy and/or hot water to be used
as a component of a heating system which provides heat for any interior space.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to install or operate a freestanding
outdoor furnace, or to cause or permit the installation or operation of a
freestanding outdoor furnace, within the Village of Minster.



   (C)   This section shall in no way be construed nor is the same
intended to prohibit the installation, operation or use of exterior chimneys,
stove pipes or similar apparatuses that are otherwise in conformity with
other federal or state laws, rules or regulations constituting any part of
any interior furnace system, interior stove system, interior fireplace system
or operation of any system that provides the exhaust of waste heat, smoke or
similar substances from interior spaces.



   (D)   This section shall not apply to any freestanding outdoor
furnace that was installed, connected and operating as of the effective date
of this section. However, this section shall not be deemed as specific
authorization for the use of any pre-existing freestanding outdoor furnace
and shall not be deemed to bar, limit or otherwise affect the rights of any
person to take private legal action regarding damage or nuisance caused by
the use of a freestanding outdoor furnace.



   (E)   No existing freestanding outdoor furnace in existence on the
effective date of this section shall be replaced or upgraded.



   (F)   Any person or corporation who shall violate any of the
provisions of this section shall for each and every violation or
non-compliance be guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree and be subject
to the sanctions provided in § 130.18. Each day such violation shall be
permitted to exist shall constitute a separate and additional offense.



(Ord. 06-11-13, passed 12-26-06)



§ 92.03  LITTERING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CASUAL PASSERBY. Means a person who does not have depositing
litter in a litter receptacle as his or her primary reason for traveling to
or by the property on which the litter receptacle is located.



      DEPOSIT.  Means to throw, drop, discard or place.



      LITTER.  Means garbage, trash, waste, animal waste or feces,
rubbish, ashes, cans bottles, wire, paper, cartons, boxes, automobile parts,
furniture, glass, yard waste including grass clippings and leaves or anything
else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature.



      LITTER RECEPTACLE.  Means a dumpster, trash can, trash bin,
garbage can or similar container in which litter is deposited for removal.



      PUBLIC PROPERTY.  Includes any private property open to the
public for the conduct of business, the provision of a service, or upon the
payment of a fee, but does not include any private property to which the
public otherwise does not have a right to access.



   (B)   No person, regardless of intent, shall deposit litter or cause
litter to be deposited on any public property, on private property not owned
by him or her, or in or on waters of the state unless one of the following
applies:



      (1)   The person is directed to do so by a public official as
a part of a litter collection drive.



      (2)   Except as provided in division (C), the person deposits
the litter in a litter receptacle in a manner that prevents it being carried
away by the elements.



      (3)   The person is issued a permit or license covering the
litter pursuant to R.C. Chapters 3734 or 6111.



   (C)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly deposit
litter, or cause it to be deposited, in a litter receptacle located on any
public property or on any private property not owned by him or her unless one
of the following applies:



      (1)   The litter was generated or located on the property on
which the litter receptacle is located.



      (2)   The person is directed to do so by a public official as
part of a litter collection drive.



      (3)   The person is directed to do so by a person whom he or
she reasonably believes to have the privilege to use the litter receptacle.



      (4)   The litter consists of any of the following:



         (a)   Beverage containers and food sacks, wrappings, and
containers of a type and in an amount that reasonable may be expected to be
generated during routine commuting or business or recreational travel.



         (b)   Beverage containers and food sacks, wrappings, and
containers of a type and in an amount that reasonable may be expected to be
generated during a routine day by a person and deposited in a litter
receptacle by a casual passerby travel.



   (D)   This section may be enforced by any sheriff, deputy sheriff,
police officer of a municipal corporation, wildlife officer, park officer,
inspector of nuisances of a county or municipal corporation or any other law
enforcement officer within the officer’s jurisdiction.



   (E)   The violation of this section shall be considered a minor
misdemeanor punishable by a fine of no more than $150.



(Ord. 12-04-02, passed 4-17-12)



WEEDS AND LITTER ON PRIVATE PROPERTY



§ 92.10  KEEPING DOWN WEEDS.



   (A)   Any person owning or having charge of land within the
municipality shall keep such property free and clear from all noxious weeds
and rank vegetation at all times.



   (B)   Noxious weeds and rank vegetation shall include but not be
limited to:



      (1)   Any weeds such as the following:



   Noxious Weeds



 




Apple of Peru

 
Leafy Spurge


Canada Thistle
 
Marestail


Columbus Grass
 
Mile-A-Minute Weed


Cressleaf Groundsel
 
Musk Thistle


Field Bindweed
 
Palmer Amarantha


Forage Kochia
 
Perennial Sowthistle


Giant Hogweed
 
Poison Hemlock


Hairy Whitetop (Ballcress)
 
Purple Loosestrife


Hedge Bindweed
 
Russian Knapweed


Heart-podded Hoary Cress
 
Russian Thistle


Japanese Knotweed
 
Serrated Tussock


Johnsongrass
 
Shatter Cane


Kochia
 
Water Hemp


Kudzu
 
Wild Parsnip




 



      (2)   Grapevines when growing in groups of 100 or more and not
pruned, sprayed, cultivated, or otherwise maintained for two consecutive
years;



(O.A.C. §§ 901:5-27-06, 901:5-37-01)



      (3)    Yellow Groove Bamboo when the plant has spread from its
original premise of planting and is not being maintained;



(O.A.C. § 901:5-37-01)



      (4)   Any weeds, grass, or plants, other than trees, bushes,
flowers, or other ornamental plants growing to a height exceeding eight
inches.



(Ord. 02-05-06, passed 7-9-02)



§ 92.11  NOTICE TO OWNER TO CUT NOXIOUS WEEDS, REMOVE LITTER; SERVICE.



   (A)   Council shall annually cause a notice to be published in a
newspaper of general circulation within the village, stating that noxious
weeds are growing on lands within the limits of the village.  Such notice
shall not be required to describe the lands or to specify the name of the
owner of such property. However, such notice shall constitute notice to any
owner, lessee, agent or tenant having charge of any land upon which noxious
weeds are growing, that the same must be cut and destroyed within five days
after such publication.  Such notice shall further specify that such weeds
shall be cut every 30 days thereafter without further notice or publication
in order to prevent spreading or maturing of weeds.  Such notice shall be
published one time in order to constitute notice hereunder.



   (B)   Upon a finding by the Legislative Authority that litter has
been placed on lands in a municipality, and has not been removed, and
constitutes a detriment to public health, the Legislative Authority shall
cause a written notice to be served upon the owner and, if different, upon
the lessee, agent, or tenant having charge of the littered land, notifying
him or her that litter is on the land, and that it must be collected and
removed within 15 days after the service of the notice.



   (C)   As used in this section and § 92.13, LITTER includes any
garbage, waste, peelings of vegetables or fruits, rubbish, ashes, cans,
bottles, wire, paper, cartons, boxes, parts of automobiles, wagons,
furniture, glass, oil of an unsightly or unsanitary nature, or anything else
of an unsightly or unsanitary nature.



   (D)   If the owner or other person having charge of the land is a
nonresident of the municipality whose address is known, the notice shall be
sent to his or her address by certified mail.  If the address of the owner
or other person having charge of the land is unknown it is sufficient to
publish the notice once in a newspaper of general circulation in the county.



   (E)   This section does not apply to land being used under a
municipal building or construction permit or license, a municipal permit or
license, or a conditional zoning permit or variance to operate a junkyard,
scrap metal processing facility, or similar business, or a permit or license
issued pursuant to R.C. Chapter 3734, §§ 4737.05 to 4737.12, or R.C.
Chapter 6111.



(Ord. 02-05-06, passed 7-9-02; Am. Ord. 12-05-01, passed 6-19-12)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see R.C. § 731.51



§ 92.12  FEES FOR SERVICE AND RETURN.



   The Police Chief, any police officer, or Clerk of the Legislative
Authority may make service and return of the notice provided for in § 92.11
and shall be allowed the same fees as that provided for service and return of
summons in civil cases before a magistrate.



(Ord. 02-05-06, passed 7-9-02)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see R.C. § 731.52



§ 92.13  PROCEDURE WHEN OWNER FAILS TO COMPLY WITH NOTICE.



   If the owner, lessee, agent, or tenant having charge of the lands
mentioned in § 92.11 fails to comply with the notice required by such
section, the Legislative Authority shall cause such noxious weeds to be cut
and destroyed or such litter removed and may employ the necessary labor to
perform the task.  All expenses incurred shall, when approved by the
Legislative Authority, be paid out of the money in the treasury of the
municipality not otherwise appropriated.



(Ord. 02-05-06, passed 7-9-02)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see R.C. § 731.53



§ 92.14  WRITTEN RETURN TO COUNTY AUDITOR; AMOUNT AS A LIEN UPON PROPERTY.



   The Legislative Authority shall make a written return to the County
Auditor of their action under §§ 92.11, 92.12, and 92.13, with a statement
of the charges for their services, the amount paid for labor, the fees of the
officers serving the notices, and a proper description of the premises. 
These amounts, when allowed, shall be entered upon the tax duplicate and be a
lien upon such lands from and after the date of entry and be collected as
other taxes and returned to the municipality with the general fund.



(Ord. 02-05-06, passed 7-9-02)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see R.C. § 731.54



FIREWORKS



§ 92.25  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   1.3G FIREWORKS.  Display fireworks consistent with regulations of the
United States Department of Transportation as expressed using the designation
“Division 1.3” in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations.



   1.4G FIREWORKS.  Consumer fireworks consistent with regulations of the
United States Department of Transportation as expressed using the designation
“Division 1.4” in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations.



   BEER and INTOXICATING LIQUOR.  Have the same meaning as in R.C. §
4301.01.



   BOOBY TRAP.  A small tube that has a string protruding from both ends
that has a friction-sensitive composition and that is ignited by pulling the
ends of the string.



   CIGARETTE LOAD.  A small wooden peg that is coated with a small
quantity of explosive composition and that is ignited in a cigarette.



   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.



   DISCHARGE SITE. An area immediately surrounding the mortars used to
fire aerial shells.



   EXPLOSIVE.   Any chemical compound, mixture, or device, the primary or
common purpose of which is to function by explosion.  EXPLOSIVE includes all
materials that have been classified as division 1.1, division 1.2, division
1.3, or division 1.4 explosives by the United States Department of
Transportation in its regulations and includes, but is not limited to,
dynamite, black powder, pellet powders, initiating explosives, blasting caps,
electric blasting caps, safety fuses, fuse igniters, squibs, cordeau detonant
fuses, instantaneous fuses, and igniter cords and igniters.  EXPLOSIVES does
not include “fireworks” as defined below, or any substance or material
otherwise meeting the definition of explosive set forth in this section that
is manufactured, sold, possessed, transported, stored, or used in any
activity described in R.C. § 3743.80, provided the activity is conducted in
accordance with all applicable laws, rules, and regulations, including, but
not limited to, the provisions of R.C. § 3743.80 and the rules of the State
Fire Marshal adopted pursuant to R.C. § 3737.82.  (R.C. § 2923.11(M))



   FIREWORKS.  Any composition or device prepared for the purpose of
producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or
detonation, except ordinary matches and except as provided in R.C. § 3743.80.



   FIREWORKS INCIDENT.  Any action or omission that occurs at a fireworks
exhibition that results in injury or death, or a substantial risk of injury
or death, to any person, and that involves either of the following:



      (1)   The handling or other use, or the results of the
handling or other use, of fireworks or associated equipment or other
materials;



      (2)   The failure of any person to comply with any applicable
requirement imposed by this chapter or R.C. Chapter 3743, or any applicable
rule adopted under this chapter or R.C. Chapter 3743.



   FIREWORKS INCIDENT SITE.  A discharge site or other location at a
fireworks exhibition where a fireworks incident occurs, a location where an
injury or death associated with a fireworks incident occurs, or a location
where evidence of a fireworks incident or an injury or death associated with
a fireworks incident is found



   FIREWORKS PLANT.  All buildings and other structures in which the
manufacturing of fireworks, or the storage or sale of manufactured fireworks
by a manufacturer, takes place.



   HIGHWAY.  Any public street, road, alley, way, lane or other public
thoroughfare.



   LICENSED BUILDING.  A building on the licensed premises of a licensed
manufacturer or wholesaler of fireworks that is approved for occupancy by the
building official having jurisdiction.



   LICENSED EXHIBITOR OF FIREWORKS or LICENSED EXHIBITOR.  A person
licensed pursuant to R.C. §§ 3743.50 through 3743.55.



   LICENSED MANUFACTURER OF FIREWORKS or LICENSED MANUFACTURER.  A person
licensed pursuant to R.C. §§ 3743.02 through 3743.08.



   LICENSED PREMISES.  The real estate upon which a licensed manufacturer
or wholesaler of fireworks conducts business.



   LICENSED WHOLESALER OF FIREWORKS or LICENSED WHOLESALER.  A person
licensed pursuant to R.C. §§ 3743.15 through 3743.21.



   MANUFACTURING OF FIREWORKS.  The making of fireworks from raw
materials, none of which in and of themselves constitute fireworks, or the
processing of fireworks.



   NOVELTIES and TRICK NOISEMAKERS.



      (1)   Devices that produce a small report intended to surprise
the user, including but not limited to booby traps, cigarette loads, party
poppers, and snappers;



      (2)   Snakes or glow worms;



      (3)   Smoke devices;



      (4)   Trick matches.



   PARTY POPPER.  A small plastic or paper item that contains not more
than 16 milligrams of friction-sensitive explosive composition that is
ignited by pulling a string protruding from the item, and from which paper
streamers are expelled when the item is ignited.



   PROCESSING OF FIREWORKS.  The making of fireworks from materials all
or part of which in and of themselves constitute fireworks, but does not
include the mere packaging or repackaging of fireworks.



   RAILROAD.  Any railway or railroad that carries freight or passengers
for hire, but does not include auxiliary tracks, spurs, and sidings installed
and primarily used in serving a mine, quarry or plant.



   RETAIL SALE or SELL AT RETAIL.  A sale of fireworks to a purchaser who
intends to use the fireworks and not to resell them.



   SMOKE DEVICE.  A tube or sphere that contains pyrotechnic composition
that, upon ignition, produces white or colored smoke as the primary effect.



   SNAKE or GLOW WORM.  A device that consists of a pressed pellet of
pyrotechnic composition that produces a large snake-like ash upon burning,
which ash expands in length as the pellet burns.



   SNAPPER.  A small paper-wrapped item that contains a minute quantity
of explosive composition coated on small bits of sand and that, when dropped,
implodes.



   STORAGE LOCATION. A single parcel or contiguous parcels of real estate
approved by the Fire Marshal pursuant to R.C. § 3743.04(I) or R.C. §
3743.17(G) that are separate from a licensed premises containing a retail
showroom, and which parcel or parcels a licensed manufacturer or wholesaler
of fireworks may use only for the distribution, possession, and storage of
fireworks in accordance with this chapter.



   TRICK MATCH.  A kitchen or book match that is coated with a small
quantity of explosive composition and that, upon ignition, produces a small
report or a shower of sparks.



   WHOLESALE SALE or SELL AT WHOLESALE.  A sale of fireworks to a
purchaser who intends to resell the fireworks so purchased.



   WIRE SPARKLER.  A sparkler consisting of a wire or stick coated with a
nonexplosive pyrotechnic mixture that produces a shower of sparks upon
ignition and that contains no more than 100 grams of this mixture.



(R.C. § 3743.01)



§ 92.26  POSSESSION, SALE, AND USE OF FIREWORKS.



   (A)   No person shall possess fireworks in this municipality or
shall possess for sale or sell fireworks in this municipality, except a
licensed manufacturer of fireworks as authorized by R.C. §§ 3743.02 through
3743.08, a licensed wholesaler of fireworks as authorized by R.C. §§
3743.15 through 3743.21, a shipping permit holder as authorized by R.C. §
3743.40, an out-of-state resident as authorized by R.C. § 3743.44, a
resident of this state as authorized by R.C. § 3743.45, or a licensed
exhibitor of fireworks as authorized by R.C. §§ 3743.50 through 3743.55, or
as authorized by any municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to
any of these statutes, and except as provided in R.C. § 3743.80 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



   (B)   Except as provided in R.C. § 3743.80 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, and except for licensed exhibitors of
fireworks authorized to conduct a fireworks exhibition pursuant to R.C. §§
3743.50 through 3743.55 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, no
person shall discharge, ignite, or explode any fireworks in this municipality.



   (C)   No person shall use in a theater or public hall what is
technically known as fireworks showers, or a mixture containing potassium
chlorate and sulphur.



   (D)   No person shall sell fireworks of any kind to a person under
18 years of age.  No person under 18 years of age shall enter a fireworks
sales showroom unless that person is accompanied by a parent, legal guardian
or other responsible adult. No person under 18 years of age shall touch or
possess fireworks on a licensed premises without the consent of the licensee.
A licensee may eject any person from a licensed premises that is in any way
disruptive to the safe operation of the premises.



   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 3743.44, no person,
other than a licensed manufacturer, licensed wholesaler, licensed exhibitor,
or shipping permit holder shall possess 1.3G fireworks in this municipality.



(R.C. § 3743.65(A) - (E))  Penalty, see § 92.99



Statutory reference:



   Felony offense for disabling a fire suppression system, see R.C. §
3743.65(G)



§ 92.27  PERMIT TO USE FIREWORKS.



   (A)   An exhibitor of fireworks licensed under R.C. §§ 3743.50
through 3743.55 who wishes to conduct a public fireworks exhibition shall
apply for approval to conduct the exhibition to the Fire Chief or fire
prevention officer and to the Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police Chief or other similar
chief law enforcement officer, having jurisdiction over the premises.



   (B)   The approval required by division (A) of this section shall be
evidenced by the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and by the Police
Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of the
Police Chief or similar chief law enforcement officer, signing a permit for
the exhibition.  Any exhibitor of fireworks who wishes to conduct a public
fireworks exhibition may obtain a copy of the form from the State Fire
Marshal or, if available, from the Fire Chief, a fire prevention officer, the
Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or a designee of
the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer.



   (C)   Before a permit is signed and issued to a licensed exhibitor
of fireworks, the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer, in consultation with
the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the
designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer,
shall inspect the premises on which the exhibition will take place and shall
determine that, in fact, the applicant for the permit is a licensed exhibitor
of fireworks.  Each applicant shall show his or her license as an exhibitor
of fireworks to the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer.



   (D)   The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and the Police Chief
or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police
Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, shall give approval to
conduct a public fireworks exhibition only if satisfied, based on the
inspection, that the premises on which the exhibition will be conducted allow
the exhibitor to comply with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal
pursuant to R.C. § 3743.53(B) and (E) and that the applicant is, in fact, a
licensed exhibitor of fireworks.  The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer,
in consultation with  the Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer or with the designee of the Police Chief or other similar
chief law enforcement officer, may inspect the premises immediately prior to
the exhibition to determine if the exhibitor has complied with the rules, and
may revoke a permit for noncompliance with the rules.



   (E)   If the Legislative Authority has prescribed a fee for the
issuance of a permit for a public fireworks exhibition, the Fire Chief or
fire prevention officer and Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, or their designee, shall not issue a permit until the
exhibitor pays the requisite fee.



   (F)   Each exhibitor shall provide an indemnity bond in the amount
of at least one million dollars with surety satisfactory to the Fire Chief or
fire prevention officer and to the Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police Chief or other similar
chief law enforcement officer, conditioned for the payment of all final
judgments that may be rendered against the exhibitor on account of injury,
death, or loss to person or property emanating from the fireworks exhibitor,
or proof of insurance coverage of at least one million dollars for liability
arising from injury, death, or loss of persons or property emanating from the
fireworks exhibition.  The Legislative Authority may require the exhibitor
to provide an indemnity bond or proof of insurance coverage in amounts
greater than those required by this division.  The Fire Chief or fire
prevention officer and Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement
officer, or their designee, shall not issue a permit until the exhibitor
provides the bond or proof of the insurance coverage required by this
division or by the Legislative Authority.



   (G)   Each permit for a fireworks exhibition issued by the Fire
Chief or fire prevention officer and by the Police Chief or other similar
chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, shall contain a distinct number,
designate the municipality, and identify the certified fire safety inspector,
Fire Chief, or fire prevention officer who will be present before, during and
after the exhibition, where appropriate.  A copy of each permit issued shall
be forwarded by the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and by the Police
Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or designee of the
Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, issuing it to
the State Fire Marshal.  A permit is not transferable or assignable.



   (H)   The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and Police Chief or
other similar chief law enforcement officer, or designee of the Police Chief
or other similar chief law enforcement officer, shall keep a record of issued
permits for fireworks exhibitions.  In this list, the Fire Chief, fire
prevention officer, Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement
officer, or designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, shall list the name of the exhibitor, his or her license
number, the premises on which the exhibition will be conducted, the date and
time of the exhibition, and the number and political subdivision designation
of the permit issued to the exhibitor for the exhibition.



   (I)   The Legislative Authority shall require that a certified fire
safety inspector, Fire Chief or fire prevention officer be present before,
during and after the exhibition, and shall require the certified fire safety
inspector, Fire Chief or fire prevention officer to inspect the premises
where the exhibition is to take place and determine whether the exhibition is
in compliance with this chapter and Ohio R.C. Chapter 3743.



(R.C. § 3743.54)  Penalty, see § 92.99



Statutory reference:



   Notice of fireworks incident, see R.C. § 3743.541



§ 92.28  MANUFACTURING OR WHOLESALE SALE WITHOUT A LICENSE; PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   No licensed manufacturer or licensed wholesaler of fireworks
shall knowingly fail to comply with the rules adopted by the State Fire
Marshal pursuant to R.C. §§ 3743.05 and 3743.18 or the requirements of R.C.
§§ 3743.06 and 3743.19.



   (B)   No licensed manufacturer or licensed wholesaler of fireworks
shall fail to maintain complete inventory, wholesale sale and retail records
as required by R.C. §§ 3743.07 and 3743.20, or to permit an inspection of
these records or the premises of a fireworks plant or the wholesaler pursuant
to R.C. §§ 3743.08 and 3743.21.



   (C)   No licensed manufacturer or licensed wholesaler of fireworks
shall fail to comply with an order of the State Fire Marshal issued pursuant
to R.C. §§ 3743.01(B)(1) and 3743.21(B)(1) within the specified period of
time.



   (D)   No licensed manufacturer or licensed wholesaler of fireworks
shall fail to comply with an order of the State Fire Marshal issued pursuant
to R.C. §§ 3743.08(B)(2) and 3743.21(B)(2) until the nonconformities are
eliminated, corrected or otherwise remedied or the 72 hour period specified
in those divisions has expired, whichever occurs first.



   (E)   No person shall smoke or shall carry a pipe, cigarette, or
cigar, or a match, lighter, other flame- producing item, or open flame on, or
shall carry a concealed source of ignition into, the premises of a fireworks
plant or on the premises of a wholesaler of fireworks, except as smoking is
authorized in specified lunchrooms or restrooms by a manufacturer or
wholesaler pursuant to R.C. § 3743.06(C) or R.C. § 3743.19(D).



   (F)   No person shall have possession or control of, or be under the
influence of, any intoxicating liquor, beer, or controlled substance while on
the premises of the fireworks plant or on the premises of a wholesaler of
fireworks.



(R.C. §§ 3743.60(E) - (J), 3743.61(E) - (J))  Penalty, see § 92.99



Statutory reference:



   Felony provisions, see R.C. §§ 3743.60(A) - (D) and 3743.61(A) - (D)



§ 92.29  PURCHASERS TO COMPLY WITH LAW; UNAUTHORIZED PURCHASES.



   (A)   No person who resides in another state and purchases fireworks
in this municipality shall obtain possession of the fireworks in this
municipality unless the person complies with R.C. § 3743.44.



   (B)   No person who resides in another state and who purchases
fireworks in this municipality shall obtain possession of fireworks in this
municipality other than from a licensed manufacturer or wholesaler, or fail,
when transporting 1.3G fireworks, to transport them directly out of the state
within 72 hours after the time of their purchase.  No such person shall give
or sell to any other person in this municipality fireworks that the person
has acquired in this state.



   (C)   No person who resides in this state and purchases fireworks in
this municipality shall obtain possession of the fireworks in this
municipality unless the person complies with R.C. § 3743.45.



   (D)   No person who resides in this state and who purchases
fireworks in this municipality under R.C. § 3743.45 shall obtain possession
of the fireworks in this municipality other than from a licensed manufacturer
or licensed wholesaler, or fail, when transporting the fireworks, to
transport them directly out of the state within 48 hours after the time of
their purchase.  No such person shall give or sell to any other person in
this municipality fireworks that the person has acquired in this state.



(R.C. § 3743.63)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.30  EXHIBITION WITHOUT A LICENSE; PROHIBITIONS FOR EXHIBITIONS.



   (A)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall fail to comply with
the applicable requirements of the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal
pursuant to R.C. § 3743.53(B) and (E) or to comply with R.C. § 3743.53(C)
and (D).



   (B)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall conduct a fireworks
exhibition unless a permit has been secured for the exhibition pursuant to
R.C. § 3743.54 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or if a
permit so secured is revoked by a Fire Chief or fire prevention officer, in
consultation with a Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement
officer, or with a designee of a Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, pursuant to those sections.



   (C)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall acquire fireworks for
use at a fireworks exhibition other than in accordance with R.C. §§ 3743.54
and 3743.55, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



   (D)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks or other person associated
with the conduct of a fireworks exhibition shall have possession or control
of, or be under the influence of, any intoxicating liquor, beer, or
controlled substance while on the premises on which the exhibition is being
conducted.



   (E)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall permit an employee to
assist the licensed exhibitor in conducting fireworks exhibitions unless the
employee is registered with the State Fire Marshal under R.C. § 3743.56.



(R.C. § 3743.64(C) - (G))  Penalty, see § 92.99



Statutory reference:



   Felony provisions, see R.C. § 3743.64(A), (B), (H)



   Notice of fireworks incident, see R.C. § 3743.541



§ 92.31  UNAUTHORIZED TRANSPORTATION OR SHIPPING.



   (A)   No person shall transport fireworks in this municipality
except in accordance with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal
pursuant to R.C. § 3743.58.



   (B)   As used in this division, FIREWORKS includes only 1.3G and
1.4G fireworks.  No person shall ship fireworks into this municipality by
mail, parcel post, or common carrier unless the person possesses a valid
shipping permit issued under R.C. § 3743.40, and the fireworks are shipped
directly to the holder of a license issued under R.C. § 3743.03, 3743.16 or
3743.51.



   (C)   No person shall ship fireworks within this municipality by
mail, parcel post, or common carrier unless the fireworks are shipped
directly to the holder of a license issued under R.C. § 3743.01, 3743.16 or
3743.51.



(R.C. § 3743.66)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.32  APPLICATION OF SUBCHAPTER.



   This subchapter does not apply to the following:



   (A)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage, or
use in emergency situations of pyrotechnic signaling devices and distress
signals for marine, aviation, or highway use;



   (B)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or
use of fusees, torpedoes, or other signals necessary for the safe operation
of railroads;



   (C)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or
use of blank cartridges in connection with theaters or shows, or in
connection with athletics as signals for ceremonial purposes;



   (D)   The manufacture for, the transportation, storage, possession
or use by, or the sale to the armed forces of the United States and the
militia of this state of pyrotechnic devices;



   (E)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or
use of toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices in which paper or
plastic caps containing 0.25 grains or less of explosive material are used,
provided that they are constructed so that a hand cannot come into contact
with a cap when it is in place for explosion, or apply to the manufacture,
sale, possession, transportation, storage or use of those caps;



   (F)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or
use of novelties and trick noisemakers, auto burglar alarms, or model rockets
and model rocket motors designed, sold, and used for the purpose of
propelling recoverable aero models;



   (G)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or
use of wire sparklers.



   (H)   The conduct of radio-controlled special effect exhibitions
that use an explosive black powder charge of not more than one-quarter pound
per charge, and that are not connected in any manner to propellant charges;
provided, that the exhibition complies with all of the following:



      (1)   No explosive aerial display is conducted in the
exhibition;



      (2)   The exhibition is separated from spectators by not less
than 200 feet;



      (3)   The person conducting the exhibition complies with
regulations of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms of the United
States Department of the Treasury and the United States Department of
Transportation with respect to the storage and transport of the explosive
black powder used in the exhibition.



(R.C. § 3743.80)



§ 92.33  ARREST OF OFFENDER; SEIZURE AND FORFEITURE OF FIREWORKS;
DISTRIBUTION OF FINES.



   (A)   The Fire Marshal, an assistant fire marshal, or a certified
fire safety inspector may arrest, or may cause the arrest of, any person whom
he or she finds in the act of violating, or who he or she has reasonable
cause to believe has violated, any provision of this subchapter.  Any arrest
shall be made in accordance with statutory and constitutional provisions
governing arrests by law enforcement officers.



   (B)   If the Fire Marshal, an assistant fire marshal, or certified
fire safety inspector has probable cause to believe that fireworks are being
manufactured, sold, possessed, transported, or used in violation of this
subchapter, he or she may seize the fireworks.  Any seizure of fireworks
shall be made in accordance with statutory and constitutional provisions
governing searches and seizures by law enforcement officers.  The Fire
Marshal's office or certified fire safety inspector's office shall impound at
the site or safely keep seized fireworks pending the time they are no longer
needed as evidence.  A sample of the seized fireworks is sufficient for
evidentiary purposes.  The remainder of the seized fireworks may be disposed
of pursuant to an order from a court of competent jurisdiction after notice
and a hearing.



   (C)   Fireworks manufactured, sold, possessed, transported, or used
in violation of this subchapter shall be forfeited by the offender.  The
Fire Marshal's office or certified fire safety inspector's office shall
dispose of seized fireworks pursuant to the procedures specified in R.C. §§
2981.11 to 2981.13  for the disposal of forfeited property by law
enforcement agencies, and the Fire Marshal or that office is not liable for
claims for the loss of or damages to the seized fireworks.



   (D)   This section does not affect the authority of peace officers,
as defined in R.C. § 2935.01, to make arrests for violations of this
subchapter or to seize fireworks manufactured, sold, possessed, transported,
or used in violation of this subchapter.



   (E)   Any fines imposed for a violation of this subchapter relating
to the sale, purchase, possession, or discharge of fireworks shall be
distributed as set forth in R.C. § 3743.68(D).



(R.C. § 3743.68)



§ 92.34  SAFETY REQUIREMENTS FOR FIREWORKS SHOWROOM STRUCTURES.



   (A)   (1)   Except as described in division (A)(2) of this
section, all retail sales of 1.4G fireworks by a licensed manufacturer or
wholesaler shall only occur from an approved retail sales showroom on a
licensed premises or from a representative sample showroom as described in
this section on a licensed premises.  For the purposes of this section, a
retail sale includes the transfer of the possession of the 1.4G fireworks
from the licensed manufacturer or wholesaler to the purchaser of the
fireworks.



      (2)   Sales of 1.4G fireworks to a licensed exhibitor for a
properly permitted exhibition shall occur in accordance with the provisions
of the Ohio Revised Code and rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal under
R.C. Chapter 119.  Such rules shall specify, at a minimum, that the licensed
exhibitor holds a license under R.C. § 3743.51, that the exhibitor possesses
a valid exhibition permit issued in accordance with R.C. § 3743.54, and that
the fireworks shipped are to be used at the specifically permitted exhibition.



   (B)   All wholesale sales of fireworks by a licensed manufacturer or
wholesaler shall only occur from a licensed premises to persons who intend to
resell the fireworks purchased at wholesale. A wholesale sale by a licensed
manufacturer or wholesaler may occur as follows:



      (1)   The direct sale and shipment of fireworks to a person
outside of this state;



      (2)   From an approved retail sales showroom as described in
this section;



      (3)   From a representative sample showroom as described in
this section;



      (4)   By delivery of wholesale fireworks to a purchaser at a
licensed premises outside of a structure or building on that premises. All
other portions of the wholesale sales transaction may occur at any location
on a licensed premises.



      (5)   Any other method as described in rules adopted by the
Fire Marshal under R.C. Chapter 119.



   (C)   (1)   A licensed manufacturer or wholesaler shall only sell
1.4G fireworks from a representative sample showroom or a retail sales
showroom. Each licensed premises shall only contain one sales structure.



      (2)   A representative sample showroom shall consist of a
structure constructed and maintained in accordance with the Nonresidential
Building Code adopted under R.C. Chapter 3781 and the Fire Code adopted under
R.C. § 3737.82 for a use and occupancy group that permits mercantile sales.
A representative sample showroom shall not contain any pyrotechnics,
pyrotechnic materials, fireworks, explosives, explosive materials, or any
similar hazardous materials or substances. A representative sample showroom
shall be used only for the public viewing of fireworks product
representations, including paper materials, packaging materials, catalogs,
photographs, or other similar product depictions. The delivery of product to
a purchaser of fireworks at a licensed premises that has a representative
sample structure shall not occur inside any structure on a licensed premises.
Such product delivery shall occur on the licensed premises in a manner
prescribed by rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to R.C.
Chapter 119.



      (3)   If a manufacturer or wholesaler elects to conduct sales
from a retail sales showroom, the showroom structures, to which the public
may have any access and in which employees are required to work, on all
licensed premises, shall comply with the following safety requirements:



         (a)   A fireworks showroom that is constructed or upon
which expansion is undertaken on and after June 30, 1997, shall be equipped
with interlinked fire detection, fire suppression, smoke exhaust, and smoke
evacuation systems that are approved by the Superintendent of Industrial
Compliance in the Department of Commerce.



         (b)   A fireworks showroom that first begins to operate
on or after June 30, 1997, and to which the public has access for retail
purposes shall not exceed 5,000 square feet in floor area.



         (c)   A newly constructed or an existing fireworks
showroom structure that exists on September 23, 2008, but that, on or after
September 23, 2008, is altered or added to in a manner requiring the
submission of plans, drawings, specifications, or data pursuant to R.C. §
3791.04, shall comply with a graphic floor plan layout that is approved by
the State Fire Marshal and Superintendent of Industrial Compliance showing
width of aisles, parallel arrangement of aisles to exits, number of exits per
wall, maximum occupancy load, evacuation plan for occupants, height of
storage or display of merchandise, and other information as may be required
by the State Fire Marshal and Superintendent of Industrial Compliance.



         (d)   A fireworks showroom structure that exists on June
30, 1997, shall be in compliance on or after June 30, 1997, with floor plans
showing occupancy load limits and internal circulation and egress patterns
that are approved by the State Fire Marshal and Superintendent of Industrial
Compliance, and that are submitted under seal as required by R.C. § 3791.04.



   (D)   The safety requirements established in division (C) of this
section are not subject to any variance, waiver, or exclusion pursuant to
this chapter or any applicable building code.



(R.C. § 3743.25)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which
another penalty is not specifically provided shall be subject to the penalty
as provided in § 10.99.



   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2) or
(B)(3) of this section, whoever violates any provisions of §§ 92.25 through
92.32 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (2)    If the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a violation of R.C. § 3743.60(I) or R.C. § 3743.61(I), or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, a violation of § 92.28(E) is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (3)   Whoever violates § 92.30(A) is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the first degree.  In addition to any other penalties that may be imposed
on a licensed exhibitor of fireworks under this division and unless the third
sentence of this division applies, the person’s license as an exhibitor of
fireworks or as an assistant exhibitor of fireworks shall be suspended, and
the person is ineligible to apply for either type of licence, for a period of
five years.  If the violation of § 92.30(A) results in serious physical
harm to persons or serious physical harm to property, the person’s license
as an exhibitor of fireworks or as an assistant exhibitor of fireworks shall
be revoked, and that person is ineligible to apply for a license as or to be
licensed as an exhibitor of fireworks or as an assistant exhibitor of
fireworks in this state.



(R.C. § 3743.99(C), (D))



Statutory reference:



   Civil penalties for violations of State Fire Code, see R.C. §
3737.51(B) - (H)



CHAPTER 93:  PARKS AND RECREATION



Section



   93.01   Closing time for parks and recreation areas



   93.02   Swimming pool rates



   93.03   Shelter house rent



§ 93.01  CLOSING TIME FOR PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS.



   The closing time for all parks and recreation areas shall be 11:00 p.m.
each night unless specifically changed for definite occasions by the Village
Council.



(Ord. 85-2-1, passed  - -85)



§ 93.02  SWIMMING POOL RATES.



   The village swimming pools rates and fees will be established from time
to time as necessary by the Village Council.



(Ord. 97-5-1, passed  - -97; Am. Ord. 02-05-04, passed 5-7-02; Am. Ord.
12-03-01, passed 4-17-12)



§ 93.03  SHELTER HOUSE RENT.



    Beginning on March 1, 2018, the rental fee for the use of a village
shelter house shall be $60 for shelters with restroom facilities and shall be
$40 for shelters without restroom facilities. An additional deposit of $50
will be required from all renters, which will be returned to the renter, if
the facility is cleaned after use.



(Ord. 04-01-02, passed 2-17-04; Am. Ord. 18-02-02, passed 2-22-18)



CHAPTER 94:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section




General Provisions




   94.01   Street or sidewalk obstruction



   94.02   Maintenance of sidewalks



   94.03   Construction requirements for sidewalks and driveway
approach aprons



   94.04   Rules for excavations



   94.05   Placement of obstruction




Trees




   94.15   Shade Tree Commission



   94.16   Permit required for planting trees



   94.17   Maintenance of curb trees




Unsafe Trees




   94.25   Unsafe trees a nuisance



   94.26   Notice to owner



   94.27   Fees for service and return



   94.28   Procedure when owner fails to comply



   94.29   Written return to County Auditor amount as a lien upon
property



 



   94.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Right-of-way management, see Chapter 97



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 94.01  STREET OR SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTION.



   (A)   No person shall obstruct any street, alley, sidewalk, public
ground, or other public way within the municipality by erecting thereon any
fence, structure or building, or permitting any fence, structure or building
to remain thereon unless authorized by the Legislative Authority or other
proper municipal official.  Each day that any such fence or building is
permitted to remain upon such public way shall be deemed a separate offense.



(R.C. § 5589.01)



   (B)   No owner or occupier of real property in the village shall
permit any shrub or tree to extend onto or over any public sidewalk in a
manner that it will impede or strike any pedestrian. No owner or occupier of
real property in the village shall fail to trim or remove any shrub or tree
that extends onto or over any public sidewalk within a period of ten days
after receipt of written or oral notice from the Chief of Police advising of
the violation of this section and requesting the trimming or removal.



   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 5589.99(A))




   (D)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.




(Ord. 97-10-3, passed  - -97)



Cross-reference:



   Driving upon sidewalk prohibited, see § 72.58



§ 94.02  MAINTENANCE OF SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of every owner of a lot upon
which sidewalks have previously been constructed either on or adjoining his
or her  property to maintain the sidewalks in a good and safe condition.



   (B)   Defects in sidewalks shall be repaired in accordance with the
Design Standards Manual.



   (C)   If the repair work involves more than 30 square feet then the
property owner or contractor shall obtain a permit from the village.



   (D)   Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall
be guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(Ord. 87- , passed 7-10-87)



§ 94.03  CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS FOR SIDEWALKS AND DRIVEWAY APPROACH
APRONS.



   (A)   All public sidewalks hereafter constructed or repaired in the
village, including sidewalks crossing driveway areas, shall be constructed of
concrete.  No public sidewalks, including those crossing driveways, may
hereafter be constructed of stone, gravel, asphalt or any other material than
concrete.



(Ord. 1959- , passed 7-7-59)



   (B)   New streets or streets that are improved with a new integral
curb and gutter and a new 404 pavement shall have concrete drive installed
from the curb to the sidewalks (or where the sidewalk normally would be
installed). These driveway aprons shall conform to the details on file with
the Village Administrator. These driveway aprons shall be installed within 12
months after the installation of the 404 pavement. All concrete shall have a
minimum strength of 4000 pounds per square inch at 28 days, and shall be
properly cured. The property owner shall pay for the above improvements and
nonconformance with this division (B) shall allow the village to perform the
above work and collect the bill from the property owner.



(Ord. 79-9-3, passed 9-21-79)



§ 94.04  RULES FOR EXCAVATIONS.



   (A)   Any person, corporation, partnership, or any other type of
entity making an excavation, or opening of any kind in a public street or
alley or utility right-of-way, shall first obtain a permit approved by the
Village Administrator of the village.



   (B)   In the event of emergencies permits shall be obtained as soon
as possible.



   (C)   All excavations made in travel areas shall be filled with
compacted gravel or granulated fill and resurfaced as approved by the Street
Commissioner.



(Ord. 77-10-3, passed  - -77)



§ 94.05  PLACEMENT OF OBSTRUCTION.



   (A)   An OBSTRUCTION is defined as a refuse container/roll-off
dumpster, construction materials associated with a building project other
than street construction or repair, or other stationary objects which may
require temporary placement upon a public street or right-of-way.



   (B)   No person shall place any obstruction in or upon a public
street or right-of-way without first obtaining a permit.  Applications for
such permit shall be made on forms as may be prescribed and shall contain
such information as is reasonably necessary to make a fair determination
whether a permit shall be issued, and such application shall be filed not
less than 48 hours in advance of the placement of the obstruction.



   (C)   A permit shall be denied or cancelled if the following
requirements for the placement of a temporary obstruction upon a public
street or right-of-way are not met, satisfied or maintained:



      (1)   Such obstruction shall not exceed an overall length of
24 feet and a width of eight feet.



      (2)   The location for the placement of the temporary
obstruction shall not impair the vision of motorists or pedestrians using a
public street or right-of-way in the general area of the obstruction, and
that the location for the placement of the obstruction is deemed to be safe
and proper by authorities.



      (3)   That reflectorized barricades shall be placed at each
end of the obstruction perpendicular to the curb line or such temporary
obstruction shall be required to display reflectorized striping either
red/white or orange/white for night visibility and safety.  Three continuous
horizontal reflectorized stripes four inches minimum width shall be displayed
along the top, center and bottom of the entire length and width of the three
sides of the temporary obstruction which are exposed to traffic.  Such
barricades shall be placed and maintained by the owner or user of the
obstruction for the entire duration that the obstruction remains at its
location.  Such barricades shall be a saw buck type with reflectorized tape
on the cross arm, and shall be a minimum of eight feet in length.



      (4)   Said temporary obstruction shall not remain upon a
public street or right-of-way for more than 14 consecutive days; however, a
permit may be renewed for an additional 14 consecutive days.



      (5)   That the public street or right-of-way surrounding the
temporary obstruction shall be kept clean and free of debris.



   (D)   Whoever violates any such provision shall be guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.  A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during
or on which a violation continues or occurs.



(Ord. 13-10-01, passed 11-5-13)  Penalty, see § 94.99



TREES



§ 94.15  SHADE TREE COMMISSION.



   (A)   There is hereby created and established a Shade Tree
Commission for the village in accordance with R.C. §§ 727.011 and 715.20.



   (B)   This Shade Tree Commission shall consist of the following six
members: Village Administrator, a member of Village Council, and four
persons, citizens and residents of the village, who shall be appointed by the
Mayor with approval of the Council.



   (C)   The term of the four persons to be appointed by the Mayor
shall be three years except that the term of two members appointed to the
first Commission shall be only one and two years, respectively. In the event
that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, his successor shall
be appointed by the Mayor for the unexpired portion of said term.



   (D)   Members of this Commission shall serve without compensation.



   (E)   The Commission shall have the power to study, investigate,
plan, advise, report and recommend to Council, the Village Administrator or
Mayor, any action, program, plan, or legislation which the Commission shall
find or determine to be necessary or advisable for the care, preservation,
trimming, planting, replanting, removal, or disposition of trees and shrubs
in the public ways, streets, and alleys.



   (F)   The Commission shall choose its own officers, make its own
rules and regulations and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of
the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. All plans,
findings, advice, reports, and recommendations made by the Commission shall
be in writing and designate by name those members of the Commission approving
or concurring therein, and members who do not so approve or concur therein
shall have the right, as part of such report, to state their reasons for
refusing to approve or concur.



   (G)   The Commission when requested by the Council, the Mayor, or
the Village Administrator, shall consider, investigate, make findings, report
and recommend upon any special matter or questions coming within the scope of
its work.



   (H)   This section and the rules and regulations as established by
the Shade Tree Commission shall conform in such a manner as to not make null
and void all existing polices and procedures identified by ordinance or
policy of the village. Upon a recommendation by the Shade Tree Commission to
the Village Council, the Council shall make the determination to pay for,
share, or assess the cost of the care, preservation, trimming, planting,
replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in the public
right-of-ways, streets, or alleys.



(Ord. 96-11-1, passed  - -96)



§ 94.16  PERMIT FOR PLANTING TREES.



   No person shall hereafter plant any tree upon any public right-of-way,
street or alley unless he or she shall have first obtained a permit in
writing from the village specifying the size, type, species, and location on
the public right-of-way, street, or alley of the tree so to be planted. Any
person violating the provisions hereof shall be fined not more than $50 and
the cost of prosecution. The Village Administrator shall have the authority
to deny a permit to any person who proposes to plant any tree or shrub upon a
public way, street, or alley, of a size, type or species found to be
undesirable by the Commission, or found to be undesirable for the location
proposed; or a permit may be denied to any person who proposes to plant any
tree or shrub upon a public way, street, or alley if the location is
unsuitable for the type or size of the tree.



(Ord. 96-11-1, passed  - -96)



§ 94.17  MAINTENANCE OF CURB TREES.



   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of every owner of a lot within
the village to maintain the trees located within the curb lawn (that area
between the sidewalk and the curb) in a safe condition, and shall trim from
the trees any portions thereof that are unsafe to persons and vehicles using
the public ways.



   (B)   Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.



(Ord. 87- , passed 7-10-87)



UNSAFE TREES



§ 94.25  UNSAFE TREES A NUISANCE.



   (A)   R.C. § 715.20 gives a municipality the power to regulate and
provide for the trimming of trees in a street or alley.  R.C. § 723.01
imposes upon the village the duty to keep streets and sidewalks open, in good
repair, and free from nuisance.



   (B)   Unsafe trees and limbs that pose a threat to the safety of
users of the public streets and alleys are hereby declared a public nuisance.



   (C)   Any person owning or having charge of land within the
municipality shall keep such property free and clear from all unsafe trees
and limbs that pose a threat to users of the public streets and alleys.



(Ord. 02-07-02, passed 7-23-02)



§ 94.26  NOTICE TO OWNER.



   (A)   Upon information that such an unsafe tree or limb exists upon
lands in the municipality, the Legislative Authority shall cause written
notice to be served on the owner, lessee, agent, or tenant having charge of
such land, giving notice that an unsafe tree or limb exists on such lands and
that they must be cut or trimmed within 15 days after service of such notice.



   (B)   The notice shall be sent to the last known address of the
owner or other person having charge of the land, or delivered by the Chief of
Police or a police officer.  If the owner or other person having charge
served by the Police Chief of police officer is a nonresident of the village
whose address is known, the notice shall be sent to his or her address by
certified mail.  If the address of the owner or other person having charge
of and land is unknown, it is sufficient to publish the notice once in a
newspaper of general circulation in the county.



(Ord. 02-07-02, passed 7-23-02)



§ 94.27  FEES FOR SERVICE AND RETURN.



   The Chief of Police or any police officer may make service and return
of the notice provided for in § 94.26 and shall be allowed the same fees as
provided for service and return of summons in civil cases.



(Ord. 02-07-02, passed 7-23-02)



§ 94.28  PROCEDURE WHEN OWNER FAILS TO COMPLY.



   (A)   If the owner, lessee, agent, or tenant having charge of the
lands mentioned in § 94.25 to comply with the notice required by such
section, the Legislative Authority shall cause such unsafe trees or limbs to
be cut, and may hire the necessary machinery and labor to perform the task,
or may use village labor and machinery, and charge therefore the rates and
fees established by written schedule.



   (B)   Expenses incurred shall, when approved by Council, be paid out
of the money in the treasury not otherwise appropriated.



(Ord. 02-07-02, passed 7-23-02)



§ 94.29  WRITTEN RETURN TO COUNTY AUDITOR AMOUNT AS A LIEN UPON PROPERTY.



    The Legislative Authority shall make a written return to the County
Auditor of its action under §§ 94.25 through 94.28, inclusive, with a
statement of the charges incurred including labor, machinery, fees serving
notice, and a proper description of the premises.  These amounts shall be
entered upon the tax duplicate and be a lien upon such lands from and after
the date of entry, and be collected as other taxes and returned to the
municipality with the general fund.



(Ord. 02-07-02, passed 7-23-02)



§ 94.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provisions of this chapter for which another
penalty is not already provided shall be subject to the penalty as prescribed
in § 10.99.



CHAPTER 95:  ANIMALS



Section




Animals Running at Large




   95.01   Dogs or other animals running at large; nuisance, dangerous
or vicious dogs; hearings



   95.02   Confining animal found at large; publication of notice; lien



   95.03   Unavoidable escapes



   95.04   Fees



   95.05   Rabies quarantine orders of Mayor



   95.06   Interfering with enforcement of quarantine orders



   95.07   Dogs may be killed for certain acts




Offenses Relating to Animals




   95.10   Abandoning animals



   95.11   Injuring animals



   95.12   Poisoning animals



   95.13   Cruelty to animals; cruelty to companion animals



   95.14   Animal fights



   95.15   Trapshooting



   95.16   Loud dog



   95.17   Dog tags



   95.18   Nuisance, dangerous and vicious dog defined; transfer of
ownership certificate; form stating dog's prior behavior



   95.19   Failure to register dog or dog kennel



   95.20   Hindering the capture of unregistered dog



   95.21   Unlawful tag



   95.22   Rights of blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility
impaired person, or trainer with assistance dog



   95.23   Retail sale and transportation of dogs



   95.24   Coloring rabbits or baby poultry; regulation of sale and
display



   95.25   Jacklighting prohibited



   95.26   Restrictions on dog ownership for certain convicted felons



   95.27   Sexual conduct with an animal



 



   95.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Assaulting police dog, horse or assistance dog, see § 136.15



Statutory reference:



   Hunting and fishing regulations, see R.C. Chapter 1533



   Law enforcement canine registration, see R.C. § 955.012



   Nuisance wild animal trapping, see O.A.C. § 1501:31-15-03



   Possession of dangerous wild animals and restricted snakes,
requirements and licensing, see R.C. Chapter 935



   Rabies: report of dog bite, confinement of animal, report of suspected
rabid animal, see O.A.C. §§ 3701-3-28 et seq.



ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE



§ 95.01  DOGS OR OTHER ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE; NUISANCE, DANGEROUS OR
VICIOUS DOGS; HEARINGS.



   (A)   Animals running at large.



      (1)   No person, who is the owner or keeper of horses, mules,
cattle, bison, sheep, goats, swine, llamas, alpacas, or poultry, shall permit
them to run at large in the public road, highway, street, lane, or alley, or
upon unenclosed land, or cause the animals to be herded, kept, or detained
for the purpose of grazing on premises other than those owned or lawfully
occupied by the owner or keeper of the animals.



(R.C. §§ 951.02)



      (2)   Whoever recklessly violates division (A)(1) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 951.99)



      (3)   The owner or keeper of an animal described in division
(A)(1) of this section who negligently permits it to run at large in
violation of division (A)(1) of this section is liable for all damages
resulting from injury, death, or loss to person or property caused by the
animal in any of the places specified in division (A)(1) of this section or
upon the premises of another without reference to the fence that may enclose
the premises.



      (4)   The running at large of any animal specified in division
(A)(1) of this section in or upon any of the places specified in division
(A)(1) of this section is prima facie evidence in a civil action for damages
under division (A)(3) of this section that the owner or keeper of the animal
negligently permitted the animal to run at large in violation of division
(A)(1) of this section.



(R.C. § 951.10)



   (B)   Dogs running at large; dangerous dogs; debarked or surgically
silenced dangerous dogs.



      (1)   As used in this division (B), DANGEROUS DOG has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 955.11.



      (2)   No owner, keeper, or harborer of any female dog shall
permit it to go beyond the premises of the owner, keeper, or harborer at any
time the dog is in heat unless the dog is properly in leash.



      (3)   Except when a dog is lawfully engaged in hunting and
accompanied by the owner, keeper, harborer, or handler of the dog, no owner,
keeper, or harborer of any dog shall fail at any time to do either of the
following:



         (a)   Keep the dog physically confined or restrained
upon the premises of the owner, keeper, or harborer by a leash, tether,
adequate fence, supervision, or secure enclosure to prevent escape;



         (b)   Keep the dog under the reasonable control of some
person.



      (4)   Except when a dangerous dog is lawfully engaged in
hunting or training for the purpose of hunting and is accompanied by the
owner, keeper, harborer, or handler of the dog, no owner, keeper, or harborer
of a dangerous dog shall fail to do either of the following:



         (a)   While the dog is on the premises of the owner,
keeper, or harborer, securely confine it at all times in a locked pen that
has a top, locked fenced yard, or other locked enclosure that has a top.



         (b)   While the dog is off the premises of the owner,
keeper, or harborer, keep that dog on a chain-link leash or tether that is
not more than six feet in length and additionally do at least one of the
following: keep the dog in a locked pen that has a top, locked fenced yard,
or other locked enclosure that has a top; have the leash or tether controlled
by a person who is of suitable age and discretion or securely attach, tie, or
affix the leash or tether to the ground or a stationary object or fixture so
that the dog is adequately restrained and station a person in close enough
proximity to that dog so as to prevent it from causing injury to any person;
or muzzle that dog.



      (5)   No person who has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
three or more violations of division (B)(3) of this section involving the
same dog and no owner, keeper, or harborer of a dangerous dog shall fail to
do the following:



         (a)   Obtain liability insurance with an insurer
authorized to write liability insurance in this state providing coverage in
each occurrence because of damage or bodily injury to or death of a person
caused by the dangerous dog if so ordered by a court and provide proof of
that liability insurance upon request to any law enforcement officer, county
dog warden, or public health official charged with enforcing this section;



         (b)   Obtain a dangerous dog registration certificate
from the County Auditor pursuant to division (B)(9) of this section, affix a
tag that identifies the dog as a dangerous dog to the dog’s collar, and
ensure that the dog wears the collar and tag at all times;



         (c)   Notify the local dog warden immediately if any of
the following occurs:



            1.   The dog is loose or unconfined.



            2.   The dog bites a person, unless the dog is on
the property of the owner of the dog, and the person who is bitten is
unlawfully trespassing or committing a criminal act within the boundaries of
that property.



            3.   The dog attacks another animal while the dog
is off the property of the owner of the dog.



         (d)   If the dog is sold, given to another person, or
dies, notify the County Auditor within ten days of the sale, transfer, or
death.



      (6)   No person shall do any of the following:



         (a)   Debark or surgically silence a dog that the person
knows or has reason to believe is a dangerous dog;



         (b)   Possess a dangerous dog if the person knows or has
reason to believe that the dog has been debarked or surgically silenced;



         (c)   Falsely attest on a waiver form provided by the
veterinarian under division (B)(7) of this section that the person’s dog is
not a dangerous dog or otherwise provide false information on that written
waiver form.



      (7)   Before a veterinarian debarks or surgically silences a
dog, the veterinarian may give the owner of the dog a written waiver form
that attests that the dog is not a dangerous dog. The written waiver form
shall include all of the following:



         (a)   The veterinarian’s license number and current
business address;



         (b)   The number of the license of the dog if the dog is
licensed;



         (c)   A reasonable description of the age, coloring, and
gender of the dog as well as any notable markings on the dog;



         (d)   The signature of the owner of the dog attesting
that the owner’s dog is not a dangerous dog;



         (e)   A statement that R.C. § 955.22(F) prohibits any
person from doing any of the following:



            1.   Debarking or surgically silencing a dog that
the person knows or has reason to believe is a dangerous dog;



            2.   Possessing a dangerous dog if the person
knows or has reason to believe that the dog has been debarked or surgically
silenced;



            3.   Falsely attesting on a waiver form provided
by the veterinarian under R.C. § 955.22(G) that the person’s dog is not a
dangerous dog or otherwise provide false information on that written waiver
form.



      (8)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of a violation
of division (B)(6) of this section that the veterinarian who is charged with
the violation obtained, prior to debarking or surgically silencing the dog, a
written waiver form that complies with division (B)(7) of this section and
that attests that the dog is not a dangerous dog.



      (9)   (a)   The County Auditor shall issue a dangerous dog
registration certificate to a person who is the owner of a dog, who is 18
years of age or older, and who provides the following to the County Auditor:



            1.   A fee of $50;



            2.   The person’s address, phone number, and
other appropriate means for the local dog warden or County Auditor to contact
the person;



            3.   With respect to the person and the dog for
which the registration is sought, all of the following:



               a.   Either satisfactory evidence of the
dog’s current rabies vaccination or a statement from a licensed
veterinarian that a rabies vaccination is medically contraindicated for the
dog;



               b.    Either satisfactory evidence of the
fact that the dog has been neutered or spayed or a statement from a licensed
veterinarian that neutering or spaying of the dog is medically
contraindicated;



               c.   Satisfactory evidence of the fact that
the person has posted and will continue to post clearly visible signs at the
person’s residence warning both minors and adults of the presence of a
dangerous dog on the property;



               d.   Satisfactory evidence of the fact that
the dog has been permanently identified by means of a microchip and the
dog’s microchip number.



         (b)   Upon the issuance of a dangerous dog registration
certificate to the owner of a dog, the County Auditor shall provide the owner
with a uniformly designed tag that identifies the animal as a dangerous dog.
The owner shall renew the certificate annually for the same fee and in the
same manner as the initial certificate was obtained. If a certificate holder
relocates to a new county, the certificate holder shall follow the procedure
in division (B)(9)(c)2. of this section and, upon the expiration of the
certificate issued in the original county, shall renew the certificate in the
new county.



         (c)   1.   If the owner of a dangerous dog for whom a
registration certificate has previously been obtained relocates to a new
address within the same county, the owner shall provide notice of the new
address to the County Auditor within ten days of relocating to the new
address.



            2.   If the owner of a dangerous dog for whom a
registration certificate has previously been obtained relocates to a new
address within another county, the owner shall do both of the following
within ten days of relocating to the new address:



               a.   Provide written notice of the new
address and a copy of the original dangerous dog registration certificate to
the County Auditor of the new county;



               b.   Provide written notice of the new
address to the County Auditor of the county where the owner previously
resided.



         (d)   The owner of a dangerous dog shall present the
dangerous dog registration certificate upon being requested to do so by any
law enforcement officer, dog warden, or public health official charged with
enforcing this section.



(R.C. § 955.22)



   (C)   Hearing.



      (1)   The municipal court or county court that has territorial
jurisdiction over the residence of the owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog
shall conduct any hearing concerning the designation of the dog as a nuisance
dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog.



      (2)   If a person who is authorized to enforce this chapter
has reasonable cause to believe that a dog in the person’s jurisdiction is
a nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog, the person shall notify the
owner, keeper, or harborer of that dog, by certified mail or in person, of
both of the following:



         (a)   That the person has designated the dog a nuisance
dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog, as applicable;



         (b)   That the owner, keeper, or harborer of the dog may
request a hearing regarding the designation in accordance with this division
(C). The notice shall include instructions for filing a request for a hearing
in the county in which the dog’s owner, keeper, or harborer resides.



      (3)   If the owner, keeper, or harborer of the dog disagrees
with the designation of the dog as a nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious
dog, as applicable, the owner, keeper, or harborer, not later than ten days
after receiving notification of the designation, may request a hearing
regarding the determination. The request for a hearing shall be in writing
and shall be filed with the municipal court or county court that has
territorial jurisdiction over the residence of the dog’s owner, keeper, or
harborer. At the hearing, the person who designated the dog as a nuisance
dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog has the burden of proving, by clear and
convincing evidence, that the dog is a nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or
vicious dog. The owner, keeper, or harborer of the dog or the person who
designated the dog as a nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog may
appeal the court’s final determination as in any other case filed in that
court.



      (4)   A court, upon motion of an owner, keeper, or harborer or
an attorney representing the owner, keeper, or harborer, may order that the
dog designated as a nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog be held in
the possession of the owner, keeper, or harborer until the court makes a
final determination under this section or during the pendency of an appeal,
as applicable. Until the court makes a final determination and during the
pendency of any appeal, the dog shall be confined or restrained in accordance
with the provisions of division (B)(4) that apply to dangerous dogs
regardless of whether the dog has been designated as a vicious dog or a
nuisance dog rather than a dangerous dog. The owner, keeper, or harborer of
the dog shall not be required to comply with any other requirements
established in this Code or the Ohio Revised Code that concern a nuisance
dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog, as applicable, until the court makes a
final determination and during the pendency of any appeal.



      (5)   If a dog is finally determined under this division (C),
or on appeal as described in this division (C), to be a vicious dog, §
90.28(D) and divisions (B)(4) to (B)(9) of this section apply with respect to
the dog and the owner, keeper, or harborer of the dog as if the dog were a
dangerous dog, and § 90.36 applies with respect to the dog as if it were a
dangerous dog, and the court shall issue an order that specifies that those
provisions apply with respect to the dog and the owner, keeper, or harborer
in that manner. As part of the order, the court shall require the owner,
keeper, or harborer to obtain the liability insurance required under division
(B)(5)(a) in an amount described in division (D)(4)(b) of this section.



      (6)   As used in this division (C), NUISANCE DOG, DANGEROUS
DOG, and VICIOUS DOG have the same meanings as in R.C. § 955.11.



(R.C. § 955.222)  (Rev. 2013)



   (D)   Penalty.



      (1)   (a)   Whoever violates division (B)(2) of this
section or commits a violation of division (B)(3) of this section that
involves a dog that is not a nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog
shall be fined not less than $25 or more than $100 on a first offense, and on
each subsequent offense shall be fined not less than $75 or more than $250
and may be imprisoned for not more than 30 days.



         (b)   In addition to the penalties prescribed in
division (D)(1)(a) of this section, if the offender is guilty of a violation
of division (B)(2) of this section or a violation of division (B)(3) of this
section that involves a dog that is not a nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or
vicious dog, the court may order the offender to personally supervise the dog
that the offender owns, keeps, or harbors, to cause that dog to complete dog
obedience training, or to do both.



(R.C. § 955.99(E))



      (2)   (a)   Whoever commits a violation of division (B)(3)
of this section that involves a nuisance dog is guilty of a minor misdemeanor
on the first offense and of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on each
subsequent offense involving the same dog. Upon a person being convicted of
or pleading guilty to a third violation of division (B)(3) of this section
involving the same dog, the court shall require the offender to register the
involved dog as a dangerous dog.



         (b)   In addition to the penalties prescribed in
division (D)(2)(a) of this section, if a violation of division (B)(3) of this
section involves a nuisance dog, the court may order the offender to
personally supervise the nuisance dog that the offender owns, keeps, or
harbors, to cause that dog to complete dog obedience training, or to do both.



(R.C. § 955.99(F))



      (3)   Whoever commits a violation of division (B)(3) of this
section that involves a dangerous dog, or a violation of division (B)(4) of
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first
offense and of a misdemeanor of the third degree on each subsequent offense.
Additionally, the court may order the offender to personally supervise the
dangerous dog that the offender owns, keeps, or harbors, to cause that dog to
complete dog obedience training, or to do both, and the court may order the
offender to obtain liability insurance pursuant to division (B)(5) of this
section. The court, in the alternative, may order the dangerous dog to be
humanely destroyed by a licensed veterinarian, the county dog warden, or the
county humane society at the owner’s expense. With respect to a violation
of division (B)(3) of this section that involves a dangerous dog, until the
court makes a final determination and during the pendency of any appeal of a
violation of that division and at the discretion of the dog warden, the dog
shall be confined or restrained in accordance with division (B)(4) of this
section or at the county dog pound at the owner’s expense.



(R.C. § 955.99(G))



      (4)   (a)   Whoever commits a violation of division (B)(3)
of this section that involves a vicious dog is guilty of one of the following:



            1.   A felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law if the dog kills or seriously injures a person. Additionally, the
court shall order that the vicious dog be humanely destroyed by a licensed
veterinarian, the county dog warden, or the county humane society at the
owner’s expense.



            2.   A misdemeanor of the first degree if the dog
causes serious injury to a person. Additionally, the court may order the
vicious dog to be humanely destroyed by a licensed veterinarian, the county
dog warden, or the county humane society at the owner’s expense.



         (b)   If the court does not order the vicious dog to be
destroyed under division (D)(4)(a)2. of this section, the court shall issue
an order that specifies that § 90.28(D) and divisions (B)(4) to (B)(9) of
this section apply with respect to the dog and the owner, keeper, or harborer
of the dog as if the dog were a dangerous dog and that § 90.36 applies with
respect to the dog as if it were a dangerous dog. As part of the order, the
court shall order the offender to obtain the liability insurance required
under division (B)(5)(a) of this section in an amount, exclusive of interest
and costs, that equals or exceeds $100,000. Until the court makes a final
determination and during the pendency of any appeal of a violation of
division (B)(3) of this section and at the discretion of the dog warden, the
dog shall be confined or restrained in accordance with the provisions
described in division (B)(4) of this section or at the county dog pound at
the owner’s expense.



(R.C. § 955.99(H))



      (5)   Whoever violates division (B)(5)(b) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 955.99(J))



      (6)   Whoever violates division (B)(6)(a), (B)(6)(b), or
(B)(6)(c) of this section is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. Additionally, the court shall order that the dog
involved in the violation be humanely destroyed by a licensed veterinarian,
the county dog warden, or the county humane society. Until the court makes a
final determination and during the pendency of any appeal of a violation of
division (B)(6)(a), (B)(6)(b), or (B)(6)(c) of this section and at the
discretion of the dog warden, the dog shall be confined or restrained in
accordance with the provisions of division (B)(4) of this section or at the
county dog pound at the owner’s expense.



(R.C. § 955.99(L))



      (7)   Whoever violates division (B)(5)(a), (B)(5)(c), or
(B)(5)(d) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 955.99(M))



      (8)   Whoever violates division (B)(9)(d) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 955.99(N))



      (9)   (a)   If a dog is confined at the county dog pound
pursuant to division (D)(3), (D)(4), or (D)(6) of this section, the county
dog warden shall give written notice of the confinement to the owner of the
dog. If the county dog warden is unable to give the notice to the owner of
the dog, the county dog warden shall post the notice on the door of the
residence of the owner of the dog or in another conspicuous place on the
premises at which the dog was seized. The notice shall include a statement
that a security in the amount of $100 is due to the county dog warden within
ten days to secure payment of all reasonable expenses, including medical care
and boarding of the dog for 60 days, expected to be incurred by the county
dog pound in caring for the dog pending the determination. The county dog
warden may draw from the security any actual costs incurred in caring for the
dog.



         (b)   If the person ordered to post security under
division (D)(9)(a) of this section does not do so within ten days of the
confinement of the animal, the dog is forfeited, and the county dog warden
may determine the disposition of the dog unless the court issues an order
that specifies otherwise.



         (c)   Not more than ten days after the court makes a
final determination under division (D)(3), (D)(4), or (D)(6) of this section,
the county dog warden shall provide the owner of the dog with the actual cost
of the confinement of the dog. If the county dog warden finds that the
security provided under division (D)(9)(a) of this section is less than the
actual cost of confinement of the dog, the owner shall remit the difference
between the security provided and the actual cost to the county dog warden
within 30 days after the court’s determination. If the county dog warden
finds that the security provided under division (D)(9)(a) of this section is
greater than that actual cost, the county dog warden shall remit the
difference between the security provided and the actual cost to the owner
within 30 days after the court’s determination.



(R.C. § 955.99(P))



      (10)   As used in this division (D), NUISANCE DOG, DANGEROUS
DOG, and VICIOUS DOG have the same meanings as in R.C. § 955.11.



(R.C. § 955.99(Q))



Statutory reference:



   Power of municipality to regulate animals running at large, see R.C.
§§ 715.23 and 955.221



§ 95.02  CONFINING ANIMAL FOUND AT LARGE; PUBLICATION OF NOTICE; LIEN.



   A person finding an animal at large in violation of § 95.01(A)(1) may,
and a law enforcement officer of the municipality on view or information
shall, take and confine that animal, promptly giving notice of the taking and
confining of the animal to the owner or keeper, if known, and if not known,
by publishing a notice describing the animal once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the county or municipality where the animal was found. If the
owner or keeper does not appear and claim the animal and pay the compensation
prescribed in § 95.04 for so taking, advertising, and keeping it within ten
days from the date of the notice, that person or the county shall have a lien
for that compensation and the animal may be sold at public auction as
provided in R.C. § 1311.49. The residue of the proceeds of sale shall be
paid and deposited by the Treasurer in the General Funds of the county.



(R.C. § 951.11)



§ 95.03  UNAVOIDABLE ESCAPES.



   If it is proven that an animal running at large in violation of §
95.01(A)(1) escaped from its owner or keeper without the owner’s or
keeper’s knowledge or fault, the animal shall be returned to its owner or
keeper upon payment of the compensation prescribed in § 95.04 for its
taking, advertising and keeping.



(R.C. § 951.12)



§ 95.04  FEES.



   (A)   The person or municipality whose law enforcement officer takes
an animal running at large in violation of § 95.01(A)(1) is entitled to
receive from the owner or keeper of the animal the following compensation:



      (1)   For taking and advertising each animal, $5; and



      (2)   Reasonable expenses actually incurred for keeping each
animal.



   (B)   Compensation for taking, advertising, and keeping a single
herd or flock shall not exceed $50 when the flock or herd belongs to one
person.



(R.C. § 951.13)



§ 95.05  RABIES QUARANTINE ORDERS OF MAYOR.



   (A)   Whenever, in the judgment of the Mayor or his or her designee,
rabies is prevalent, he or she shall declare a quarantine of all dogs in the
municipality or a part thereof.  During the quarantine, the owner, keeper or
harborer of any dog shall keep it confined on the premises of the owner,
keeper or harborer or in a pound, kennel, or other suitable place, at the
expense of the owner, keeper or harborer, except that a dog may be permitted
to leave the premises of its owner, keeper or harborer if it is under leash
or under the control of a responsible person.  The quarantine order shall be
considered an emergency and need not be published.



   (B)   When the quarantine has been declared, the Mayor or his or her
designee may require the vaccination for rabies of all dogs within the
municipality or part thereof.



(R.C. § 955.26)



   (C)   No person shall violate a rabies quarantine order issued under
this section or R.C. § 955.26.



(R.C. § 955.39)



   (D)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor for a first offense; for each subsequent offense such
person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 955.99(C))



§ 95.06  INTERFERING WITH ENFORCEMENT OF QUARANTINE ORDERS.



   (A)   No person shall hinder, obstruct, resist or interfere with any
enforcing officer while engaged in enforcing an order issued under § 95.05.



   (B)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the
hindrance, obstruction, resistance, or interference alleged consisted of
constitutionally protected speech only.



Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.07  DOGS MAY BE KILLED FOR CERTAIN ACTS.



    Subject to R.C. § 955.261(A)(2) and (3), a dog that is chasing or
approaching in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack that
attempts to bite or otherwise endanger, or that kills or injures a person, or
a dog that chases, threatens, harasses, injures, or kills livestock, poultry,
other domestic animal, or other animal that is the property of another
person, except a cat or another dog, can be killed at the time of that
chasing, threatening, harassment, approaching, attempt, killing or injury. 
If, in attempting to kill such a dog, a person wounds it, the person is not
liable to prosecution under the criminal laws or ordinances that punish
cruelty to animals.  Nothing in this section precludes a law enforcement
officer from killing a dog that attacks a police dog as defined in R.C. §
2921.321.



(R.C. § 955.28(A))



OFFENSES RELATING TO ANIMALS



§ 95.10  ABANDONING ANIMALS.



   (A)   No owner or keeper of a dog, cat, or other domestic animal
shall abandon the animal.



(R.C. § 959.01)



   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the
first degree on each subsequent offense.



(R.C. § 959.99(E)(2))



§ 95.11  INJURING ANIMALS.



   (A)   No person shall maliciously, or willfully and without the
consent of the owner, kill or injure a dog, cat, or any other domestic animal
that is the property of another.  This section does not apply to a licensed
veterinarian acting in an official capacity.



(R.C. § 959.02)



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
second degree.  If the value of the animal killed or the injury done amounts
to $300 or more, whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 959.99(B))



   (C)   This section does not apply to a person killing or injuring an
animal or attempting to do so while endeavoring to prevent it from
trespassing upon his or her enclosure, or while it is so trespassing, or
while driving it away from his or her premises; provided within 15 days
thereafter, payment is made for damages done to such animal by killing or
injuring, less the actual amount of damage done by such animal while so
trespassing, or a sufficient sum of money is deposited with the nearest judge
of a county court or judge of a municipal court having jurisdiction within
such time to cover the damages.  The deposit shall remain in the custody of
such judge until there is a determination of the damage resulting from such
killing or injury and from the trespass.  The judge and his or her bondsmen
shall be responsible for the safekeeping of such money and for the payment
thereof as for money collected upon a judgment.



(R.C. § 959.04)



§ 95.12  POISONING ANIMALS.



   (A)   No person shall maliciously, or willfully and without the
consent of the owner, administer poison, except a licensed veterinarian
acting in such capacity, to a  dog, cat, or any other domestic animal that
is the property of another; and no person shall, willfully and without the
consent of the owner, place any poisoned food where it may be easily found
and eaten by any such animal, either upon his or her own lands or the lands
of another.



(R.C. § 959.03)



   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 959.99(C))



   (C)   This section does not apply to a person killing or injuring an
animal or attempting to do so while endeavoring to prevent it from
trespassing upon his or her enclosure, or while it is so trespassing, or
while driving it away from his or her premises; provided that within 15 days
thereafter, payment is made for damages done to such animal by killing or
injuring, less the actual amount of damage done by such animal while so
trespassing, or a sufficient sum of money is deposited with the nearest judge
of a county court or judge of a municipal court having jurisdiction within
such time to cover the damages.  The deposit shall remain in the custody of
such judge until there is a determination of the damage resulting from such
killing or injury and from the trespass.  The judge and his or her bondsmen
shall be responsible for the safekeeping of such money and for the payment
thereof as for money collected upon a judgment.



(R.C. § 959.04)



§ 95.13  CRUELTY TO ANIMALS; CRUELTY TO COMPANION ANIMALS.



   (A)   No person shall:



      (1)   Torture an animal, deprive one of necessary sustenance,
unnecessarily or cruelly beat, needlessly mutilate or kill, or impound or
confine an animal without supplying it during the confinement with a
sufficient quantity of good wholesome food and water;



      (2)   Impound or confine an animal without affording it,
during the confinement, access to shelter from wind, rain, snow, or excessive
direct sunlight, if it can reasonably be expected that the animal would
otherwise become sick or in some other way suffer.  This division does not
apply to animals impounded or confined prior to slaughter.  For the purpose
of this section, SHELTER means an artificial enclosure, windbreak, sunshade,
or natural windbreak or sunshade that is developed from the earth's contour,
tree development, or vegetation;



      (3)   Carry or convey an animal in a cruel or inhuman manner;



      (4)   Keep animals other than cattle, poultry or fowl, swine,
sheep, or goats in an enclosure without wholesome exercise and change of air,
nor feed cows on food that produces impure or unwholesome milk;



      (5)   Detain livestock in railroad cars or compartments longer
than 28 hours after they are so placed without supplying them with necessary
food, water, and attention, nor permit the stock to be so crowded as to
overlie, crush, wound, or kill each other.



   (B)   Upon the written request of the owner or person in custody of
any particular shipment of livestock, which written request shall be separate
and apart from any printed bill of lading or other railroad form, the length
of time in which the livestock may be detained in any cars or compartment
without food, water, and attention may be extended to 36 hours without
penalty therefor.  Division (A) of this section does not prevent the
dehorning of cattle.



   (C)   All fines collected for violations of division (A) of this
section shall be paid to the society or association for the prevention of
cruelty to animals, if there is one in the municipality; otherwise, all fines
shall be paid to the general fund.



(R.C. § 959.13)



   (D)   Cruelty to companion animals.



      (1)   As used in this section:



         BOARDING KENNEL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 956.01.



         CAPTIVE WHITE-TAILED DEER. Has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 1531.01.



         COMPANION ANIMAL. Means any animal that is kept inside a
residential dwelling and any dog or cat regardless of where it is kept,
including a pet store as defined in R.C. § 956.01. COMPANION ANIMAL does not
include livestock or any wild animal.



         CRUELTY, TORMENT, and TORTURE . Have the same meanings as
in R.C. § 1717.01.



         DOG KENNEL. Means an animal rescue for dogs that is
registered under R.C. § 956.06, a boarding kennel, or a training kennel.



         FEDERAL ANIMAL WELFARE ACT. Means the “Laboratory Animal
Act of 1966,” Pub. L. No. 89-544, 80 Stat. 350 (1966), 7 U.S.C. §§ 2131
et seq., as amended by the “Animal Welfare Act of 1970,” Pub. L. No.
91-579, 84 Stat. 1560 (1970), the “Animal Welfare Act Amendments of
1976,” Pub. L. No. 94-279, 90 Stat. 417 (1976), and the “Food Security
Act of 1985,” Pub. L. No. 99-198, 99 Stat. 1354 (1985), and as it may be
subsequently amended.



         LIVESTOCK. Means horses, mules, and other equidae; cattle,
sheep, goats, and other bovidae; swine and other suidae; poultry; alpacas;
llamas; captive white-tailed deer; and any other animal that is raised or
maintained domestically for food or fiber.



         PRACTICE OF VETERINARY MEDICINE. Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 4741.01.



         SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM. Means any of the following:



            1.   Physical harm that carries an unnecessary or
unjustifiable substantial risk of death;



            2.   Physical harm that involves either partial or
total permanent incapacity;



            3.   Physical harm that involves acute pain of a
duration that results in substantial suffering or that involves any degree of
prolonged or intractable pain;



            4.   Physical harm that results from a person who
confines or who is the custodian or caretaker of a companion animal depriving
the companion animal of good, wholesome food and water that proximately
causes the death of the companion animal.



         TRAINING KENNEL. Means an establishment operating for
profit that keeps, houses, and maintains dogs for the purpose of training the
dogs in return for a fee or other consideration.



         WILD ANIMAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1531.01.



      (2)   No person shall knowingly torture, torment, needlessly
mutilate or maim, cruelly beat, poison, needlessly kill, or commit an act of
cruelty against a companion animal.



      (3)   No person shall knowingly cause serious physical harm to
a companion animal.



      (4)   No person who confines or who is the custodian or
caretaker of a companion animal shall negligently do any of the following:



         (a)   Torture, torment, or commit an act of cruelty
against the companion animal;



         (b)   Deprive the companion animal of necessary
sustenance or confine the companion animal without supplying it during the
confinement with sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water if
it can reasonably be expected that the companion animal would become sick or
suffer in any other way as a result of or due to the deprivation or
confinement;



         (c)   Impound or confine the companion animal without
affording it, during the impoundment or confinement, with access to shelter
from heat, cold, wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct sunlight if it can
reasonably be expected that the companion animal would become sick or suffer
in any other way as a result of or due to the lack of adequate shelter.



      (5)   No owner, manager, or employee of a dog kennel who
confines or is the custodian or caretaker of a companion animal shall
knowingly do any of the following:



         (a)   Torture, torment, needlessly mutilate or maim,
cruelly beat, poison, needlessly kill, or commit an act of cruelty against
the companion animal;



         (b)   Deprive the companion animal of necessary
sustenance or confine the companion animal without supplying it during the
confinement with sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water if
it is reasonably expected that the companion animal would die or experience
unnecessary or unjustifiable pain or suffering as a result of the deprivation
or confinement;



         (c)   Impound or confine the companion animal without
affording it, during the impoundment or confinement, with access to shelter
from heat, cold, wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct sunlight if it is
reasonably expected that the companion animal would die or experience
unnecessary or unjustifiable pain or suffering as a result of or due to the
lack of adequate shelter.



      (6)   No owner, manager, or employee of a dog kennel who
confines or is the custodian or caretaker of a companion animal shall
negligently do any of the following:



         (a)   Torture, torment, or commit an act of cruelty
against the companion animal;



         (b)   Deprive the companion animal of necessary
sustenance or confine the companion animal without supplying it during the
confinement with sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water if
it can reasonably be expected that the companion animal would become sick or
suffer in any other way as a result of or due to the deprivation or
confinement;



         (c)   Impound or confine the companion animal without
affording it, during the impoundment or confinement, with access to shelter
from heat, cold, wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct sunlight if it can
reasonably be expected that the companion animal would become sick or suffer
in any other way as a result of or due to the lack of adequate shelter.



      (7)   Divisions (D)(2), (D)(3), (D)(4), (D)(5), and (D)(6) of
this section do not apply to any of the following:



         (a)   A companion animal used in scientific research
conducted by an institution in accordance with the federal animal welfare act
and related regulations;



         (b)   The lawful practice of veterinary medicine by a
person who has been issued a license, temporary permit, or registration
certificate to do so under R.C. Chapter 4741;



         (c)   Dogs being used or intended for use for hunting or
field trial purposes, provided that the dogs are being treated in accordance
with usual and commonly accepted practices for the care of hunting dogs;



         (d)   The use of common training devices, if the
companion animal is being treated in accordance with usual and commonly
accepted practices for the training of animals;



         (e)   The administering of medicine to a companion
animal that was properly prescribed by a person who has been issued a
license, temporary permit, or registration certificate under R.C. Chapter
4741.



      (8)   Notwithstanding any section of the Ohio Revised Code
that otherwise provides for the distribution of fine moneys, the Clerk of
Court shall forward all fines the Clerk collects that are so imposed for any
violation of this division (D) to the Treasurer of the municipality, whose
county humane society or law enforcement agency is to be paid the fine money
as determined under this division. The Treasurer shall pay the fine moneys to
the county humane society or the county, township, municipal corporation, or
state law enforcement agency in this state that primarily was responsible for
or involved in the investigation and prosecution of the violation. If a
county humane society receives any fine moneys under this division, the
county humane society shall use the fine moneys either to provide the
training that is required for humane agents under R.C. § 1717.06 or to
provide additional training for humane agents.



(R.C. § 959.131)



   (E)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree.  In addition, the court may order the
offender to forfeit the animal or livestock and may provide for its
disposition including, but not limited to, the sale of the animal or
livestock.  If an animal or livestock is forfeited and sold pursuant to this
division, the proceeds from the sale first shall be applied to pay the
expenses incurred with regard to the care of the animal from the time it was
taken from the custody of the former owner.  The balance of the proceeds
from the sale, if any, shall be paid to the former owner of the animal.



(R.C. § 959.99(D))



   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates division (D)(2) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree on a first offense and a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (D)(3) of this section is
guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (3)   Whoever violates division (D)(4) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree on a first offense and a
misdemeanor of the first degree on each subsequent offense.



      (4)   Whoever violates division (D)(5) of this section is
guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (5)   Whoever violates division (D)(6) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (6)   (a)   A court may order a person who is convicted of
or pleads guilty to a violation of division (D) of this section to forfeit to
an impounding agency, as defined in R.C. § 959.132, any or all of the
companion animals in that person's ownership or care. The court also may
prohibit or place limitations on the person's ability to own or care for any
companion animals for a specified or indefinite period of time.



         (b)   A court may order a person who is convicted of or
pleads guilty to a violation of division (D) of this section to reimburse an
impounding agency for the reasonably necessary costs incurred by the agency
for the care of a companion animal that the agency impounded as a result of
the investigation or prosecution of the violation, provided that the costs
were not otherwise paid under R.C. § 959.132.



      (7)   If a court has reason to believe that a person who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of division (D) of this section
suffers from a mental or emotional disorder that contributed to the
violation, the court may impose as a community control sanction or as a
condition of probation a requirement that the offender undergo psychological
evaluation or counseling. The court shall order the offender to pay the costs
of the evaluation or counseling.



(R.C. § 959.99(E))



Statutory reference:



   Impoundment of companion animals; notice and hearing, see R.C. §
959.132



§ 95.14  ANIMAL FIGHTS.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly do either of the following:



      (1)   Engage in cockfighting, bearbaiting, or pitting an
animal against another;



      (2)   Use, train, or possess any animal for seizing,
detaining, or maltreating a domestic animal.



   (B)   No person shall knowingly do either of the following:



      (1)   Be employed at cockfighting, bearbaiting, or pitting an
animal against another;



      (2)   Do any of the following regarding an event involving
cockfighting, bearbaiting, or pitting an animal against another:



         (a)   Wager money or anything else of value on the
results of the event;



         (b)   Pay money or give anything else of value in
exchange for admission to or being present at the event;



         (c)   Receive money or anything else of value in
exchange for the admission of another person to the event or for another
person to be present at the event;



         (d)   Use, possess, or permit or cause to be present at
the event any device or substance intended to enhance an animal’s ability
to fight or to inflict injury on another animal;



         (e)   Permit or cause a minor to be present at the event
if any person present at or involved with the event is conducting any of the
activities described in division (B)(1) or (B)(2)(a), (B)(2)(b), (B)(2)(c),
or (B)(2)(d) of this section.



   (C)   A person who knowingly witnesses cockfighting, bearbaiting, or
an event in which one animal is pitted against another when a violation of
division (B) of this section is occurring at the cockfighting, bearbaiting,
or event is an aider and abettor and has committed a violation of this
division.



(R.C. § 959.15)



   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) or (C) of this section is
guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 959.99(C))



Statutory reference:



   Dogfighting, felony provisions, see R.C. § 959.16



§ 95.15  TRAPSHOOTING.



   (A)   Live birds or fowl shall not be used as targets in
trapshooting.



(R.C. § 959.17)



   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 959.99(C))



§ 95.16  LOUD DOG.



   (A)   No person shall own, harbor or keep in custody a dog which
disturbs the peace by barking, yelping, howling or making other loud noises
to the annoyance and/or discomfort of any person. Continuous barking,
yelping, howling and/or making other loud noises for 15 consecutive minutes
by such dog, whether confined inside a residence or building or to the
outside area, shall be deemed to have disturbed the peace and to have caused
the annoyance and discomfort of persons; provided, that at the time of the
complaint, no person or persons were trespassing or threatening to trespass
upon the private property of the owner, and provided that the dog was not
being teased or provoked in any manner.



   (B)   Any person who shall allow any dog habitually to remain, be
lodged or fed within any dwelling, building, yard or enclosure owned or
occupied by such person shall be considered as harboring or keeping such dog.



   (C)   Upon an initial complaint, an enforcement officer shall warn
the person in writing of the violation. Upon a second such complaint within
30 days, the enforcement officer shall charge the person with a violation of
this section.



   (D)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to owners,
operators or employees of licensed veterinary hospitals, licensed kennels, or
licensed animal boarding establishments, nor does this section apply to
blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility impaired persons when the dog
serves as an assistance dog.



   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



§ 95.17  DOG TAGS.



   (A)   No owner of a dog, except a dog constantly confined to a dog
kennel registered under R.C. Chapter 955 or one licensed under R.C. Chapter
956, shall fail to require the dog to wear, at all times, a valid tag issued
in connection with a certificate of registration. A dog found not wearing at
any time a valid tag shall be prima-facie evidence of lack of registration
and shall subject any dog found not wearing such a tag to impounding, sale,
or destruction.



(R.C. § 955.10)



   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section shall be guilty
of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 955.99(B))



§ 95.18  NUISANCE, DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS DOG DEFINED; TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP
CERTIFICATE; FORM STATING DOG'S PRIOR BEHAVIOR.



   (A)   As used in this section:



      DANGEROUS DOG.



         (a)   A dog that, without provocation, and subject to
division (b) of this definition, has done any of the following:



            1.   Caused injury, other than killing or serious
injury, to any person;



            2.   Killed another dog;



            3.   Been the subject of a third or subsequent
violation of R.C. § 955.22(C) or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.



         (b)   “Dangerous dog” does not include a police dog
that has caused injury, other than killing or serious injury, to any person
or has killed another dog while the police dog is being used to assist one or
more law enforcement officers in the performance of their official duties.



      MENACING FASHION. Means a dog that would cause any person being
chased or approached to reasonably believe that the dog will cause physical
injury to that person.



      NUISANCE DOG.



         (a)   Subject to division (b) of this definition,
“nuisance dog” means a dog that without provocation and while off the
premises of its owner, keeper, or harborer has chased or approached a person
in either a menacing fashion or an apparent attitude of attack or has
attempted to bite or otherwise endanger any person.



         (b)   “Nuisance dog” does not include a police dog
that, while being used to assist one or more law enforcement officers in the
performance of official duties, has chased or approached a person in either a
menacing fashion or an apparent attitude of attack or has attempted to bite
or otherwise endanger any person.



      POLICE DOG. Means a dog that has been trained and may be used to
assist one or more law enforcement officers in the performance of their
official duties.



      SERIOUS INJURY. Any of the following:



         (a)   Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk
of death;



         (b)   Any physical harm that involves a permanent
incapacity, whether partial or total, or a temporary, substantial incapacity;



         (c)   Any physical harm that involves a permanent
disfigurement or a temporary, serious disfigurement;



         (d)   Any physical harm that involves acute pain of a
duration that results in substantial suffering or any degree of prolonged or
intractable pain.



      VICIOUS DOG.



         (a)   A dog that, without provocation and subject to
division (b) of this definition, has killed or caused serious injury to any
person.



         (b)   “Vicious dog” does not include either of the
following:



            1.   A police dog that has killed or caused
serious injury to any person while the police dog is being used to assist one
or more law enforcement officers in the performance of their official duties;



            2.   A dog that has killed or caused serious
injury to any person while a person was committing or attempting to commit a
trespass or other criminal offense on the property of the owner, keeper, or
harborer of the dog.



      WITHOUT PROVOCATION. A dog acts without provocation when it was
not teased, tormented, or abused by a person, or it was not coming to the aid
or the defense of a person who was not engaged in illegal or criminal
activity and who was not using the dog as a means of carrying out such
activity.



   (B)   Upon the transfer of ownership of any dog, the seller of the
dog shall give the buyer a transfer of ownership certificate that shall be
signed by the seller. The certificate shall contain the registration number
of the dog, the name of the seller, and a brief description of the dog. Blank
forms of the certificate may be obtained from the County Auditor. A transfer
of ownership shall be recorded by the Auditor upon presentation of a transfer
of ownership certificate that is signed by the former owner of a dog and that
is accompanied by a fee of $5.



   (C)   Prior to the transfer of ownership or possession of any dog,
upon the buyer’s or other transferee’s request, the seller or other
transferor of the dog shall give to the person a written notice relative to
the behavior and propensities of the dog.



   (D)   Within ten days after the transfer of ownership or possession
of any dog, if the seller or transferor of the dog has knowledge that the dog
is a dangerous dog, the seller or other transferor shall give to the buyer or
transferee, the Board of Health for the district in which the buyer or other
transferee resides, and the dog warden of the county in which the buyer or
other transferee resides a completed copy of a written form on which the
seller shall furnish the following information:



      (1)   The name and address of the buyer or other transferee of
the dog;



      (2)   The age, sex, color, breed and current registration
number of the dog;



      (3)   In addition, the seller shall answer the following
questions which shall be specifically stated on the form as follows:



         Has the dog ever chased or attempted to attack or bite a
person? If yes, describe the incident(s) in which the behavior occurred.



         Has the dog ever bitten a person? If yes, describe the
incident(s) in which the behavior occurred.



         Has the dog ever seriously injured or killed a person? If
yes, describe the incident(s) in which the behavior occurred.



      (4)   The dog warden of the county in which the seller resides
furnishes the form to the seller at no cost.



   (E)   No seller or other transferor of a dog shall fail to comply
with the applicable requirements of divisions (B) to (D) of this section.



(R.C. § 955.11)



   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates division (E) of this section because
failure to comply with division (B) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (E) of this section because of
a failure to comply with division (C) or (D) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor on a first offense and of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree on each subsequent offense.



(R.C. § 955.99(A))



§ 95.19  FAILURE TO REGISTER DOG OR DOG KENNEL.



   (A)   No owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog more than three months
of age, nor owner of a dog kennel, shall fail to file an application for
registration required by R.C. § 955.01, nor shall he or she fail to pay the
legal fee therefor.



(R.C. § 955.21)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $25
nor more than $100 on a first offense, and on each subsequent offense shall
be fined not less than $75 nor more than $250 and may be imprisoned for not
more than 30 days.



(R.C. § 955.99(E))



§ 95.20  HINDERING THE CAPTURE OF UNREGISTERED DOG.



   (A)   No person shall obstruct or interfere with anyone lawfully
engaged in capturing an unlicensed dog or making an examination of a dog
wearing a tag.



(R.C. § 955.24)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 955.99(B))



   (C)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the
hindrance, obstruction, resistance, or interference alleged consisted of
constitutionally protected speech only.



§ 95.21  UNLAWFUL TAG.



   (A)   No person shall own, keep, or harbor a dog wearing a
fictitious, altered, or invalid registration tag or a registration tag not
issued by the County Auditor in connection with the registration of that
animal.



(R.C. § 955.25)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 955.99(B))



§ 95.22  RIGHTS OF BLIND, DEAF OR HEARING IMPAIRED, OR MOBILITY IMPAIRED
PERSON, OR TRAINER WITH ASSISTANCE DOG.



   (A)   When either a blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility
impaired person, or a trainer of an assistance dog is accompanied by an
assistance dog, the person or the trainer, as applicable, is entitled to the
full and equal accommodations, advantages, facilities, and privileges of all
public conveyances, hotels, and lodging places, all places of public
accommodation, amusement, or resort, and other places to which the general
public is invited, and may take the dog into such conveyances and places,
subject only to the conditions and limitations applicable to all persons not
so accompanied, except that:



      (1)   The dog shall not occupy a seat in any public
conveyance; and



      (2)   The dog shall be leashed while using the facilities of a
common carrier.



      (3)   Any dog in training to become an assistance dog shall be
covered by a liability insurance policy provided by the nonprofit special
agency engaged in such work protecting members of the public against personal
injury or property damage caused by the dog.



   (B)   No person shall deprive a blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or
mobility impaired person, or a trainer of an assistance dog who is
accompanied by an assistance dog of any of the advantages, facilities, or
privileges provided in division (A) of this section, nor charge the person or
trainer a fee or charge for the dog.



(R.C. § 955.43(A), (B))



   (C)   As used in this section:



      ASSISTANCE DOG. Means a guide dog, hearing dog, or service dog
that has been trained by a nonprofit special agency.



      BLIND. Means either of the following:



         (a)   Vision 20/200 or less in the better eye with
proper correction;



         (b)   Field defect in the better eye with proper
correction that contracts the peripheral field so that the diameter of the
visual field subtends an angle no greater than 20 degrees.



      GUIDE DOG. Means a dog that has been trained or is in training to
assist a blind person.



      HEARING DOG. Means a dog that has been trained or is in training
to assist a deaf or hearing- impaired person.



      INSTITUTIONS OF EDUCATION. Means:



         (a)   Any state university or college as defined in R.C.
§ 3345.32;



         (b)   Any private college or university that holds a
certificate of authorization issued by the Ohio Board of Regents pursuant to
R.C. Chapter 1713;



         (c)   Any elementary or secondary school operated by a
board of education;



         (d)   Any chartered or nonchartered nonpublic elementary
or secondary school; or



         (e)   Any school issued a certificate of registration by
the state Board of Career Colleges and Schools.



      MOBILITY IMPAIRED PERSON. Means any person, regardless of age,
who is subject to a physiological defect or deficiency regardless of its
cause, nature, or extent that renders the person unable to move about without
the aid of crutches, a wheelchair, or any other form of support, or that
limits the person’s functional ability to ambulate, climb, descend, sit,
rise, or perform any related function. MOBILITY IMPAIRED PERSON includes a
person with a neurological or psychological disability that limits the
person’s functional ability to ambulate, climb, descend, sit, rise, or
perform any related function, and also includes a person with a seizure
disorder and a person who is diagnosed with autism.



      SERVICE DOG. Means a dog that has been trained or is in training
to assist a mobility impaired person.



(R.C. §§ 955.011(B), 955.43(C))



   (D)   Whoever violates any provision of this section shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 955.99(D))



Cross-reference:



   Assaulting assistance dog, see § 136.15



§ 95.23  RETAIL SALE AND TRANSPORTATION OF DOGS.



   (A)   No person shall sell, offer to sell, or expose for sale to the
general public at retail any dog under the age of eight weeks.



   (B)   No person shall receive or ship, for sale to the general
public at retail, any dog that is not accompanied by a certificate, issued by
a licensed veterinarian who is accredited by the United States Department of
Agriculture and authorized to issue health certificates for animals in
interstate commerce, certifying that the dog is sufficiently sound and
healthy to be reasonably expected to withstand the intended transportation
without adverse effect.



   (C)   This section does not apply to the transportation of dogs in
interstate commerce by common carrier, provided that neither the point of
shipment nor the point of receiving is within this state.



   (D)   No person responsible for the transportation of a pregnant dog
shall be liable in damages for any injury or illness of, or the death of, the
dog or any puppies, whenever the injuries, illness or death results from the
birth of such puppies during the time the dog is being transported.



(R.C. § 955.50)



   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor
for a first offense; each subsequent offense is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.



(R.C. § 955.99(C))



§ 95.24  COLORING RABBITS OR BABY POULTRY; REGULATION OF SALE AND DISPLAY.



   (A)   No person shall dye or otherwise color any rabbit or baby
poultry, including, but not limited to, chicks and ducklings.  No person
shall sell, offer for sale, expose for sale, raffle or give away any rabbit
or baby poultry which has been dyed or otherwise colored.  No poultry
younger than four weeks of age may be sold, given away or otherwise
distributed to any person in lots of less than six.  Stores, shops, vendors
and others offering young poultry for sale or other distribution shall
provide and operate brooders or other heating devices that may be necessary
to maintain poultry in good health, and shall keep adequate food and water
available to the poultry at all times.



(R.C. § 925.62)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree on a first offense; each subsequent offense is a
misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 925.99(B))



§ 95.25  JACKLIGHTING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall throw or cast the rays of a spotlight or other
artificial light from any vehicle into any field, woodland, or forest while
having in his or her possession a hunting device, or throw or cast the rays
of a spotlight or other artificial light from any vehicle into any field,
woodland, or forest for the purpose of locating a wild animal.



   (B)   This section does not apply to law enforcement officers,
wildlife officers, military personnel, and officers or employees of the
Department of Natural Resources while in the performance of their duties, or
to any landowner or lessee having a reason to use a light while engaged in
surveillance or protection of his or her property.



   (C)   An officer whose duty it is to enforce this chapter may arrest
a person whom he or she has reasonable grounds to believe is violating this
section, search the vehicle for firearms or other hunting implements in the
possession or under the control of that person, and seize the same.



(R.C. § 1533.161)



   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 1533.99(B))



§ 95.26  RESTRICTIONS ON DOG OWNERSHIP FOR CERTAIN CONVICTED FELONS.



   (A)   No person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a felony
offense of violence committed on or after May 22, 2012 or a felony violation
of any provision of R.C. Chapter 959, R.C. Chapter 2923 or R.C. Chapter 2925
committed on or after May 22, 2012 shall knowingly own, possess, have custody
of, or reside in a residence with either of the following for a period of
three years commencing either upon the date of release of the person from any
period of incarceration imposed for the offense or violation or, if the
person is not incarcerated for the offense or violation, upon the date of the
person’s final release from the other sanctions imposed for the offense or
violation:



      (1)   An unspayed or unneutered dog older than 12 weeks of age;



      (2)   Any dog that has been determined to be a dangerous dog
under R.C. Chapter 955 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



   (B)   A person described in division (A) of this section shall
microchip for permanent identification any dog owned, possessed by, or in the
custody of the person.



   (C)   (1)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any
person who is confined in a correctional institution of the Department of
Rehabilitation and Correction.



      (2)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any
person with respect to any dog that the person owned, possessed, had custody
of, or resided in a residence with prior to May 22, 2012.



(R.C. § 955.54)



   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) or (B) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 955.99(O))



§ 95.27  SEXUAL CONDUCT WITH AN ANIMAL



   (A)   As used in this section:



      ANIMAL. Means a nonhuman mammal, bird, reptile, or amphibian,
either dead or alive.



      OFFENSE. Means a violation of this section or an attempt, in
violation of R.C. § 2923.02, to violate this section.



      OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 959.132.



      SEXUAL CONDUCT. Means either of the following committed for the
purpose of sexual gratification:



         (a)   Any act done between a person and animal that
involves contact of the penis of one and the vulva of the other, the penis of
one and the penis of the other, the penis of one and the anus of the other,
the mouth of one and the penis of the other, the mouth of one and the anus of
the other, the vulva of one and the vulva of the other, the mouth of one and
the vulva of the other, any other contact between a reproductive organ of one
and a reproductive organ of the other, or any other insertion of a
reproductive organ of one into an orifice of the other;



         (b)   Without a bona fide veterinary or animal husbandry
purpose to do so, the insertion, however slight, of any part of a person's
body or any instrument, apparatus, or other object into the vaginal, anal, or
reproductive opening of an animal.



   (B)   No person shall knowingly engage in sexual conduct with an
animal or knowingly possess, sell, or purchase an animal with the intent that
it be subjected to sexual conduct.



   (C)   No person shall knowingly organize, promote, aid, or abet in
the conduct of an act involving any sexual conduct with an animal.



   (D)   An officer may seize and cause to be impounded at an
impounding agency an animal that the officer has probable cause to believe is
the subject of an offense. With respect to an animal so seized and impounded,
all procedures and requirements that are established in R.C. § 959.132, and
all other provisions of that section, apply to the seizure, impoundment, and
disposition of the animal. References in R.C. § 959.132 to “section
959.131 of the Revised Code”, “companion animal”, and “offense”
shall be construed, respectively, as being references to “§ 90.37 of this
Code” and to “animal” and “offense” as defined in this section, for
purposes of application under this section only.



(R.C. § 959.21)



   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree. In addition, the court may order the
offender to forfeit the animal or livestock and may provide for its
disposition including but not limited to the sale of the animal or livestock.
If an animal or livestock is forfeited and sold pursuant to this division,
the proceeds from the sale first shall be applied to pay the expenses
incurred with regard to the care of the animal from the time it was taken
from the custody of the former owner. The balance of the proceeds from the
sale, if any, shall be paid to the former owner of the animal.



(R.C. § 959.99(D))



      (2)   If a court has reason to believe that a person who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this section suffers from a
mental or emotional disorder that contributed to the violation, the court may
impose as a community control sanction or as a condition of probation a
requirement that the offender undergo psychological evaluation or counseling.
The court shall order the offender to pay the costs of the evaluation or
counseling.



(R.C. § 959.99(E)(6))



§ 95.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which another
penalty is not specifically provided shall be subject to the penalty as
provided in § 10.99.



CHAPTER 96:  EXTERIOR MAINTENANCE CODE



Section



   96.01   Title



   96.02   Scope



   96.03   Purpose



   96.04   Applicability



   96.05   Conflict of laws



   96.06   Definitions



   96.07   Enforcement



   96.08   Inspection



   96.09   Maintenance responsibility



   96.10   General exterior maintenance requirements



   96.11   Exterior surfaces



   96.12   Foundations



   96.13   Roofs, gutters, downspouts and chimneys



   96.14   Yard area maintenance



   96.15   Infestation



   96.16   Notice of violation



   96.17   Village right of abatement



   96.18   Ordering building vacated and razed



   96.19   Posting of notice



   96.20   Unlawful entry



   96.21   Violation for unlawful entry



   96.22   Removal of building at expense of owner



   96.23   Right of entry



   96.24   Recovery of abatement costs



   96.25   Appeal



   96.26   Section enlargement of authority



   96.27   Failure to comply with orders



§ 96.01  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known as the Exterior Property Maintenance Code
of the Village of Minster.



(Ord. 04-06-01, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 10-09-04, passed 10-5-10)



§ 96.02  SCOPE.



   The chapter is limited to the establishment of minimum standards for
the maintenance of exterior surfaces and exterior functioning units of all
structures, buildings and uses within the village, including yard areas
immediately contiguous thereto.



(Ord. 04-06-01, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 10-09-04, passed 10-5-10)



§ 96.03  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety,
and welfare by establishing minimum standards governing the maintenance,
appearance, and exterior condition of all premises and uses throughout the
village; to fix certain responsibilities and duties upon owners, residents
and managers of the same as to both separate and correlative responsibilities
and duties; to authorize and establish procedures for the exterior inspection
of such premises and uses; to fix penalties for the violations of this
chapter; and to provide for the repair, and/or demolition or vacation of
premises unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use. This chapter is hereby
declared to be remedial and essential for the public interest, and it is
intended that this chapter be construed and interpreted to effectuate the
purposes as stated herein.



(Ord. 04-06-01, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 10-09-04, passed 10-5-10)



§ 96.04  APPLICABILITY.



   Every building, occupancy or use shall comply with the provisions of
this chapter, whether or not such building or use shall have been
constructed, altered or repaired before or after the enactment of this
chapter, and without regard to any permits or licenses which shall have been
issued for the use or occupancy of the building or premises, for the
construction or repair of the building or use, or for the installation or
repair of equipment or facilities prior to the effective date of this
chapter. This chapter established minimum standards for the initial and
continued occupancy and use of all such structures and does not replace or
modify standards otherwise established for the construction, repair,
alteration or use of the building. Where there is mixed occupancy,
residential, or nonresidential use therein shall be nevertheless regulated by
and subject to the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 04-06-01, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 10-09-04, passed 10-5-10)



§ 96.05  CONFLICT OF LAWS.



   In any case where a provision of this chapter imposes a higher standard
than that set forth in any other ordinance by the village or law of the
state, then the standard set forth herein shall prevail, but if a provision
of this chapter imposes a lower standard that is imposed by any other
ordinance of the village or law of the state, then the higher standard
contained in any such other ordinance or law shall prevail.



(Ord. 04-06-01, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 10-09-04, passed 10-5-10)



§ 96.06  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words are hereby
defined. Words used in the present tense shall include the future; the
singular number shall include the plural and the plural, the singular; the
word “building” shall include the word “structure” and the word
“shall” is mandatory and not directory.



   DETERIORATION. The condition or appearance of the exterior of the
building, or parts thereof, characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling,
cracking, peeling, rusting, or other evidence of physical decay, neglect or
lack of maintenance.



   EXTERIOR OF THE PREMISES. Those portions of a building which are
exposed to public view and the open space of any premises outside of any
building.



   FINAL ORDER. That a notice of violation has been served according to
this chapter, and the persons named have failed to comply within the time
allowed, or that a notice of violation has been served according to this
chapter, an appeal taken, and is that order of determination issued by the
Board of Zoning Appeals.



   GARBAGE. Animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.



   INFESTATION. The presence of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests on
the premises, which constitutes a health hazard.



   NUISANCE. That which is defined by the statutes of the state and
declared thereby to be a nuisance and also including conditions dangerous to
human life or detrimental to the health of persons on or near the premises
where the conditions exists and where the conditions are perilous by active
and negligent operation thereof and unsanitary conditions are anything
offensive to the senses or dangerous to health. Buildings or structures
constituting public nuisances as used in this chapter shall apply to
buildings or other structures which are unsafe, insecure, structurally
defective, unstable or unsanitary. They include those buildings or structures
which inadequately provide exit facilities, those building or structures
unsuitable or improper for the use or occupancy to which they are put, those
buildings or structures which constitute a hazard to health or safety because
of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation or damage by fire or other cause,
those buildings or structures which are obsolescent, abandoned or contain
inadequate or unsafe equipment or are otherwise dangerous to life or
property, those buildings or structures which for any of the foregoing
reasons or by reason of continued vacancy thereby resulting in lack of
reasonable or adequate maintenance of structure or grounds are causing
deterioration and a blighting influence on nearby properties and thereby
depreciating the enjoyment and use of property in the immediate vicinity to
such an extent that it is harmful to the community in which such structure is
situated.



   OCCUPANT. Any person living and sleeping in a dwelling unit or having
actual possession of such dwelling unit or any person who leases or rents a
nonresidential building, structure or any portion thereof.



   OWNER. Owner or owners shall be the recorded owner of the premises upon
which the building or structures is located. They shall include either an
owner in fee or a lessor estate. A mortgage or vendee in possession, assignee
of rents, receiver, executor, administrator trustee, lessee or other person
in control of the building or their duly authorized agent may also be deemed
the owner or owners as references herein. Any such person as identified above
shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this section.



   PERSON. Includes any individual, corporation, association, partnership,
trustee, lessee, agent or assignee.



   PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land, including the buildings or
structures thereon.



   REFUSE. All putrescible, and nonputrescible solid waste (except body
wastes) including but not limited to garbage, rubbish, ashes, dead animals;
and industrial wastes; an accumulation of brush, broken glass, stumps, and
roots that present a safety hazard and includes garbage, trash and debris
which present an unsanitary and/or safety hazard.



   RUBBISH. Nonputrescible solid waste consisting of both combustible and
non- combustible wastes such as paper, wrappings, tin cans, yard clippings,
leaves, wood, glass, crockery, plastics, and similar materials.



(Ord. 04-06-01, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 10-09-04, passed 10-5-10)



§ 96.07  ENFORCEMENT.



   The enforcement of any and all provisions of this chapter is placed
with the Village Administrator, Zoning Administrator, if not the Village
Administrator, the Village Police Chief or the Village Fire Chief as they
believe may be required to carry out and effectuate all of the provisions
herein.



(Ord. 04-06-01, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 10-09-04, passed 10-5-10)



§ 96.08  INSPECTION.



   All buildings, premises, and uses within the village are subject to
exterior inspections from time to time by the Village Administrator, Zoning
Administrator, the Village Police Chief or the Village Fire Chief.



(Ord. 04-06-01, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 10-09-04, passed 10-5-10)



§ 96.09  MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITY.



   (A)   The owner/manager of every structure or use within the village
shall be responsible for maintaining the exterior surfaces of the same in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   The owner/manager of every structure or use within the village
shall be responsible for maintaining the yard area contiguous thereto in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter.



   (C)   No owner or manager shall be relieved from the obligations of
nor be entitled to defend any violation by reason of contract or agreement
between them and any other person.



(Ord. 04-06-01, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 10-09-04, passed 10-5-10)



§ 96.10  GENERAL EXTERIOR MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The exterior of all structures or uses within the village,
whether functional or aesthetic, shall be maintained in good repair. Any
exterior part or feature thereof having functional use shall be capable of
performing the use for which such part or feature was designed.



   (B)   The entire yard area and extending up to and including the lot
line in all directions shall be maintained in a safe, clean, and sanitary
condition.



(Ord. 04-06-01, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 10-09-04, passed 10-5-10)



§ 96.11  EXTERIOR SURFACES.



   (A)   All exterior surfaces of every structure or use within the
village shall be maintained so as to resist decay or deterioration from any
naturally occurring cause. All exterior surfaces shall be covered with paint,
finish, or other surface coating so as to prevent such decay and
deterioration. An exterior wall segment, facing or other distinguishable
surface area determined to have more than 25% of its total area bare,
peeling, flaking, pitted, corroded or otherwise deteriorated, will require
the wall segment, facing or other distinguishable surface area to be surface
coated in its entirety. If the surface to be coated is a portion of a larger
structure, such surface coating shall be compatible on color, texture, and
design with the entire structure.



   (B)   Any deteriorated or decayed exterior wall, doors, porches,
floors, steps, railing, or parts or features thereof, shall be repaired,
replaced or removed.



   (C)   Any damaged or broken windows, screens, or shutters, and
deteriorated or decayed sill, sash, molding, lintel, frame or trim thereof
shall be repaired or replaced.



(Ord. 04-06-01, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 10-09-04, passed 10-5-10)



§ 96.12  FOUNDATIONS.



   The foundation of every structure or use within the village shall be
maintained in such condition and repair as to prevent damage to the
structural integrity of the same.



(Ord. 04-06-01, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 10-09-04, passed 10-5-10)



§ 96.13  ROOFS, GUTTERS, DOWNSPOUTS AND CHIMNEYS.



   (A)   The roof of every structure or use within the village shall be
maintained weather-tight. All missing shingles, or other roofing materials,
shall be replaced with materials of similar kind, nature, design and color as
the original thereof. Any roof segment, or distinguishable portion thereof,
determined to have more than 25% of its total area comprised of missing or
deteriorated shingles, or other roofing material, then the roof segment or
distinguishable portion thereof shall be replaced or repaired with materials
of similar kind, nature, design, and color as the original thereof.



   (B)   Any structure or use within the village having gutters and/or
downspouts in place shall be maintained in such a manner as to keep such
gutters and/or downspouts free of exterior rust and corrosion. Such rust or
corrosion as may develop in the course of ordinary use of the same shall be
removed, painted, or otherwise surface-coated as to keep such gutters and/or
downspouts free of visible rust or corrosion.



(Ord. 04-06-01, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 10-09-04, passed 10-5-10)



§ 96.14  YARD AREA MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   Refuse.



      (1)   No furniture, mattresses, household furnishings, rugs,
appliances, dilapidated vehicles or vehicle parts, discarded or abandoned
machinery and construction equipment shall be placed or stored in any yard
area or use within the village over a period in excess of seven days.



      (2)   Exterior property areas of all premises or uses shall be
kept free of debris, objects, materials, or conditions that, create a health,
accident or fire hazard, or are a public nuisance, or constitute a blighting
or deteriorating influence on the neighborhood. All debris shall be removed
within seven days.



   (B)   Grass and weed control. Grass and weeds shall be maintained,
controlled and cut in conformance with § 92.10 of the Village Code. All lots
shall be provided with grass or other appropriate ground cover or landscaping
material so as to assure absorption of rainfall and prevent erosion and rapid
runoff of surface water.



   (C)   Accessory structures.



      (1)   All structures or uses located in the yard area within
the village, such as sheds, barns, garages, bins, and the like shall be
maintained in good repair in conformance with other provisions of this
chapter having regard to foundation, roofs, and exterior surfaces.



      (2)   Any broken, rusted, deteriorated or decayed fence, yard
enclosure, or devise or structure located in the yard area contiguous to any
structures or use within the village shall be repaired or removed.



   (D)   Ground surface hazards. Holes, cracks, excavations, breaks,
projections and obstructions at any place on the premises which are a hazard
to persons using the premises shall not be permitted.



   (E)   Motor vehicles. Parking of motor vehicles on any lot or parcel
of land within the village is regulated by the Zoning Code, and Chapter 91:
Junk Motor Vehicles, of the Village Code.



(Ord. 04-06-01, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 10-09-04, passed 10-5-10)



§ 96.15  INFESTATION.



   All structures and the premises thereof shall be maintained free of
vermin, rodents and other pests, and free of sources of breeding, harborage
and infestation by such vermin, rodents and other pests.



(Ord. 04-06-01, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 10-09-04, passed 10-5-10)



§ 96.16  NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   (A)   Where a violation of any provision of this chapter is found to
exist, the Village Administrator, Zoning Administrator, the Village Police
Chief or the Village Fire Chief shall cause a written notice of such
violation to be served upon the owner, manager, occupant, or other person
responsible for the correction thereof. The notice shall specify the
violation committed and shall provide a reasonable period or time, not more
than 90 days, to correct or abate the violation. The notice shall state that
if the violation is not corrected or abated with the time allowed, the
village may enter upon the premises and do the correction or abatement, or
order the building to be vacated and razed, and charge the cost thereof to
the person named in the final order.



   (B)   Notice shall be served by certified mail to the current
address as recorded with the county auditor as to the owner, and the property
address to the occupant.



   (C)   Notice may also be served by personal delivery to the owner or
occupant.



   (D)   In the absence of an appeal, as provided below, the completion
of notice, and failure to comply, shall constitute a final order as to
administrative proceedings.



(Ord. 04-06-01, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 10-09-04, passed 10-5-10)



§ 96.17  VILLAGE RIGHT OF ABATEMENT.



   (A)   In the event a violation is not corrected or abated as
required by a final order:



      (1)   The Village of Minster shall have the right to enter
upon the premises and make the correction or abatement, and recover the
actual cost thereof, plus 15% for inspections and administrative fees, from
the owner and/or other person named in the final order; or



      (2)   Upon failure to correct or abate the violation, any two
or more inspectors as described above shall have the right to make entry upon
the premises to inspect the interior of the building for the purpose of
determining the extent of the unsafe conditions observed as a result of the
external inspection described in § 96.08 or to determine if there exits any
other unsafe conditions.



   (B)   Prior to the inspection of the interior of the structure, the
inspector shall give notice to the owner or owners of both the date and time
of the inspection.



   (C)   The village as well as its employees or agents including
inspectors shall be immune from any liability whatsoever should damage be
caused to the structure in order to gain entry to the interior of the
structure pursuant to this chapter.



   (D)   It shall be a violation of law for the owner or owners of any
property upon whom notice is sent to fail to take those measures as
instructed in the notice herein described within the time period provided for
in the notice.



(Ord. 04-06-01, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 10-09-04, passed 10-5-10)



§ 96.18  ORDERING BUILDING VACATED.



   When the Police Chief and Village Administrator with the advice and
consent of the Zoning and Building Inspector, or Fire Chief are of the
opinion that a building or structure is in such an unsafe or unsanitary
condition so that life is endangered thereby, they may order and require that
the occupants thereof vacate such building or structure immediately upon
notice and that the structure be razed.



(Ord. 10-09-04, passed 10-5-10)



§ 96.19  POSTING OF NOTICE.



   (A)   The Police Chief and Village Administrator shall cause to be
published at such entrances to such building or structure the following
notice: “This building is unfit for occupancy and its use has been
prohibited forthwith.”



   (B)   Such notice shall remain posted until the building or
structure is razed.



(Ord. 10-09-04, passed 10-5-10)



§ 96.20  UNLAWFUL ENTRY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person other than an employee or designee
of the village, properly authorized to do so, to remove or cause to be
removed such notice without written permission of the Village Administrator
or the Police Chief.



(Ord. 10-09-04, passed 10-5-10)



§ 96.21  VIOLATION FOR UNLAWFUL ENTRY.



   Violation of § 96.20 shall be punishable by a fine of up to $500. Each
removal of such notice shall be considered a separate violation. It shall be
unlawful for any person other than those authorized by law or by the Village
Administrator or Police Chief to do so to enter a building or structure which
has been posted with the above described notice. Such unlawful entry is
punishable by a fine of up to $500. Each unlawful entry by a person as
described above shall be considered a separate violation.



(Ord. 10-09-04, passed 10-5-10)



§ 96.22  REMOVAL OF BUILDING AT EXPENSE OF OWNER.



   In case of an order for removal of a building or structure which is not
complied with within the specified time frame as described in § 96.16, the
Police Chief and/or Village Administrator may cause such building or
structure to be removed at the expense of the owner or owners. Prior to the
village taking such action, the village shall give at least ten days’
written notice by certified mail to the owner or owners of such property.



(Ord. 10-09-04, passed 10-5-10)



§ 96.23  RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   The Police Chief and/or Village Administrator or their duly authorized
agent shall be authorized at any time thereafter to enter upon such premise
and the owner shall permit him or her entry to abate the nuisance by
demolition and removal of the structure or by taking any such other action as
may be required.



(Ord. 10-09-04, passed 10-5-10)



§ 96.24  RECOVERY OF ABATEMENT COSTS.



   In abating such nuisance, the village may go to whatever extent
necessary to complete the abatement of the same and the cost of the abatement
action shall be recovered from the owner in the following manner:



   (A)   The owner or owners shall be billed directly by certified mail
for the cost of the abatement. The bill for the costs of the abatement shall
be paid within 60 days after receipt of the bill.



   (B)   If costs are not so recovered then the village shall cause the
cost of the abatement to be levied as an assessment and recovered in
accordance with R.C. § 715.261.



(Ord. 10-09-04, passed 10-5-10)



§ 96.25  APPEAL.



   (A)   Within 14 days of the date of receipt of notice of a
violation, the person may request a hearing before the Board of Zoning Appeal
by filling a written request with the Village Administrator or Zoning
Administrator. The appeal shall be heard at the next regularly scheduled
meeting of the Board of Zoning Appeals, allowing at least ten days’ notice
to the party and the Village Administrator or Zoning Administrator. The Board
of Zoning Appeals may sustain, modify or dismiss, in whole or in part any
action required to correct or abate the violation set forth in the notice and
shall issue an order incorporating its determinations, and such order shall
be a final order as to these administrative proceedings.



   (B)   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall consider the following in
determining appropriate action to be taken, to wit:



      (l)   That any modifications or the original order of the
Village Administrator or Zoning Administrator shall not, in any material way,
alter the standards of this chapter and shall not affect detrimentally the
health or safety of occupants, or the health, safety or welfare of the
occupants or owners of adjacent premises or of the immediate neighborhood; and



      (2)   That strict enforcement would constitute an undue and
unnecessary hardship on the owner, manager, or resident, by reason of
compelling an expenditure for repair of the premises which would
substantially disproportionate to any benefit to the health, safety, or
welfare of the community that might be derived there from.



(Ord. 04-06-01, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 10-09-04, passed 10-5-10)



§ 96.26  SECTION ENLARGEMENT OF AUTHORITY.



   This section shall not be deemed to be a limitation or restriction on
the authority of any department, division, official or employee of the
village, but shall be deemed to be an enlargement of any authority existing
by virtue of the statutes of the state, or any ordinance heretofore enacted
by Council.



(Ord. 10-09-04, passed 10-5-10)



§ 96.27  FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH ORDERS.



   (A)   In addition to all other remedies, conditions or penalties
that may be available to the village, any person failing to abide an order of
the village to repair or remove an unsafe building found to be a public
nuisance may be issued a citation by the village and fined up to $500. Each
failure to abide by an order issued under this section shall be deemed a
separate violation.



   (B)   Each day during which the owner or owners fail to comply with
orders issued herein may be considered as a separate violation punishable as
herein described.



(Ord. 10-09-04, passed 10-5-10)



CHAPTER 97:  RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT



Section



   97.01   Definitions



   97.02   Purpose and scope of chapter



   97.03   Prohibition; types of permits; Right-of-Way Board



   97.04   Application procedure; appeal



   97.05   Criteria for granting permits



   97.06   Obligations of permittees; conditions of permits



   97.07   Permit fees and auditing



   97.08   Joint planning and construction



   97.09   Village use of facilities



   97.10   Adoption of regulations



   97.11   Indemnity; insurance



   97.12   Removal of facilities



   97.13   Revocation



   97.14   Reservation of rights



   97.15   Temporary movement of facilities



   97.16   Foreclosure and receivership



   97.17   Non-enforcement and waivers by village



   97.18   Captions



   97.19   Severability



 



   97.99   Penalties



Cross-reference:



   Placement of temporary obstruction, see § 94.05



§ 97.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations have the meanings set forth herein. When not inconsistent
with the context, words in the present tense include the future tense, words
in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular
number include the plural number. The words “shall” and “will” are
mandatory and “may” is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their
common and ordinary meaning.



   APPLICANT. Any person applying for a right-of-way permit hereunder.



   BEST EFFORTS. The best reasonable efforts under the circumstances,
taking into consideration, among other appropriate matters, all applicable
laws, regulations, safety, engineering and operational codes, available
technology, weather conditions, field conditions, human resources and cost.



   CHAPTER. Chapter 97 of the Village Code, as amended from time to time,
and any regulations adopted hereunder.



   COMMENT PERIOD. Has the meaning set forth in § 97.10(A).



   COUNCIL. The legislative body of the village.



   DIRECTOR. The Village Administrator.



   FORCE MAJEURE. A strike, act of God, act of public enemy, order of any
kind of a government of the United States of America or of the State of Ohio
or any of their departments, agencies or political subdivisions; terrorism,
riot, epidemic, landslides, lightning, earthquake, fire, tornado, storm,
flood, civil disturbance, explosion, partial or entire failure of a utility
or any other cause or event not reasonably within the control of the party
disabled by such force majeure, but only to the extent such disabled party
notifies the other party as soon as practicable regarding such force majeure
and then for only so long as and to the extent that, the force majeure
prevents compliance or causes non-compliance with the provisions hereof.



   FRANCHISE. A valid service permit or franchise issued by the village
pursuant to the Village Code or Constitution and laws of Ohio or the United
States, and accepted by any person, pursuant to which such person may operate
or provide natural gas, electric, cable television, communication or other
utility services to consumers within the village.



   GENERAL RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT. Shall have the meaning set forth in §
97.03(B).



   GOVERNMENTAL PURPOSES. Those purposes classified as governmental under
Ohio law, as well as (i) street lighting to the extent provided by the
village, (ii) water utility service, (iii) storm sewer services; (iv)
sanitary sewer services; (v) electrical utility services; and (vi) any other
village utility service to the extent such other village utility service is
provided to village facilities.



   LEASEBACK. The sale or transfer of property by a permittee to another
person contemporaneously followed by the leasing of the property to the
permittee on a long term basis, that are not operated or controlled by such
lessee, and are operated or controlled by the permittee.



   LIMITED RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT. Shall have the meaning set forth in §
97.03(B).



   PERMITTEE. Any person issued a general or limited right-of-way permit
pursuant to this chapter to use or occupy all or a portion of the
rights-of-way in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and said
right-of-way permit.



   PERSON. Any natural person or any association, firm, partnership, joint
venture, corporation, or other legally recognized entity, whether for-profit
or not-for-profit.



   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any real property owned by the village or easements
held or used by the village, other than a right-of-way.



   REGULATION. Any rule adopted by the Director pursuant to the authority
of this chapter, and the procedure set forth in § 97.10 to carry out its
purpose and intent.



   RESIDENTIAL PURPOSES. Residential use of right-of-way for such uses as
mailboxes, trees, decorative purposes or any curb cuts and driveways, and as
may be further defined in the regulations.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The surface of and the space above and below the paved or
unpaved portions of any public street, public road, public highway, public
freeway, public lane, public path, public way, public alley, public court,
public sidewalk, public boulevard, public parkway, public drive and any other
land dedicated or otherwise designated for the same, including but not
limited to public easements for commercial corridor improvements, now or
hereafter held by the village which shall, within its proper use and meaning
in the sole opinion of the Director, entitle a permittee, in accordance with
the terms hereof and of any right-of-way permit, to the use thereof for the
purpose of installing or operating any poles, wires, cables, transformers,
conductors, ducts, lines, mains, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers,
appliances, attachments or other property or facilities as may be ordinarily
necessary and pertinent to the provision of natural gas, electric, cable
television, communications or other utility services as set forth in any
franchise or any right-of-way permit. RIGHT-OF-WAY shall not include private
easements or public property, except to the extent the use or occupation of
public property is specifically granted in a right-of-way permit or by
regulation.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY BOARD. Shall have the meaning set forth in § 97.03(F).



   RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT. The non-exclusive grant of authority to use or
occupy all or a portion of village’s rights-of-way granted pursuant to this
chapter.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY RELATED COSTS. The total costs, to the greatest extent
permitted by law, to the village of planning, regulating, purchasing,
maintaining and governing the rights-of-way, including any costs of joint
planning, enforcement of this chapter, and related costs and overheads,
including but not limited to an appropriate allocation of the costs of any
geographic information systems utilized by the village.



   VILLAGE. The Village of Minster, Ohio.



(Ord. 10-12-05, passed 1-4-11)



§ 97.02  PURPOSE AND SCOPE OF CHAPTER.



   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the regulation
of the use or occupation of all rights-of-way in the village, the issuance of
right-of-way permits to persons for such use or occupancy and to set forth
the policies of the village related thereto.



   (B)   A right-of-way permit issued pursuant to this chapter does not
take the place of any franchise, service permit, license, or permit which may
be additionally required by law. Each permittee shall obtain any and all such
additional state, federal or village franchises, licenses or permits
necessary to the operation and conduct of its business or the occupation or
use of any right-of-way; provided, however, that no permittee holding a valid
right-of-way permit shall be required to obtain a franchise for any type of
services rendered by said permittee for which the village did not require
franchises at the time said permittee’s permit was last issued or renewed.
Should there be a direct conflict between the provisions of this chapter and
a valid franchise, the provisions of the franchise shall prevail; provided,
however, that additional obligations shall not be construed as a conflict.



   (C)   The Director is hereby directed and empowered to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.



   (D)   The village’s policy regarding right-of-way is:



      (1)   To promote the utilization of rights-of-way for the
public health, safety and welfare and to promote economic development in the
village;



      (2)   To promote the availability of a wide range of utility,
communication and other services, including the rapid deployment of new
technologies and innovative services, to the village’s residents and
taxpayers at reasonable costs;



      (3)   To promote cooperation among the permittees and the
village in the occupation of rights-of-way, and work therein, in order to
minimize public inconvenience during right-of-way work, and eliminate
wasteful, unnecessary or unsightly duplication of facilities;



      (4)   To promote public safety and protect public property;



      (5)   To ensure adequate public compensation for private use
of the rights-of-way and the costs related thereto, including the regulation
thereof;



      (6)   To promote and require reasonable accommodation of all
uses of rights-of-way; and when all requests for right-of-way use cannot be
accomplished, to give priority for use of rights-of-way, in the order
indicated, from highest to lowest, to the following users:



         (a)   The village for governmental purposes;



         (b)   Another governmental entity for governmental
purposes with the village’s concurrence, or other governmental use required
by law;



         (c)   General right-of-way permittees and proprietary
uses by the village;



         (d)   Limited right-of-way permittees; provided,
however, that the Director may reasonable require cooperation and
accommodation among permittees in the public interest;



      (7)   To assure that applicants have the financial, technical
and managerial resources to comply with this chapter and the provisions of
any right-of-way permit issued hereunder; provided that, for purposes of this
chapter, an applicant possessing valid certification or other valid authority
to operate pursuant to authority granted to the Public Utilities Commission
of Ohio, including certification pursuant to R.C. §§ 4933.81 et seq., for
the services to be provided by the facilities subject to this chapter shall
be presumed to possess the requisite financial, technical and managerial
resources, unless otherwise shown by clear and convincing evidence.



   (E)   All right-of-way permits granted hereunder shall be
non-exclusive and no property right of any nature shall be created by the
granting of a permit under this chapter.



   (F)   This chapter does not apply, and nothing herein should be
construed to apply the provisions of this chapter, to structures or
facilities owned or operated by the village or any village operations that
occupy or use the rights-of-way. Further, the costs imposed by the
village’s occupancy or use of the rights-of-way shall not be included in
the costs to the village to manage and maintain the rights-of-way. It is
specifically contemplated, however, that all village departments or divisions
that utilize the rights-of-way shall carry out their operations in a manner
consistent with the policy set forth in this chapter, including participation
and cooperation in all joint planning hereunder and identification of
structures and facilities located in the rights-of-way.



(Ord. 10-12-05, passed 1-4-11)



§ 97.03  PROHIBITION; TYPES OF PERMITS; RIGHT-OF-WAY BOARD.



   (A)   (1)   Unless otherwise permitted pursuant to the Village
Codes, no person shall use, occupy, construct, own or operate structures or
facilities in, under or over any rights-of-way or any public property within
the village unless such person first obtains a right-of-way permit and
conforms to the requirements set forth therein and in this chapter; provided,
however, that right-of-way permits shall not be required for the following
uses:



         (a)   Newspaper stands;



         (b)   Carts;



         (c)   Sidewalk cafes;



         (d)   Awnings;



         (e)   Bus stops;



         (f)   Any governmental or other municipal use by the
village;



         (g)   Other uses not incompatible with the village
policies as specified in this Chapter 97 as approved by the Director; and



         (h)   Residential purposes, as long as, in the opinion
of the Director, such use:



            1.   Has received or will receive all other
necessary permits, including any under this Chapter 97;



            2.   Is not inconsistent with policy of the
village;



            3.   Does not adversely affect the public health,
safety or welfare; and



            4.   Does not materially interfere with the other
lawful use of the right-of-way.



      (2)   The Director shall adopt regulations controlling and
further defining residential purposes and to otherwise implement the
determinations to be made under this section. Such regulations shall, among
other matters, specify that the owner of facilities that holds title to such
facilities solely as a result of a leaseback shall not be subject to the
provisions of this chapter. LEASEBACK means the sale or transfer of property
by a permittee to another person contemporaneously followed by the leasing of
the property to the permittee on a long term basis, that are not operated or
controlled by said lessee, and are operated or controlled by the permittee,
are not considered to be using, occupying, owning or operating such
facilities, for purposes of this chapter, solely as a result of such
leaseback.



   (B)   (1)   The following types of right-of-way permits are
available:



         (a)   General right-of-way permit. Right-of-way permit
granted to persons who desire and are granted authority to utilize
rights-of-way generally for business purposes including the provision of
utility, cable television, communications or other services to the village,
its residents and taxpayers; and



         (b)   Limited right-of-way permit. Right-of-way permit
granted to a person for a specific, limited use of the rights-of-way or a
specific portion thereof as further delineated in such permit. A limited
right-of-way permit shall not be available to any person for use of more than
one-half mile of right-of-way. Limited right-of-way permits may be granted
for any amount of right-of-way to agencies of the government of the United
States, the State of Ohio, or its political subdivisions for governmental
purposes.



      (2)   Nothing in this chapter should be construed to preclude
the village from requiring any person offering any natural gas, electric,
cable television, communications or other utility services for which the
village may lawfully require a franchise, to acquire a franchise upon the
expiration of any right-of-way permit issued hereunder.



   (C)   Any such right-of-way permit may also allow the use of
specified public property for the uses set forth in the right-of-way permit
and in this chapter.



   (D)   Each right-of-way permit shall specify the use or uses for
which it is granted and contain such other non-discriminatory terms and
conditions as are appropriate and as are set forth in the regulations.



   (E)   Unless otherwise set forth herein, right-of-way permits or the
rights of a permittee thereunder are not transferable without the prior
express written approval of the Director, upon written request. Such request
shall contain evidence that the proposed transferee is subject to the
jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission of Ohio, possesses a valid
certification from the Public Utilities Commission of Ohio, including
certification pursuant to R.C. §§ 4933.81 et seq., and/or is recognized on
the rolls of the Public Utilities Commission of Ohio for the services to be
provided by the facilities subject to this chapter. The Director shall adopt
regulations providing procedures for transfer of right-of-way permits that
shall include provisions providing that (i) all requests for transfer shall
be deemed approved if the Director does not disapprove the same within 30
days of receipt of the completed written transfer request, and (ii) transfer
to affiliates under common ownership and control with the permittee shall not
require approval, so long as the Director is provided 30 days written notice
of such transfer.



   (F)   There is hereby created a Right-of-Way Board, consisting of
the Director, the Chair of Council’s Utilities Committee and the Village
Engineer. The Right-of-Way Board shall act by majority vote and each of its
members may designate an alternate, in writing, to perform such member’s
duties and obligations in such member’s absence. The Director shall act as
chair of the Right-of-Way Board.



   (G)   The Director shall adopt regulations controlling and further
defining residential purposes and to otherwise implement the determinations
to be made under this section. Such regulations shall, among other matters,
specify (i) that the owner of facilities that holds title to such facilities
solely as a result of a leaseback are not considered to be using, occupying,
owning or operating such facilities, for purposes of this chapter, solely as
a result of such leaseback.



(Ord. 10-12-05, passed 1-4-11)



§ 97.04  APPLICATION PROCEDURE; APPEAL.



   (A)   Applications for a general right-of-way permit by a holder of
a franchise shall be filed with the Director in such form and in such manner
as the regulations require. There shall be no application fee. Any person
holding a valid franchise shall be granted a general right-of-way permit.
Such general right-of-way permit shall be valid so long as the underlying
franchise is valid and the applicable provisions of that franchise, the
right-of-way permit and of this chapter are complied with; provided, however,
that such right-of-way permit shall only relate to and entitle the permittee
to utilize the rights-of-way, in accordance with this chapter, for purposes
directly related to the provision of the specific services for which it has a
franchise. Any other right-of-way use by such permittee shall require a
separate or amended right-of-way permit issued pursuant to § 97.04(B).



   (B)   All other applications for general right-of-way permits, or
amendments or renewals thereof, shall be filed with the Director in such form
and in such manner as the regulations require, along with an application fee
of $500. The Director shall determine if the application is in order and
shall, within 45 days of the receipt of a complete application, issue a
written report regarding such application. The report shall recommend that
the Right-of-Way Board deny or grant the right-of-way permit, subject to any
appropriate terms and conditions, in accordance with the criteria set forth
in this chapter. The Director’s report shall be served upon the applicant
by mail along with a notice of when the Right-of-Way Board will consider the
same. The Right-of-Way Board shall then consider such recommendation and make
a final determination in writing, within 15 days of the Director’s report,
as to whether or not such right-of-way permit should be granted and if so,
upon what terms and conditions. The term of each such general right-of-way
permit shall be for ten years from issuance, or such lesser term as the
applicant requests.



   (C)   An application for a limited right-of-way permit, or renewal
thereof, shall be filed in such form and in such manner as the regulations
require, along with an application fee of either (i) $50 for a limited
right-of-way permit for residential purposes, or (ii) $250 for all others. If
the Director determines that the application is in order and that the
criteria set forth in § 97.05 have been met, and that the application should
be granted, the Director shall, within 45 days of a receipt of a completed
application, conditionally grant or renew such a right-of-way permit subject
to any appropriate terms and conditions or deny the same. The Director’s
conditional grant, renewal or denial shall be served upon the applicant by
mail. Such conditional denial, grant or renewal shall become final unless
modified or rejected by the Right-of-Way Board within 15 days of issuance by
the Director. The term of such limited right-of-way permits shall be three
years from issuance, or such lesser term as the applicant requests. A limited
right-of-way permit for residential purposes may be granted for an indefinite
term from issuance, but may be cancelled by the Director with 60 days written
notice.



   (D)   Any applicant may appeal the failure of the Director to
conditionally grant a right-of-way permit, or to recommend it to be granted
upon terms and conditions acceptable to the applicant, to the Right-of-Way
Board. In order to perfect such appeal, the applicant shall file, within ten
days of the Director’s determination or recommendation, or within 45 days
of the filing of the application if the Director has taken no action, an
appeal to the Right-of-Way Board. The Right-of-Way Board shall then review
the matter and after affording the applicant an opportunity to be heard
either in person or in writing render a final determination within 15 days of
the filing of the appeal, unless such period is waived by the applicant.
Except to the extent otherwise appealable by law, the Right-of-Way Board’s
decision shall be final with regard to all decisions regarding limited
right-of-way permits. Decisions of the Right-of-Way Bard regarding general
right-of-way permits may be appealed to the Village Council.  Such appeal
shall be filed with the Clerk of the Council in such form as the regulation
requires, within 15 days of the decision appealed from. Decisions of Council
on such appeals shall be final.



   (E)   Any right-of-way permittee shall, within 30 days of the
granting or renewal of any right-of-way permit hereunder, if and as
applicable, pay a pro-rata portion of the fees required by § 97.07(B) or
(C); provided, however, that should the permittee appeal, and during the
pendency thereof the permittee does not use or occupy any right-of-way, the
permittee shall not be required to pay such pro-rata portion of said fees
until such appeal has been finally determined.



(Ord. 10-12-05, passed 1-4-11)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.05  CRITERIA FOR GRANTING PERMITS.



   (A)   A general right-of-way permit shall be granted to any
applicant holding a valid franchise.



   (B)   Except as provided in § 97.05(A) and (C), a general or a
limited right-of-way permit shall be granted to an applicant upon a
determination that:



      (1)   The granting of the right-of-way permit will contribute
to the public health, safety or welfare in the village;



      (2)   The granting of the right-of-way permit will be
consistent with the policy of the village as set forth in § 97.02(D); and



      (3)   The applicant is not delinquent on any taxes or other
obligations to the village or Auglaize County, and has the requisite
financial, managerial and technical ability to fulfill all its obligations
hereunder.



   (C)   A limited right-of-way permit for residential purposes not
exempted pursuant to section § 97.03(A) shall be granted at the Director’s
discretion if the director finds that granting such permit will not be
inconsistent with the policy of the village set forth in § 97.02(D).



   (D)   The Director, the Right-of-Way Board or Council on appeal may
impose such lawful conditions on the granting of a permit as reasonably
required to be consistent with the criteria set forth in this section and to
promote the policy of the village set forth in § 97.02(D).



(Ord. 10-12-05, passed 1-4-11)



§ 97.06  OBLIGATIONS OF PERMITTEES; CONDITIONS OF PERMITS.



   (A)   In addition to the other requirements set forth herein and in
the regulations, each permittee, except a limited right-of-way permittee for
residential purposes, shall:



      (1)   Use its best efforts to cooperate with other permittees
and the village for the best, most efficient, most aesthetic and least
obtrusive use of rights-of-way, consistent with safety, and to minimize
traffic and other disruptions including street cuts;



      (2)   Participate in such joint planning, construction and
advance notification of right-of-way work, excepting such work performed in
an emergency provided the permittee uses its best efforts to contact the
village at the earliest possible time after beginning any such emergency work
requiring excavation or other interference with the flow of traffic, as may
be required by this chapter and as may be more specifically set forth in
regulations promulgated pursuant to this chapter, and provided further, that
mandatory joint planning shall not (i) commence prior to January 1, 2011 or
(ii) require the exchange or provision of trade secrets or competitively
sensitive materials or information;



      (3)   Reasonably cooperate with other permittees in
utilization of, construction in and occupancy of public rights-of-way within
the village, but only to the extent the same is consistent with the grant
thereof, is not additionally burdensome to any property owner or unreasonably
burdensome to the permittee; provided, however, that nothing in this division
shall be construed to require expenditure of funds or rearrangement of
facilities by a permittee without fair compensation.



      (4)   At the direction of the Director upon reasonable written
notice of not less than 90 days, as determined by the Director taking into
account the size of the project, the difficulty associated with such removal
or rearrangement, costs and such other matters as the Director deems
appropriate, any permittee shall, at its sole cost, including but not limited
to engineering, construction, permits and other such costs, temporarily or
permanently remove or rearrange its facilities (i) as deemed necessary or
otherwise in the public interest by the Director to accommodate construction,
repair or modification of any street, sidewalk, village utility or other
public improvement, (ii) as part of the Director’s determination, to the
extent permitted by state law, that designated portions of its rights-of-way
should accommodate only underground facilities or that facilities should
occupy only one side or a specified portion of a street or other public way,
provided that such determination is reasonable and a part of an overall
improvement or beautification plan or project, (iii) if an additional or
subsequent village or other public use of rights-of-way is inconsistent with
the then current uses of such permittee, (iv) or for any other reasonable
cause as determined by the Director pursuant to § 97.14(B). Notwithstanding
any other provision of this division, notice of less than 90 days may be
utilized to the extent necessary to alleviate an emergency threatening the
public health, safety, or welfare. If the permittee believes that additional
time is necessary to relocate facilities pursuant to this section and such
additional time is not granted by the Director, the permittee may petition
Village Council for additional time to relocate its facilities.



      (5)   Provide maps and other information relating to a
permittee’s facilities and operations within the rights-of-way and
compliance with this chapter in such form as the regulations require. The
maps and information shall, at a minimum, locate, describe and identify all
uses of, and structures and facilities of such permittee in, the
rights-of-way;



      (6)   Perform all work, construction, maintenance or removal
of structures and facilities within the right-of-way, including tree
trimming, in accordance with good engineering and construction practice
including any appropriate safety codes and of the Village Code as may be
amended from time to time and use its best efforts to repair and replace any
street, curb or other portion of the right-of-way, or facilities or
structures located therein, not less than materially equivalent to its
condition prior to such work and to do so in a manner which minimizes any
inconvenience to the public, the village and other permittees, all in
accordance with the regulations adopted hereunder.



      (7)   Register, or cause to be registered, its facilities with
underground reporting services as set forth in the regulations;



      (8)   Use its best efforts to cooperate with the village in
any emergencies involving the rights-of-way in such manner as the regulations
shall require including the maintenance of a 24-hour emergency contact;



      (9)   Be permitted to enter into lease or other wholesale type
agreements with affiliates or other entities for the use of permittee’s
facilities located within the rights-of-way; provided, however, permittee
shall remain responsible and liable to pay all rights-of-way fees and perform
all obligations imposed by: 1) this chapter; 2) any regulations promulgated
pursuant to this chapter; and 3) the permittee’s right-of-way permit;



      (10)   Designate a single point of contact for all purposes
hereunder, as well as comply with such other contact and notice protocols as
the regulations require.



   (B)   Each permittee shall assure that any subcontractor or other
person performing any work or service in the right-of-way on behalf of said
permittee will comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter and its
right-of-way permit and will identify the permittee for whom such contractor
is working. The permittee shall be responsible and liable hereunder for all
actions of any such subcontractor as if the permittee had performed or failed
to perform any such obligation.



(Ord. 10-12-05, passed 1-4-11)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.07  PERMIT FEES AND AUDITING.



   (A)   Except for any fees charged pursuant to this Chapter 97,
general right-of-way permittees who have a franchise shall not be liable for
any additional right-of-way permit fees over and above any franchise fees
specified in its franchise for uses of rights-of-way directly related to the
uses for which such permittee holds its franchise, so long as the amount of
such fees due in each quarter is equal to or greater than the amounts
otherwise due the village pursuant to § 97.07(B). If the amount due under §
97.07(B) is more than the franchise fees then the permittee shall receive a
credit in each quarter against such amount for all such fees paid in such
quarter, and shall pay the balance to the village as set forth in §
97.07(E). Any cable television provider that has a valid franchise to operate
a cable television system within the village shall not be liable for any
additional right-of-way permit fees over and above any cable television
franchise fees specified in its cable television franchise for uses of
rights-of-way directly related to the uses for which such cable television
provider holds a cable franchise, so long as the amount of such fees due in
each quarter is equal to or greater than the amounts otherwise due the
village pursuant to § 97.07(B). If the amount due under § 97.07(B) is more
than said cable franchise fees, then the cable television provider shall
receive a credit in each quarter against such amount for all such fees paid
in such quarter, and shall pay the balance to the village as set forth in §
97.07(E).



   (B)   (1)   In addition to any fees charged pursuant to this
Chapter 97, all general right-of-way permittees shall pay an annual fee, for
each calendar year, in the amount of $1,200;



      (2)   Such payment shall be made in quarterly payments of $300
on or before March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31 of the calendar
year.



   (C)   In addition to any fees charged pursuant to this Chapter 97,
limited right-of-way permittees shall pay an annual fee of $0.50 per lineal
foot of right-of-way used or occupied, but not less than $50. This fee shall
be waived for all limited right-of-way permits for residential purposes and
may be waived by the Director for limited right-of-way permittees that are
agencies of the government of the United States, the State of Ohio, or its
political subdivisions. Such fee shall be paid in advance for each calendar
year prior to January 31 of such year.



   (D)   Further specifications regarding the determination and
calculation of the fees set forth in § 97.07(B) and (C) may be set forth in
the regulations.



   (E)   All fees pursuant to this chapter shall be paid by check money
order or wire transfer to the village as the regulations require.



   (F)   Each general right-of-way permittee shall maintain books,
records, maps, documents and other evidence directly pertinent to its
calculation of payments to the village. The Director, the Village Fiscal
Officer or either’s designated agents shall have reasonable access to any
books, records, maps, documents and other evidence for inspection, copying
and audit to the extent necessary to assure that the payments hereunder are
accurate and that all right-of-way permittees fully comply with the
provisions of this chapter and their respective right-of-way permits.



   (G)   Any increase in such fees must be approved by Council.



(Ord. 10-12-05, passed 1-4-11)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.08  JOINT PLANNING AND CONSTRUCTION.



   In order to promote the purposes of this chapter and the policy set
forth herein, the Director shall adopt regulations requiring and governing
joint planning and construction for all right-of-way permittees except for
limited right-of-way permittees for residential purposes. Such regulations
shall not, however, require a permittee to divulge trade secrets or other
competitively sensitive confidential information release of which would cause
material injury to the permittee. Such regulations shall also require any
confidential information of a permittee in the possession of the village be
treated as such, to the extent determined legally appropriate by the Village
Solicitor.



(Ord. 10-12-05, passed 1-4-11)



§ 97.09  VILLAGE USE OF FACILITIES.



   Except for traffic control facilities and facilities in place as of the
effective date of this chapter, facilities that are the subject of other
agreements between the village and a permittee, or as otherwise provided by
law, the village shall not install or maintain upon any poles and within any
underground pipes or conduits or other facilities of any general or limited
right-of-way permittee, any facilities desired by the village for the
village’s use without the consent of such permittee unless (i) such
installation and maintenance is lawful and consistent with good engineering
and construction practice and all appropriate safety codes, (ii) such
installation and maintenance does not unreasonably and materially interfere
with existing and future operations of the permittee, (iii) such installation
and maintenance is not unduly burdensome to such permittee, (iv) the village
offers to enter into a reasonable agreement with the permittee which
specifies other appropriate and reasonable terms and conditions governing the
use of permittee’s facilities including compensation to the permittee for
the village’s use of such facilities, and (v) the village’s use is
non-discriminatory. Each permittee shall cooperate with the village in the
development of a facility use agreement for such village facilities. Each
permittee shall cooperate with the village in planning and designing its
facilities so as to accommodate the village’s reasonably disclosed
requirements in this regard. Copies of all agreements hereunder shall be
filed with the Director.



(Ord. 10-12-05, passed 1-4-11)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.10  ADOPTION OF REGULATIONS.



   (A)   In accordance with the provisions of § 97.06, the Director
may propose regulations, as the Director deems appropriate from time to time,
to carry out the express purposes and intent of this chapter, including
regulations governing the procedures of the Right-of-Way Board. Such proposed
regulations shall be filed with the Clerk of Council to be placed on
Council’s agenda for action subsequent to the comment period noted below.
Each general right-of-way permittee shall be served with a copy of the
proposed regulations by regular U.S. mail; provided, however, that any
failure of any permittee to actually receive such notice shall not in any way
affect the validity or enforceability of such regulation. Any person,
including any permittee, may file specific written comments or objection’s
on the proposed regulations with the Clerk of Council within a 30-day period
after such publication (hereinafter “comment period”).



   (B)   Such regulations shall not materially increase the obligations
of any permittee hereunder. In proposing such regulations, including those
related to § 97.07, the Director shall, among other appropriate factors,
consider the costs of permittee compliance as an important factor in
determining the appropriateness of the regulations.



   (C)   The Council shall, by ordinance, adopt, reject or modify any
proposed regulations.



(Ord. 10-12-05, passed 1-4-11)



§ 97.11  INDEMNITY: INSURANCE.



   (A)   Except for limited right-of-way permittees for residential
purposes, each permittee shall, as a condition of its right-of-way permit,
indemnify, protect and hold harmless the village from any claim, loss or
damage arising in any way from permittee’s occupation or use of the
right-of-way, including but not limited to the construction, operation or
maintenance of permittee’s facilities, and from any such permittee’s
negligent or wrongful act or omission excluding, however, claims arising from
the village’s sole negligence or willful misconduct.



   (B)   Except for limited right-of-way permittees for residential
purposes, each permittee, as a condition of its permit, shall keep in force a
policy or policies of liability insurance, having such terms and in such
amounts as are set forth in the regulations, covering its facilities and
operations pursuant to its right-of-way permit. The village shall be named as
an additional insurance on such policy.



   (C)   Upon the written application of a permittee and approval of
the Director, Village Solicitor and Fiscal Officer, permittees who (i)
maintain a net book value in excess of $10,000,000, and (ii) otherwise
demonstrate and maintain acceptable financial strength, may self-insure in
lieu of providing policies of insurance.



(Ord. 10-12-05, passed 1-4-11)



§ 97.12  REMOVAL OF FACILITIES.



   (A)   Except for limited right-of-way permittees for residential
purposes, when the permit so allows, any right-of-way permittee that intends
to discontinue use of and abandon any facilities within the rights-of-way
shall submit a written notice to the Director describing the portion of the
facilities to be discontinued and abandoned, any plan for securing the same
and the proposed date of abandonment, which date shall not be less than 60
days form the date such notice is submitted to the Director. A permittee
shall not abandon such facilities without such notice. The permittee shall
remove or secure such facilities if and as required by the written order of
the Director so long as such order is issued no more than 60 days from the
date said notice is submitted to the Director.



   (B)   Should any permittee fail, after notice, to remove or
rearrange facilities at the Director’s request as specified in § 97.12(A)
or comply with the Director’s order pursuant to § 97.07, the village may,
at its option and in addition to the imposition of any penalties or other
remedies hereunder, undertake or cause to be undertaken, any reasonable
action necessary to remove, secure, or rearrange the facilities. The village
shall have no liability for any damage caused by such action and the
permittee shall be liable to the village for all reasonable costs incurred by
the village in such action.



(Ord. 10-12-05, passed 1-4-11)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.13  REVOCATION.



   (A)   In addition to any other rights set out in this chapter, the
village reserves the right to revoke, in accordance with the procedures set
forth in § 97.13(B), any right-of-way permit in the event such permittee
violates any material provision of this chapter or its right-of-way permit.



   (B)   The Director shall give a permittee 30 days prior written
notice of an intent to revoke said permittee’s right-of-way permit. Such
notice shall state the reasons for such action. If the permittee cures the
violation or other cause within the 30-day notice period, or if the permittee
initiates efforts satisfactory to the Director to remedy the stated
violation, the Director shall rescind such notice of revocation. If the
permittee does not cure the stated violation or other cause or undertake
efforts satisfactory to the Director to remedy the stated violation, the
Director may recommend such permit be revoked. After granting the permittee
an opportunity to be heard in person or in writing, the Right-of-Way Board
may revoke the right-of-way permit. Unless otherwise required by law the
decision of the Right-of-Way Board shall be final.



   (C)   Unless otherwise permitted by the Director or required by law
if a right-of-way permit is revoked, all facilities located in the
rights-of-way or located upon public property pursuant to such permit shall
be removed at the sole expense of the permittee.



(Ord. 10-12-05, passed 1-4-11)



§ 97.14  RESERVATION OF RIGHTS.



   (A)   Nothing in this chapter should be construed so as to grant any
right or interest in any right-of-way or public property other than that
explicitly set forth herein or in a right-of-way permit.



   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the
village from constructing, maintaining, repairing or relocating any village
utility, including street lighting, communications or like facilities;
grading, paving, maintaining, repairing, relocating or altering any street,
public property or right-of-way; or constructing, maintaining, relocating, or
repairing any sidewalk or other public work or improvement. To the extent
that such work requires temporary or permanent relocation or rearrangement of
any facilities or structures of any permittee, such relocating or
rearrangement shall be accomplished at the sole cost of the permittee in such
time and in such manner as set forth in the regulations.



(Ord. 10-12-05, passed 1-4-11)



§ 97.15  TEMPORARY MOVEMENT OF FACILITIES.



   In the event it is necessary to move or remove temporarily any of the
permittee’s wires, cables, poles, or other facilities placed pursuant to
this chapter, in order to lawfully move a large object, vehicle, building or
other structure over the streets of the village, upon four weeks written
notice by the Director to the permittee, the permittee shall, at the expense
of the person requesting the temporary removal of such facilities, comply
with Director’s request; provided that the permittee’s expense has been
reasonably secured by the person so requesting.



(Ord. 10-12-05, passed 1-4-11)



§ 97.16  FORECLOSURE AND RECEIVERSHIP.



   Upon the filing of any voluntary or involuntary petition under the
Bankruptcy Act by or against the permittee, or any action for foreclosure or
other judicial sale of the permittee’s facilities located within the
right-of-way, the permittee shall promptly notify the Director of such fact.



(Ord. 10-12-05, passed 1-4-11)



§ 97.17  NON-ENFORCEMENT AND WAIVERS BY VILLAGE.



   The permittee shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply with
any of the provisions of its right-of-way permit or this chapter by reason of
any failure of the village to enforce prompt compliance.



(Ord. 10-12-05, passed 1-4-11)



§ 97.18  CAPTIONS.



   The captions and headings in this chapter are for convenience and
reference purposes only and shall not affect in any way the meaning of
interpretation of this chapter.



(Ord. 10-12-05, passed 1-4-11)



§ 97.19  SEVERABILITY.



   If any section, subsection, clause or provision or any part thereof of
this chapter shall be finally adjudicated by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid, the remainder shall be unaffected by such
adjudication and all the remaining provision shall remain in full force and
effect. If the enforcement or effective date of any section, subsection,
clause or provision or any part thereof of this chapter is stayed by a court
or administrative agency with competent jurisdiction, the remaining
provisions shall be unaffected by such stay and all other provisions shall
remain in full force and effect.



(Ord. 10-12-05, passed 1-4-11)



§ 97.99  PENALTIES.



   (A)   In addition to any other penalties set forth in this chapter,
and the remedy of specific performance which may be enforced in a court of
competent jurisdiction, the following penalties shall apply.



      (1)   Any person or permittee violating § 97.04, § 97.06, §
97.07, § 97.09, § 97.12 or failing to pay when due any forfeiture imposed
pursuant, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Each day
such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.



      (2)   For failure to comply with any other provision of this
chapter, the penalty shall be a civil forfeiture, payable to the village, in
the amount of $500 per day for each day of violation. In addition, for
failure to timely comply with a notice by the Director to remove or rearrange
facilities pursuant to § 97.06(A)(4) and § 97.09, an additional civil
forfeiture equal to any costs incurred by the village as a result of such
failure, including but not limited to any penalties or liquidated damages
charged the village by its contractors occasioned thereby, shall be imposed.



   (B)   Any permittee may be excused for violations of this chapter
and its right-of-way permit due to force majeure.



(Ord. 10-12-05, passed 1-4-11)



CHAPTER 98: SMALL CELL TECHNOLOGY IN THE RIGHT-OF-WAY



Section



   98.01   Definitions



   98.02   General requirements



   98.03   Application and approval process



   98.04   Design guidelines



   98.05   Safety requirements



   98.06   Installation and inspection



   98.07   General provisions



   98.08   Annual collocation fee



   98.09   Liability and signal interference



   98.10   Requirements for removal, replacement, maintenance and repair



   98.11   Rule making authority



   98.12   Right of appeal



   98.13   Effect of partial invalidity



 



   98.99   Penalty



§ 98.01  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   General use of terms.



      (1)   The terms, phrases, words, and their derivations used in
this chapter shall have the meanings given in this section.



      (2)   Words not defined shall be given their common and
ordinary meaning.



   (B)   Defined terms.



      ABANDONED. Any small cell facilities or wireless support
structures that are unused for a period of 365 days without the operator
otherwise notifying the village and receiving the village's approval.



      ANTENNA. Communications equipment that transmits or receives
radio frequency signals in the provision of wireless service.



      APPLICANT. Any person applying for a small cell permit hereunder.



      COLLOCATION or COLLOCATE. To install, mount, maintain, modify,
operate, or replace wireless facilities on a wireless support structure.



      DECORATIVE POLE.  A pole, arch, or structure, including some
street light poles placed in the right-of-way specifically designed and
placed for aesthetic purposes and on which no appurtenances or attachments
have been placed except for any of the following:



         (a)   Electric lighting;



         (b)   Specifically designed informational or directional
signage; or



         (c)   Temporary holiday or special event attachments.



      DESIGN GUIDELINES. Those detail design guidelines, specifications
and examples adopted by the staff and administration pursuant to § 98.04 for
the design and installation of small cell facilities and wireless support
structures, which are effective insofar as they do not conflict with federal
and state law, rule and regulations.



      OPERATOR. A wireless service provider, cable operator, or a video
service provider that operates a small cell facility and provides wireless
service. OPERATOR includes a wireless service provider, cable operator, or a
video service provider that provides information services as defined in the
"Telecommunications Act of 1996," 110 Stat. 59, 47 U.S.C. 153(2), and
services that are fixed in nature or use unlicensed spectrum.



      PERMITTEE. The owner and/or operator issued a small cell permit
pursuant to this chapter and the design guidelines.



      PERSON. Any natural person or any association, firm, partnership,
joint venture, corporation, or other legally recognized entity, whether
for-profit or not-for-profit.



      RIGHT-OF-WAY. The surface of, and the space within, through, on,
across, above, or below, any public street, public road, public highway,
public freeway, public lane, public path, public alley, public court, public
sidewalk, public boulevard, public parkway, public drive, public easement,
and any other land dedicated or otherwise designated for a compatible public
use, which is owned or controlled by the village.



      SMALL CELL FACILITY. A wireless facility that meets both of the
following requirements:



         (a)   Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of not
more than six cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has
exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit
within an enclosure of not more than six cubic feet in volume.



         (b)   All other wireless equipment associated with the
facility is cumulatively not more than 28 cubic feet in volume. The
calculation of equipment volume shall not include electric meters,
concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation boxes, grounding
equipment, power transfer switches, cut-off switches, and vertical cable runs
for the connection of power and other services.



      SMALL CELL PERMIT. The non-exclusive grant of authority issued by
the village to install a small cell facility and/or a wireless support
structure in a portion of the right-of-way in accordance with these
guidelines.



      UTILITY POLE. A structure that is designed for, or used for the
purpose of, carrying lines, cables, or wires for electric or
telecommunications service. UTILITY POLE excludes street signs and decorative
poles.



      VILLAGE. The Village of Minster.



      WIRELESS FACILITY. Equipment at a fixed location that enables
wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network,
including all of the following:



         (a)   Equipment associated with wireless communications;



         (b)   Radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or
fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable
equipment, regardless of technological configuration.



         (c)   The term does not include any of the following:



            1.   The structure or improvements on, under, or
within which the equipment is collocated; or



            2.   Coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is between
wireless support structures or utility poles or that is otherwise not
immediately adjacent to or directly associated with a particular antenna.



      WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A pole, such as a monopole, either
guyed or self-supporting, street light pole, traffic signal pole, a 15-foot
or taller sign pole, or utility pole capable of supporting small cell
facilities. WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE excludes:



         (a)   A utility pole or other facility owned or operated
by a municipal electric utility; and



         (b)   A utility pole or other facility used to supply
traction power to public transit systems, including railways, trams,
streetcars and trolley buses.



      WIRELINE BACKHAUL FACILITY. A facility used for the transport of
communications service or any other electronic communications by coaxial,
fiber-optic cable, or any other wire.



(Ord. 18-10-02, passed 2-19-19)



§ 98.02  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   General requirements. The following requirements shall apply
to all small cell facilities and wireless support structures proposed within
the right-of-way.



      (1)   No person shall occupy or use the right-of-way except in
accordance with law.



      (2)   In occupying or using the right-of-way, no person shall
unreasonably compromise the public health, safety, and welfare.



      (3)   No person shall occupy or use the right-of-way without
first obtaining, under this chapter, Chapter 97, or R.C. §§ 1332.24 or
4939.031, any requisite consent of the village. Before placing small cell
facilities or wireless support structures in the right-of-way, an operator
must apply for and receive a general right-of-way permit under Chapter 97. If
the operator's activities in the right-of-way will consist solely of
collocating small cell facilities, constructing, modifying, or replacing new
wireless support structures and associated small cell facilities, removing
such facilities, or eligible facilities requests as defined by the Federal
Communication Commission, then the operator shall not be required to pay the
annual fee for holders of a right-of-way permit provided in Chapter 97. This
provision shall not be construed to waive application fees or any other
construction or work permit necessary for work in the village.



   (B)   The permitting procedures and authorizations set forth herein
in this chapter shall apply only to the small cell facilities and wireless
support structures in the right-of-way, and do not authorize the construction
and operation of a wireline backhaul facility, which continues to be governed
by Chapter 97.



   (C)   Nothing in this chapter preludes the village from applying its
generally applicable health, safety and welfare regulations when granting
consent for a small cell facility or wireless support structure in the
village’s right-of-way.



(Ord. 18-10-02, passed 2-19-19)



§ 98.03  APPLICATION AND APPROVAL PROCESS.



   (A)   Pre-application conference.



      (1)   The village requires pre-submittal conferences to meet
with potential applicants and discuss projects on a conceptual level. The
conference is intended to identify the correct application type and content
requirements for any given project, and also to create an informal forum in
which applicants and the village can discuss any concerns that should be
addressed as soon as possible to avoid any unnecessary delays in the
processing of an application and deployment of wireless facilities in the
village. The requirement for a pre-submittal conference may be waived by the
Village Administrator or designee based on necessity and prior experience
with the applicant.



      (2)   An appointment is required for all pre-submittal
conferences. The Village Administrator may establish regular hours in which
appointments are available and the number of potential projects that may be
discussed at a pre-submittal conference.



   (B)   Application required. Prior to installation, modification,
relocation or removal of a small cell facility, relocation or removal of an
existing wireless support structure, installation of a new wireless support
structure, or collocation on an existing wireless support structure in the
right-of-way, the operator shall apply to the village and receive approval
from the village. Prior to submitting such application, the applicant must
possess a right-of-way permit, as required by Chapter 97 of this code.



   (C)   Required application materials. Unless otherwise required by
state or federal law, the application shall be submitted to the Village
Administrator with the applicable fee and all required materials and
information in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and the
design guidelines in order for the application to be considered complete.



   (D)   Application processing fee. For processing an application for
consent, the village may charge a fee for each small cell facility and
wireless support structure requested as prescribed under R.C. § 4939.0316
and as listed on the associated application forms which shall be made
available by the Village Administrator.



(Ord. 18-10-02, passed 2-19-19)



§ 98.04  DESIGN GUIDELINES.



   (A)   Village staff and administration shall adopt by resolution
detailed design guidelines with objective, technically feasible criterial
applied in a non-discriminatory manner that reasonably match the aesthetics
and character of the immediate area regarding all the following, which the
village shall consider in reviewing an application:



      (1)   The location of any ground-mounted small cell facilities;



      (2)   The location of a small cell facility on a wireless
support structure;



      (3)   The appearance and concealment of small cell facilities,
including those relating to materials used for arranging, screening, and
landscaping; and



      (4)   The design and appearance of a wireless support
structure.



   (B)   The provisions in this section shall not limit or prohibit the
discretion of the Village Administrator to promulgate and make publicly
available other information, materials, forms, or requirements in addition
to, and separate from, the design guidelines so long as the information,
materials, forms, or requirements do not conflict with this chapter or other
applicable state or federal law.



   (C)   Waiver of guidelines. In the event that strict compliance with
any provision in these guidelines, as applied to a specific proposed small
cell facility, would effectively prohibit the provision of personal wireless
services, the Village Administrator may at its sole discretion having no
value as precedent, grant a limited, one-time exemption from strict
compliance.



(Ord. 18-10-02, passed 2-19-19)



§ 98.05  SAFETY REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Prevention of failures and accidents. Any person who owns a
small cell facility and/or wireless support structure sited in the
right-of-way shall at all times employ ordinary and reasonable care and
install and maintain in use industry standard technology for preventing
failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injury, or nuisance
to the public.



   (B)   Compliance with fire safety and FCC regulations. Small cell
facilities, wires, cables, fixtures, and other equipment shall be installed
and maintained in substantial compliance with the requirements of the
National Electric Code, all FCC, state, and local regulations, and in such
manner that will not interfere with the use of other property.



   (C)   Changes in state or federal standards and regulations. If
state or federal standards and regulations are amended, the owners of the
small cell facilities and/or wireless support structures governed by this
chapter shall bring any facilities and/or structures into compliance with the
revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of
the standards and regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is
mandated by the regulating agency. Failure to bring small cell facilities
and/or wireless support structures into compliance with any revised standards
and regulations shall constitute grounds for removal at the owner's expense.



   (D)   Indemnification. Any operator who owns or operates small cell
facilities or wireless support structures in the right-of-way shall
indemnify, protect, defend, and hold the village and its elected officials,
officers, employees, agents, and volunteers harmless against any and all
claims, lawsuits, judgments, costs, liens, losses, expenses, fees to include
reasonable attorney fees and costs of defense, proceedings, actions, demands,
causes of action, liability and suits of any kind and nature, including
personal or bodily injury or death, property damage or other harm for which
recovery of damages is sought, to the extent that it is caused by the
negligence of the operator who owns or operates small cell facilities and
wireless service in the right-of-way, any agent, officer, director,
representative, employee, affiliate, or subcontractor of the operator, or
their respective officers, agents, employees, directors, or representatives
while installing, repairing, or maintaining facilities in the right-of-way.



   (E)   Surety bond or equivalent financial tool for cost of removal.
All owners must procure and provide to the village a bond, or must provide
proof of an equivalent financial mechanism, to ensure compliance with all
provisions of this chapter. The bond must be maintained for as long as the
owner has small cell facilities and/or wireless support structures located in
the right-of-way. The bond or equivalent financial method must specifically
cover the cost of removal of unused or abandoned small cell facilities and/or
wireless support structures or damage to village property caused by an
operator or its agent of each small cell facility and/or wireless support
structure in case the village has to remove or pay for its removal. Two
acceptable alternatives to a bond include a fund set aside and a letter of
credit.



(Ord. 18-10-02, passed 2-19-19)



§ 98.06  INSTALLATION AND INSPECTION.



   (A)   (1)   Completion within 180 days. The collocation of a new
wireless support structure for which a small cell permit is granted shall be
completed within 180 days after issuance of the small cell permit unless the
village and the applicant agree to extend this period. The village will agree
to an extension if the delay is caused by: (a) make-ready work for a
village-owned wireless support structure; or (b) the lack of commercial power
or backhaul availability at the site, provided that the operator has made a
timely request within 60 days after the issuance of the small cell permit for
commercial power or backhaul services. The additional time to complete
installation may not exceed a total of 360 days after the issuance of the
small cell permit.



      (2)   Procedure for request for extension of time. In
situations when completion will not occur within 180 days after issuance of
the small cell permit, the applicant may request an extension of time. Such
extension request must be completed utilizing the village's extension of time
form, which will include the length of time being requested and the reason
for the delay. The extension must be filed with the Village Administrator.



   (B)   Requirement for work permit. Prior to commencing work in the
right-of-way, the applicant must obtain a right-of-way work permit from the
Village Administrator as required in § 97.04(C). In most instances, this
work permit will be able to be issued in conjunction with and utilizing the
materials included for an application for small cell permits issued under
this chapter. Once the work authorized by the right-of- way work permit
commences, it should be completed within 45 days.



(Ord. 18-10-02, passed 2-19-19)



§ 98.07  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   As-built maps and records.



      (1)   Operator shall maintain accurate maps and other
appropriate records, including an inventory, of its small cell facilities and
wireless support structures as they are actually constructed in the
right-of-way or any other village-owned property. The inventory shall include
GIS coordinates, date of installation, type of wireless support structure
used for installation, wireless support structure owner and description/type
of installation for each small cell facility and wireless support structure.



      (2)   Upon village's written request, operator shall provide a
cumulative inventory within 30 days or immediately upon an occurrence defined
by the village as an emergency. Concerning small cell facilities and wireless
support structures that become inactive, the inventory shall include the same
information as active installations in addition to the date the small cell
facility and/or wireless support structure was deactivated and the date the
small cell facility and/or wireless support structure was removed from the
right-of-way. The village may compare the inventory to its records to
identify any discrepancies.



   (B)   Generally applicable health and safety regulations. All small
cell facilities and wireless support structures shall be designed,
constructed, operated and maintained in compliance with all generally
applicable federal, state, and local health and safety regulations, including
without limitation all applicable regulations for human exposure to RF
emissions.



(Ord. 18-10-02, passed 2-19-19)



§ 98.08  ANNUAL COLLOCATION FEE.



   For each attachment of a small cell facility to a wireless support
structure owned or operated by the village and located in the right-of-way,
the village may charge the operator an annual fee as prescribed in R.C. §
4939.022 and as listed on associated application forms which shall be made
available by the Village Administrator.



(Ord. 18-10-02, passed 2-19-19)



§ 98.09  LIABILITY AND SIGNAL INTERFERENCE.



   (A)   No liability. The village shall not be liable to the operator
by reason of inconvenience, annoyance or injury to the small cell facilities,
wireless support structures, and related ground or pole-mounted equipment or
activities conducted by the operator therefrom, arising from the necessity of
repairing any portion of the right-of-way, or from the making of any
necessary alteration or improvements, in or to, any portion of the
right-of-way, or in, or to, village's fixtures, appurtenances, or equipment.



   (B)   Signal interference prohibited. In the event that an
operator's small cell facility interferes with the public safety radio
system, or the village's or State of Ohio's traffic signal system, then the
operator shall, at its cost, immediately cooperate with the village to either
rule out the operator as the interference source or eliminate the
interference. Cooperation with the village may include, but shall not be
limited to, temporarily switching the transmission equipment on or off for
testing.



(Ord. 18-10-02, passed 2-19-19)



§ 98.10  REQUIREMENTS FOR REMOVAL, REPLACEMENT, MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR.



   (A)   Replacement of municipal-owned wireless support structure.



      (1)   When necessary to accommodate small cell facility. The
village may require, in response to an application to collocate a small cell
facility on a village-owned wireless support structure, the replacement or
modification of the wireless support structure at the operator's cost if the
village determines that replacement or modification is necessary for
compliance with construction and safety standards. Such replacement or
modification shall conform to these design guidelines. The village may retain
ownership of the replacement or modified wireless support structure.



      (2)   Accommodation of reservation of space for future public
safety or transportation uses. If the village has reserved space for future
public safety or transportation uses on the village-owned wireless support
structure, the replacement or modification must accommodate the future use.



   (B)   Removal or relocation required for village project.



      (1)   Operator shall remove and relocate the permitted small
cell facility and/or wireless support structure at the operator's sole
expense to accommodate construction of a public improvement project by the
village.



      (2)   If operator fails to remove or relocate the small cell
facility and/or wireless support structure or portion thereof as requested by
the village within 120 days of the village's notice, then the village shall
be entitled to remove the small cell facility and/or wireless support
structure, or portion thereof at operator's sole cost and expense, without
further notice to operator.



      (3)   Operator shall, within 30 days following issuance of
invoice for the same, reimburse the village for its reasonable expenses
incurred in the removal (including, without limitation, overhead and
expenses) of the small cell facilities and/or wireless support structure, or
portion thereof.



   (C)   Removal required by village for safety and imminent danger
reasons.



      (1)   Operator shall, at its sole cost and expense, promptly
disconnect, remove, or relocate the applicable small cell facility and/or
wireless support structure within the time frame and in the manner required
by the village if the village reasonably determines that the disconnection,
removal, or location of any part of the small cell facility and/or wireless
support structure:



         (a)   Is necessary to protect the public health, safety,
welfare, or village property; or



         (b)   Operator fails to obtain all applicable licenses,
permits, and certifications required by law for its small cell facility
and/or wireless support structure.



      (2)   If the Village Administrator reasonably determines that
there is imminent danger to the public, then the village may immediately
disconnect, remove, or relocate the applicable small cell facility and/or
wireless support structure at the operator's sole cost and expense.



   (D)   Removal/abandonment of facilities.



      (1)   Operator shall remove small cell facilities and/or
wireless support structures when such facilities are abandoned regardless of
whether or not it receives notice from the village. Unless the village sends
notice that removal must be completed immediately to ensure public health,
safety, and welfare, the removal must be completed within the earlier of 60
days of the small cell facility and/or wireless support structure being
abandoned, or within 60 days of receipt of written notice from the village.
When operator abandons permanent structures in the right-of-way, the operator
shall notify the village in writing of such abandonment and shall file with
the village the location and description of each small cell facility and/or
wireless support structure abandoned. Prior to removal, operator must make
application to the village and receive approval for such removal. Operator
must obtain a right-of-way work permit for the removal. The village may
require the operator to complete additional remedial measures necessary for
public safety and the integrity of the right-of-way.



      (2)   The village may, at its option, allow a wireless support
structure to remain in the right-of-way and coordinate with the owner to
transfer ownership of such wireless support structure to the village, instead
of requiring the owner and/or operator to remove such wireless support
structure.



   (E)   Restoration. Operator shall repair any damage to the
right-of-way, any facilities located within the right-of-way, and/or the
property of any third party resulting from operator's removal or relocation
activities (or any other of operator's activities hereunder) within ten
calendar days following the date of such removal or relocation, at operator's
sole cost and expense. Restoration of the right-of-way and such property must
be to substantially the same condition as it was immediately before the date
the operator was granted a small cell permit for the applicable location, or
did the work at such location (even if operator did not first obtain a small
cell permit). This includes restoration or replacement of any damaged trees,
shrubs, or other vegetation. Such repair, restoration and replacement shall
be submit to the sole, reasonable approval of the village.



(Ord. 18-10-02, passed 2-19-19)



§ 98.11  RULE MAKING AUTHORITY.



   Village Administrator is hereby authorized to promulgate additional
rules and regulations, including but not limited to the adoption of forms and
application submittal requirements, to carry out the purpose and intent of
this chapter in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare. Such
rules, and amendments thereto shall be consistent with this code, and shall
be subject to the approval of the Village Administrator.



(Ord. 18-10-02, passed 2-19-19)



§ 98.12  RIGHT OF APPEAL.



   Appeals of the staff and administration's decision on enforcement of
these regulations, rules and requirements established in the design
guidelines or other information, materials or forms promulgated by the staff
shall be taken to the Village Council by filing a notice of appeal with the
Fiscal Officer. Appeals shall be filed within ten days of the staff or
administration's decision. Decisions by the Village Council shall be subject
only to judicial review in accordance with law.



(Ord. 18-10-02, passed 2-19-19)



§ 98.13  EFFECT OF PARTIAL INVALIDITY.



   The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable, and
if any section, subsection, or clause of this chapter is held by a court of
competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such a
ruling shall not affect the other parts of this chapter that can be given
effect.



(Ord. 18-10-02, passed 2-19-19)



§ 98.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   For failure to comply with any provision of this chapter or
the design guidelines, the penalty shall be a civil forfeiture, payable to
the village, in an amount of $250 per day for each day the violation
continues.



   (B)   In addition to the civil forfeiture in division (A), the
village may also pursue the remedies of revocation of the small cell permit
or specific performance of the violated provision.



   (C)   The Village Administrator may excuse violations of this
chapter for reasons of force majeure.



   (D)   For purposes of this section, FORCE MAJEURE means a strike,
acts of God, acts of public enemies, orders of any kind of a government of
the United States of America or of the State of Ohio or any of their
departments, agencies, or political subdivisions; riots, epidemics,
landslides, lightning, earthquakes, fires, tornadoes, storms, floods, civil
disturbances, explosions, partial or entire failure of utilities or any other
cause or event not reasonably within the control of the permittee, but only
to the extent the disabled party notifies the other party as soon as
practicable regarding such force majeure and then for only so long as and to
the extent that, the force majeure prevents compliance or causes
non-compliance with the provisions hereof.



(Ord. 18-10-02, passed 2-19-19)



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



      Chapter




         110.   PEDDLERS, ITINERANT MERCHANTS AND SOLICITORS




CHAPTER 110:  PEDDLERS, ITINERANT MERCHANTS AND SOLICITORS



Section



   110.01   (Reserved)



   110.02   Definitions



   110.03   License requirement



   110.04   Application procedure



   110.05   Standards for issuance



   110.06   Revocation procedure



   110.07   Standards for revocation



   110.08   Appeal procedure



   110.09   Exhibition of identification



   110.10   Municipal policy on soliciting



   110.11   Notice regulating soliciting



   110.12   Duty of solicitors



   110.13   Uninvited soliciting prohibited



   110.14   Time limit on soliciting



 



   110.99   Penalty



Statutory reference:



   Municipal power to regulate, see R.C. §§ 715.61, 715.63, and 715.64



   Revocation of licenses for conviction of certain fraud and theft
offenses, see R.C. § 2961.03



§ 110.01  (RESERVED)



§ 110.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUSINESS.  The business carried on by any person who is an itinerant
merchant, peddler, or solicitor as defined in this section.



   GOODS.  Merchandise of any description, and includes, but is not
limited to, wares and foodstuffs.



   ITINERANT MERCHANT.  Any person, whether as owner, agent, or
consignee, who engages in a temporary business of selling goods within the
municipality and who, in the furtherance of such business, uses any building,
structure, vehicle, or any place within the municipality.



   PEDDLER.  Any person, not an itinerant merchant, who:



      (1)   Travels from place to place by any means carrying goods
for sale, or making sales, or making deliveries; or



      (2)   Without traveling from place to place, sells or offers
goods for sale from any public place within the municipality.



   SOLICITOR.  Any person who travels by any means from place to place,
taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods to be delivered in the
future or for services to be performed in the future.  A person who is a
solicitor is not a peddler.



§ 110.03  LICENSE REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   Any person who is an itinerant merchant, peddler, or solicitor
shall obtain a license before engaging in such activity within the
municipality and shall pay a fee for each salesperson for each week that such
business is carried on.



   (B)   The fee for the license required by this chapter shall be as
set from time to time by the Legislative Authority.



   (C)   No license issued under this chapter shall be transferable.



   (D)   All licenses issued under this chapter shall be good for six
days and shall terminate automatically with the last day for which the fee
shall have been paid.



   (E)   The license fee is waived for all non-profit charitable
organizations.  Such organization must show proof of its non-profit status
before the fee will be waived.



(Ord. 94-8-2, passed 8-10-94; Am. Ord. 97-  , passed -  -97)  Penalty, see
§ 110.99



§ 110.04  APPLICATION PROCEDURE.



   (A)   All applicants for licenses required by this chapter shall
file an application with the Clerk or other authorized official.  This
application shall be signed by the applicant if an individual, or by all
partners if a partnership, or by the president if a corporation.  The
applicant may be requested to provide information concerning the following
items:



      (1)   The complete name and current address of the applicant
and each salesperson;



      (2)   Date of birth and Social Security numbers of the
individuals;



      (3)   The name and address of the person, if any, for whose
purpose the business will be carried on, and, if a corporation, the state of
incorporation;



      (4)   The time period or periods during which it is proposed
to carry on applicant's business;



      (5)   (a)   The nature, character, and quality of the goods
or services to be offered for sale or delivered;



         (b)   If goods, their invoice value and whether they are
to be sold by sample as well as from stock, where and by whom such goods are
manufactured or grown, and where such goods are at the time of application;



      (6)   The nature of the advertising proposed to be done for
the business;



      (7)   Whether or not the applicant, or the individual
salesperson or the person identified in division (A)(3) has been convicted of
any crime or misdemeanor and, if so, the nature of each offense and the
penalty assessed for each offense;



      (8)   A list of places where past business has been conducted
so a background check can be completed.



   (B)   Applicants for peddler or solicitor licenses may be required
to provide further information concerning the following items, in addition to
that requested under division (A) above:



      (1)   A description or photograph of the applicant;



      (2)   A description of any vehicle proposed to be used in the
business, including its registration number, if any.



   (C)   All applicants for licenses required by this chapter shall
attach to their application, if required by the municipality, credentials
from the person, if any, for which the applicant proposes to do business,
authorizing the applicant to act as such representative.



   (D)   Applicants who propose to handle foodstuffs shall also attach
to their application, in addition to any attachments required under division
(C), a statement from a licensed physician, dated not more than 14 days prior
to the date of application, certifying the applicant to be free of contagious
or communicable disease.



(Ord. 94-8-2, passed 8-16-94)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.05  STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE.



   (A)   Upon receipt of an application, an investigation of the
applicant's business reputation and character shall be made.



   (B)   The application shall be approved unless such investigation
discloses tangible evidence that the conduct of the applicant's business
would pose a substantial threat to the public health, safety, or general
welfare.  In particular, the following tangible evidence will constitute
valid reasons for disapproval of an application:



      (1)   The applicant has been conviction within the last three
years of any felony, or conviction within the last three year of any
misdemeanor involving a sex offense, a drug trafficking offense, or any
offense of violence against persons or property;



      (2)   The applicant has made willful misrepresentations in the
application;



      (3)   The applicant as committed prior violations of
ordinances pertaining to itinerant merchants, peddlers, solicitors, and the
like;



      (4)   The applicant as committed prior fraudulent acts; or



      (5)   The applicant as a record of continual breaches of
solicited contracts.



§ 110.06  REVOCATION PROCEDURE.



   A license may be revoked by the Mayor, Chief of Police or other
designated official based on complaints received by citizens after notice and
hearing, pursuant to the standards in § 110.06.  Notice of hearing for
revocation shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds
of the complaint and the time and place of the hearing.  Such notice shall
be mailed to the licensee at his or her last known address prior to the date
set for the hearing.



(Ord. 94-8-2, passed 8-16-94)



§ 110.07  STANDARDS FOR REVOCATION.



   A license granted under this chapter may be revoked for any of the
following reasons:



   (A)   Fraud or misrepresentation contained in the license
application;



   (B)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in
connection with the business being conducted under the license;



   (C)   Violation of this chapter;



   (D)   Conviction of the licensee of any felony, or conviction of the
licensee of any misdemeanor involving a sex offense, a drug trafficking
offense, or any offense of violence against persons or property; or



   (E)   Conducting the business licensed in an unlawful manner or in
such a way as to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general
welfare of the public.



§ 110.08  APPEAL PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Any person aggrieved by a decision under § 110.04 or 110.06
shall have the right to appeal to the Legislative Authority.  The appeal
shall be taken by filing with the Legislative Authority, within 14 days after
notice of the decision has been mailed to such person's last known address, a
written statement setting forth the grounds for appeal.  The Legislative
Authority shall set the time and place for a hearing, and notice for such
hearing shall be given to such person in the same manner as provided in §
110.05.



   (B)   The order of the Legislative Authority after the hearing shall
be final.



§ 110.09  EXHIBITION OF IDENTIFICATION.



   (A)   Any license issued to an itinerant merchant under this chapter
shall be posted conspicuously in or at the place named therein.  In the
event more than one place within the municipality shall be used to conduct
the business licensed, separate licenses shall be issued for each place.



   (B)   The Clerk or other authorized official shall issue a license
to each peddler or solicitor licensed under this chapter.  The license shall
contain the words “Licensed Peddler” or “Licensed Solicitor,” the
expiration date of the license, and the number of the license.  The license
shall be kept with the licensee during such time as he or she is engaged in
the business licensed.



Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.10  MUNICIPAL POLICY ON SOLICITING.



   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the municipality that the
residents in the municipality shall make the determination of whether
solicitors shall be, or shall not be, invited to their respective residences.



§ 110.11  NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITING.



   (A)   Notice of the refusal of invitation to solicitors to any
residence shall be given on a weatherproof card, approximately three inches
by four inches in size, exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the
residence, indicating the determination by the occupant, containing the
applicable words, as follows:



   “NO SOLICITORS INVITED”



   (B)   The letters shall be at least one-third of an inch in
height.  For the purpose of uniformity, the Police Chief may provide the
cards to persons requesting, at the cost thereof, if available.



   (C)   The card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to
any solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence of the
information contained thereon.



§ 110.12  DUTY OF SOLICITORS.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of every solicitor upon going onto any
premises in the municipality upon which a residence is located to first
examine the notice provided for in § 110.10 if any is attached, and be
governed by the statement contained on the notice. If the notice states “NO
SOLICITORS INVITED,” then the solicitor, whether registered or not, shall
immediately and peacefully depart from the premises.



   (B)   Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence,
whether invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the
premises when requested to do so by the occupant.



Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.13  UNINVITED SOLICITING PROHIBITED.



   It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance
for any person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any
door, or create any sound in any manner calculated to attract the attention
of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience
with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting in defiance of the notice
exhibited at the residence in accordance with the provisions of § 110.10
above.



Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.14  TIME LIMIT ON SOLICITING.



   The license is valid between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., and
business can only be conducted on Monday through Saturday.  Itinerant vendor
sales shall be prohibited on Sundays.



(Ord. 94-8-2, passed 8-16-94)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not more
than $100.



(Ord. 94-8-2, passed 8-16-94)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



      Chapter




         130.   GENERAL PROVISIONS





         131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY





         132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE





         133.   SEX OFFENSES





         134.   GAMBLING OFFENSES





         135.   OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS





         136.   OFFENSES AGAINST JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION





         137.   WEAPONS CONTROL





         138.   DRUG OFFENSES




CHAPTER 130:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   130.01   Application of Title XIII



   130.02   Definitions



   130.03   Classification of offenses



   130.04   Common law offenses abrogated



   130.05   Rules of construction



   130.06   Limitation of criminal prosecutions



   130.07   Requirements for criminal liability; voluntary intoxication



   130.08   Culpable mental states



   130.09   Organizational criminal liability



   130.10   Personal accountability for organizational conduct



   130.11   Attempt



   130.12   Complicity



   130.13   Presumption of innocence; proof of offense; affirmative
defense



   130.14   Battered woman syndrome



   130.15   Delinquency adjudications deemed convictions



   130.16   Criminal law jurisdiction



   130.17   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property held by
Police Department



   130.18   Imposing sentence for misdemeanor



   130.19   Multiple sentences



   130.20   Self-defense: limitations on duty to retreat prior to using
force



   130.21   Apprehension, detention, or arrest of persons on bond



 



   130.99   Penalty for Title XIII



Statutory reference:



   DNA testing of certain delinquent children and certain prisoners, see
R.C. §§ 2152.74 and 2901.07



   Mayor's Court generally, see R.C. Chapter 1905



   Municipal Court generally, see R.C. Chapter 1901



   Trials, Magistrate Courts, see R.C. Chapter 2938



§ 130.01  APPLICATION OF TITLE XIII.



   (A)   Title XIII of this code of ordinances embodies and prescribes
penalties for offenses against the municipality not classifiable in previous
titles and chapters.  The word MISDEMEANORS, as used in this Title, is not
exhaustive and does not imply that offenses found elsewhere in this code of
ordinances are not also misdemeanors and punishable as such.



   (B)   Each act or omission for which a fine, imprisonment, or both
is provided under this Title or elsewhere in this code, or each act or
omission which is declared a violation of this code, is unlawful and is
hereby made a misdemeanor.  Upon conviction, the penalty or penalties so
provided shall be imposed by the court.



§ 130.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CONTRABAND. Any property that is illegal for a person to acquire or
possess under a statute, ordinance, or rule, or that a trier of fact lawfully
determines to be illegal to possess by reason of the property’s involvement
in an offense. CONTRABAND includes, but is not limited to, all of the
following:



      (1)   Any controlled substance, as defined in R.C. § 3719.01,
or any device or paraphernalia related thereto;



      (2)   Any unlawful gambling device or paraphernalia;



      (3)   Any dangerous ordnance or obscene material.



   DANGEROUS OFFENDER.  A person who has committed an offense, whose
history, character and condition reveal a substantial risk that he or she
will be a danger to others, and whose conduct has been characterized by a
pattern of repetitive, compulsive or aggressive behavior with heedless
indifference to the consequences.



   DEADLY FORCE.  Any force that carries a substantial risk that it will
proximately result in the death of any person.



   FORCE.  Any violence, compulsion, or constraint physically exerted by
any means upon or against a person or thing.



   LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.  Any of the following:



      (1)   A sheriff, deputy sheriff, constable, police officer of
a township or joint police district , marshal, deputy marshal, municipal
police officer, member of a police force employed by a metropolitan housing
authority under R.C. § 3735.31(D) or state highway patrol trooper.



      (2)   An officer, agent, or employee of the state or any of
its agencies, instrumentalities, or political subdivisions, upon whom, by
statute, a duty to conserve the peace or to enforce all or certain laws is
imposed and the authority to arrest violators is conferred, within the limits
of such statutory duty and authority.



      (3)   The Mayor, in a capacity as chief conservator of the
peace within the municipality.



      (4)   A member of an auxiliary police force organized by the
county, township, or municipal law enforcement authorities, within the scope
of the member's appointment or commission.



      (5)   A person lawfully called pursuant to R.C. § 311.07 to
aid a sheriff in keeping the peace, for the purposes and during the time when
the person is called.



      (6)   A person appointed by a Mayor pursuant to R.C. § 737.01
as a special patrolling officer during a riot or emergency, for the purposes
and during the time when the person is appointed.



      (7)   A member of the organized militia of this state or the
armed forces of the United States, lawfully called to duty to aid civil
authorities in keeping the peace or protect against domestic violence.



      (8)   A prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney,
secret service officer, or municipal prosecutor.



      (9)   A veterans' home police officer appointed under R.C. §
5907.02.



      (10)   A member of a police force employed by a regional
transit authority under R.C. § 306.35(Y).



      (11)   A special police officer employed by a port authority
under R.C. § 4582.04 or 4582.28.



      (12)   The House of Representatives Sergeant at Arms if the
House of Representatives Sergeant at Arms has arrest authority pursuant to
R.C. § 101.311(E)(1) and an Assistant House of Representatives Sergeant at
Arms.



      (13)    The Senate Sergeant at Arms and an Assistant Senate
Sergeant at Arms;



      (14)   A special police officer employed by a municipal
corporation at a municipal airport, or other municipal air navigation
facility, that has scheduled operations, as defined in 14 C.F.R. § 119.3, as
amended, and that is required to be under a security program and is governed
by aviation security rules of the Transportation Security Administration of
the United States Department of Transportation as provided in 49 C.F.R. parts
1542 and 1544, as amended.



   NOT GUILTY BY REASON OF INSANITY.  A person is NOT GUILTY BY REASON OF
INSANITY relative to a charge of an offense only if the person proves, in the
manner specified in R.C. § 2901.05, that at the time of the commission of
the offense, he or she did not know, as a result of a severe mental disease
or defect, the wrongfulness of his or her acts.



   OFFENSE OF VIOLENCE.



      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2903.01, 2903.02, 2903.03,
2903.04, 2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.15, 2903.21, 2903.211, 2903.22,
2905.01, 2905.02, 2905.11, 2905.32, 2907.02, 2907.03, 2907.05, 2909.02,
2909.03, 2909.24, 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2917.01, 2917.02, 2917.03,
2917.31, 2919.25, 2921.03, 2921.04, 2921.34, or 2923.161, of division (A)(1)
of R.C. § 2903.34, of  division (A)(1), (2) or (3) of R.C. § 2911.12, or
of division (B)(1), (2), (3) or (4) of R.C. § 2919.22, or felonious sexual
penetration in violation of former R.C. § 2907.12;



      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance
or law of this or any other state or of the United States, substantially
equivalent to any section, division or offense listed in division (1) of this
definition;



      (3)   An offense, other than a traffic offense, under an
existing or former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or
of the United States, committed purposely or knowingly, and involving
physical harm to persons or a risk of serious physical harm to persons;



      (4)   A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing, any offense under division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.



   PERSON.



      (1)   (a)   Subject to division (2) of this definition, as
used in any section contained in Title XIII of this code that sets forth a
criminal offense, PERSON includes all of the following:



            1.   An individual, corporation, business trust,
estate, trust, partnership and association.



            2.   An unborn human who is viable.



         (b)   As used in any section contained in Title XIII of
this code that does not set forth a criminal offense, PERSON includes an
individual, corporation, business trust, estate, partnership and association.



         (c)   As used in division (1)(a)2. of this definition,
UNBORN HUMAN means an individual organism of the species Homo sapiens from
fertilization until live birth.  VIABLE means the stage of development of a
human fetus at which there is a realistic probability of maintaining and
nourishing of a life outside the womb with or without temporary artificial
life-sustaining support.



      (2)   Notwithstanding division (1)(a) of this definition, in
no case shall the portion of the definition of the term PERSON that is set
forth in division (1)(a)2. of this definition be applied or construed in any
section contained in Title XIII of this code that sets forth a criminal
offense in any of the following manners:



         (a)    Except as otherwise provided in division (2)(a)
of this definition, in a manner so that the offense prohibits or is construed
as prohibiting any pregnant woman or her physician from performing an
abortion with the consent of the pregnant woman, with the consent of the
pregnant woman implied by law in a medical emergency, or with the approval of
one otherwise authorized by law to consent to medical treatment on behalf of
the pregnant woman.  An abortion that violates the conditions described in
the immediately preceding sentence may be punished as a violation of R.C. §
2903.01, 2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04, 2903.05, 2903.06, 2903.08, 2903.11,
2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.14, 2903.21 or 2903.22, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, as applicable.  An abortion that does not
violate the conditions described in the second immediately preceding sentence
but that does violate R.C. § 2919.12, 2919.13(B), 2919.15, 2919.151, 2919.17
or 2919.18, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, may be
punished as a violation of such section, as applicable.  Consent is
sufficient under this division if it is of the type otherwise adequate to
permit medical treatment to the pregnant woman, even if it does not comply
with R.C. § 2919.12.



         (b)   In a manner so that the offense is applied or is
construed as applying to a woman based on an act or omission of the woman
that occurs while she is or was pregnant and that results in any of the
following:



            1.   Her delivery of a stillborn baby.



            2.   Her causing, in any other manner, the death
in utero of a viable, unborn human that she is carrying.



            3.   Her causing the death of her child who is
born alive but who dies from one or more injuries that are sustained while
the child is a viable, unborn human.



            4.   Her causing her child who is born alive to
sustain one or more injuries while the child is a viable, unborn human.



            5.   Her causing, threatening to cause, or
attempting to cause, in any other manner, an injury, illness, or other
psychological illness or condition, regardless of its duration or gravity, to
a viable, unborn human that she is carrying.



   PHYSICAL HARM TO PERSONS.  Any injury, illness, or other physiological
impairment, regardless of its gravity or duration.



   PHYSICAL HARM TO PROPERTY.  Any tangible or intangible damage to
property that, in any degree, results in loss to its value or interferes with
its use or enjoyment.  PHYSICAL HARM TO PROPERTY does not include wear and
tear occasioned by normal use.



   PRIVILEGE.  An immunity, license, or right conferred by law, or
bestowed by express or implied grant, or arising out of status, position,
office, or relationship, or growing out of necessity.



   PROPERTY.



      (1)   Any property, real or personal, tangible or intangible,
and any interest or license in that property.  PROPERTY includes, but is not
limited to, cable television service, other telecommunications service,
telecommunications devices, information service, computers, data, computer
software, financial instruments associated with computers, other documents
associated with computers, or copies of the documents, whether in machine or
human-readable form, trade secrets, trademarks, copyrights, patents, and
property protected by a trademark, copyright or patent.  “Financial
instruments associated with computers” include, but are not limited to,
checks, drafts, warrants, money orders, notes of indebtedness, certificates
of deposit, letters of credit, bills of credit or debit cards, financial
transaction authorization mechanisms, marketable securities, or any computer
system representations of any of them.



      (2)   As used in this definition, TRADE SECRET has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 1333.61, and TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE and INFORMATION
SERVICE have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.



      (3)   As used in this definition and in the definition of
CONTRABAND in this section, CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE, COMPUTER, COMPUTER
NETWORK, COMPUTER SOFTWARE, COMPUTER SYSTEM, DATA, and TELECOMMUNICATIONS
DEVICE have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.



   REPEAT OFFENDER.  A person who has a history of persistent criminal
activity and whose character and condition reveal a substantial risk that he
or she will commit another offense. It is prima facie evidence that a person
is a repeat offender if any of the following applies:



      (1)   Having been convicted of one or more offenses of
violence, as defined in R.C. § 2901.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant
to sentence for one or more of those offenses, he or she commits a subsequent
offense of violence;



      (2)   Having been convicted of one or more sexually oriented
offenses, as defined in R.C. § 2950.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant
to sentence for one or more of those offenses, he or she commits a subsequent
sexually oriented offense;



      (3)   Having been convicted of one or more theft offenses, as
defined in R.C. § 2913.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence
for one or more of those offenses, he or she commits a subsequent theft
offense;



      (4)   Having been convicted of one or more felony drug abuse
offenses, as defined in R.C. § 2925.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant
to sentence for one or more of those offenses, he or she commits a subsequent
felony drug abuse offense;



      (5)   Having been convicted of two or more felonies, and
having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for any such offense, he or she
commits a subsequent offense;



      (6)   Having been convicted of three or more offenses of any
type or degree other than traffic offenses, alcoholic intoxication offenses,
or minor misdemeanors, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for
any such offense, he or she commits a subsequent offense.



   RISK.  A significant possibility, as contrasted with a remote
possibility, that a certain result may occur or that certain circumstances
may exist.



   SCHOOL, SCHOOL BUILDING, and SCHOOL PREMISES.  Have the same meanings
as in R.C. § 2925.01.



   SCHOOL ACTIVITY.  Any activity held under the auspices of a board of
education of a city, local, exempted village, joint vocational, or
cooperative education school district; a governing authority of a community
school established under R.C. Chapter 3314; a governing board of an
educational service center; or the governing body of a nonpublic school for
which the State Board of Education prescribes minimum standards under R.C. §
3301.07.



   SCHOOL BUS.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.



   SCHOOL SAFETY ZONE.  Consists of a school, school building, school
premises, school activity, and school bus.



   SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM TO PERSONS.  Any of the following:



      (1)   Any mental illness or condition of such gravity as would
normally require hospitalization or prolonged psychiatric treatment;



      (2)   Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of
death;



      (3)   Any physical harm that involves some permanent
incapacity, whether partial or total, or that involves some temporary,
substantial incapacity;



      (4)   Any physical harm that involves some permanent
disfigurement, or that involves some temporary, serious disfigurement;



      (5)   Any physical harm that involves acute pain of such
duration as to result in substantial suffering, or that involves any degree
of prolonged or intractable pain.



   SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM TO PROPERTY.  Any physical harm to property that
does either of the following:



      (1)   Results in substantial loss to the value of the
property, or requires a substantial amount of time, effort, or money to
repair or replace;



      (2)   Temporarily prevents the use or enjoyment of the
property, or substantially interferes with its use or enjoyment for an
extended period of time.



   SUBSTANTIAL RISK.  A strong possibility, as contrasted with a remote
or significant possibility, that a certain result may occur or that certain
circumstances may exist.



(R.C. §§ 2901.01, 2935.36(E))



§ 130.03  CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENSES.



   As used in this Title:



   (A)   Offenses include misdemeanors of the first, second, third, and
fourth degree, minor misdemeanors, and offenses not specifically classified.



   (B)   Regardless of the penalty that may be imposed, any offense
specifically classified as a misdemeanor is a misdemeanor.



   (C)   Any offense not specifically classified is a misdemeanor if
imprisonment for not more than one year may be imposed as a penalty.



   (D)   Any offense not specifically classified is a minor misdemeanor
if the only penalty that may be imposed is one of the following:




      (1)   For an offense committed prior to January 1, 2004, a
fine not exceeding $100;




      (2)   For an offense committed on or after January 1, 2004, a
fine not exceeding $150, community service under R.C. § 2929.27(D), or a
financial sanction other than a fine under R.C. § 2929.28.



(R.C. § 2901.02)



§ 130.04  COMMON LAW OFFENSES ABROGATED.



   (A)   No conduct constitutes a criminal offense against the
municipality unless it is defined as an offense in this code.



   (B)   An offense is defined when one or more sections of this code
state a positive prohibition or enjoin a specific duty, and provide a penalty
for violation of such prohibition or failure to meet such duty.



   (C)   This section does not affect the power of a court to punish
for contempt or to employ any sanction authorized by law to enforce an order,
civil judgment or decree.



(R.C. § 2901.03)



§ 130.05  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C) or (D) of this
section, sections of this code defining offenses or penalties shall be
strictly construed against the municipality and liberally construed in favor
of the accused.



   (B)   Rules of criminal procedure and sections of this code
providing for criminal procedure shall be construed so as to effect the fair,
impartial, speedy, and sure administration of justice.



   (C)   Any provision of a section of this code that refers to a
previous conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of a section of this
code, the Revised Code or a division of a section of this code or the Revised
Code shall be construed to also refer to a previous conviction of or plea of
guilty to a substantially equivalent offense under an existing or former law
of this municipality, state, another state, or the United States or under an
existing or former municipal ordinance.



   (D)   Any provision of this Code that refers to a section, or to a
division of a section, of this Code that defines or specifies a criminal
offense shall be construed to also refer to an existing or former law of this
state, another state, or the United States, to an existing or former
municipal ordinance, or to an existing or former division of any such
existing or former law or ordinance that defines or specifies, or that
defined or specified, a substantially equivalent offense.



(R.C. § 2901.04)



§ 130.06  LIMITATION OF CRIMINAL PROSECUTIONS.



   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in division (A)(2), (A)(3) or
(A)(4) of this section or as otherwise provided in this section, a
prosecution shall be barred unless it is commenced within the following
periods after an offense is committed:



         (a)   For a felony, six years;



         (b)   For a misdemeanor other than a minor misdemeanor,
two years;



         (c)   For a minor misdemeanor, six months.



      (2)   There is no period of limitation for the prosecution of
a violation of R.C. § 2903.01 or R.C. § 2903.02.



      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (B) to (J) of
this section, a prosecution of any of the following offenses shall be barred
unless it is commenced within 20 years after the offense is committed:



         (a)   A violation of R.C. § 2903.03, 2903.04, 2905.01,
2905.32, 2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.21, 2909.02, 2909.22, 2909.23, 2909.24,
2909.26, 2909.27, 2909.28, 2909.29, 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2911.12, or
2917.02, a violation of R.C. § 2903.11 or 2903.12 if the victim is a peace
officer, a violation of R.C. § 2903.13 that is a felony, or a violation of
former R.C. § 2907.12.



         (b)   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or
complicity in committing a violation set forth in division (A)(3)(a) of this
section.



      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (D) to (L) of
this section, a prosecution of a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03 or a
conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in committing a
violation of either section shall be barred unless it is commenced within 25
years after the offense is committed.



   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2) of
this section, if the period of limitation provided in division (A)(1) or
(A)(3) of this section has expired, prosecution shall be commenced for an
offense of which an element is fraud or breach of fiduciary duty within one
year after discovery of the offense either by an aggrieved person or by the
aggrieved person's legal representative who is not a party to the offense.



      (2)   If the period of limitation provided in division (A)(1)
or (A)(3) of this section has expired, prosecution for a violation of R.C. §
2913.49 shall be commenced within five years after discovery of the offense
either by an aggrieved person or the aggrieved person's legal representative
who is not a party to the offense.



   (C)   (1)   If the period of limitation provided in division
(A)(1) or (A)(3) of this section has expired, prosecution shall be commenced
for the following offenses during the following specified periods of time:



         (a)   For an offense involving misconduct in office by a
public servant at any time while the accused remains a public servant, or
within two years thereafter;



         (b)   For an offense by a person who is not a public
servant but whose offense is directly related to the misconduct in office of
a public servant, at any time while that public servant remains a public
servant, or within two years thereafter.



      (2)   As used in this division:



         (a)   The phrase OFFENSE IS DIRECTLY RELATED TO THE
MISCONDUCT IN OFFICE OF A PUBLIC SERVANT includes, but is not limited to a
violation of R.C. § 101.71, 101.91, 121.61 or 2921.13, 102.03(F) or (H),
2921.02(A), 2921.43(A) or (B), or 3517.13(F) or (G), that is directly related
to an offense involving misconduct in office of a public servant, or a
violation of any municipal ordinance substantially equivalent to those Ohio
Revised Code sections listed in this division (C)(2)(a).



         (b)   PUBLIC SERVANT has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2921.01.



   (D)   (1)   If a DNA record made in connection with the criminal
investigation of the commission of a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03
is determined to match another DNA record that is of an identifiable person
and if the time of the determination is later than 25 years after the offense
is committed, prosecution of that person for a violation of the section may
be commenced within five years after the determination is complete.



      (2)   If a DNA record made in connection with the criminal
investigation of the commission of a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03
of the Revised Code is determined to match another DNA record that is of an
identifiable person and if the time of the determination is within 25 years
after the offense is committed, prosecution of that person for a violation of
the section may be commenced within the longer of 25 years after the offense
is committed or five years after the determination is complete.



      (3)   As used in this division, DNA RECORD has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 109.573.



   (E)   An offense is committed when every element of the offense
occurs.  In the case of an offense of which an element is a continuing
course of conduct, the period of limitation does not begin to run until such
course of conduct or the accused's accountability for it terminates,
whichever occurs first.



   (F)   A prosecution is commenced on the date an indictment is
returned or an information filed, or on the date a lawful arrest without a
warrant is made, or on the date a warrant, summons, citation, or other
process is issued, whichever occurs first.  A prosecution is not commenced
by the return of an indictment or the filing of an information unless
reasonable diligence is exercised to issue and execute process on the same. 
A prosecution is not commenced upon issuance of a warrant, summons, citation,
or other process unless reasonable diligence is exercised to execute the same.



   (G)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time when
the corpus delicti remains undiscovered.



   (H)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time when
the accused purposely avoids prosecution.  Proof that the accused departed
this municipality or conceals the accused's identity or whereabouts is prima
facie evidence of the accused's purpose to avoid prosecution.



   (I)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time a
prosecution against the accused based on the same conduct is pending in this
state, even though the indictment, information, or process that commenced the
prosecution is quashed or the proceedings on the indictment, information, or
process are set aside or reversed on appeal.



   (J)   The period of limitation for a violation of this Title or
Title XXIX of the Ohio Revised Code that involves a physical or mental wound,
injury, disability, or condition of a nature that reasonably indicates abuse
or neglect of a child under 18 years of age or of a child with a
developmental disability or physical impairment under 21 years of age shall
not begin to run until either of the following occurs:



      (1)   The victim of the offense reaches the age of majority.



      (2)   A public children services agency, or a municipal or
county peace officer that is not the parent or guardian of the child, in the
county in which the child resides or in which the abuse or neglect is
occurring or has occurred has been notified that abuse or neglect is known,
suspected, or believed to have occurred.



   (K)   As used in this section, PEACE OFFICER has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 2935.01.



   (L)   The amendments to divisions (A) and (D) of this section apply
to a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03 committed on and after July 16,
2015, and apply to a violation of either of those sections committed prior to
July 16, 2015, if prosecution for that violation was not barred under this
section as it existed on July 15, 2015.



(R.C. § 2901.13)



Statutory reference:



   Limitation for income tax violations, see R.C. § 718.12



§ 130.07  REQUIREMENTS FOR CRIMINAL LIABILITY; VOLUNTARY INTOXICATION.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, a person
is not guilty of an offense unless both of the following apply:



      (1)   The person’s liability is based on conduct that
includes either a voluntary act, or an omission to perform an act or duty
that the person is capable of performing;



      (2)   The person has the requisite degree of culpability for
each element as to which a culpable mental state is specified by the language
defining the offense.



   (B)   When the language defining an offense does not specify any
degree of culpability, and plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict
criminal liability for the conduct described in the section, then culpability
is not required for a person to be guilty of the offense. The fact that one
division of a section plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict liability
for an offense defined in that division does not by itself plainly indicate a
purpose to impose strict criminal liability for an offense defined in other
divisions of the section that do not specify a degree of culpability.



   (C)   (1)   When language defining an element of an offense that
is related to knowledge or intent or to which mens rea could fairly be
applied neither specifies culpability nor plainly indicates a purpose to
impose strict liability, the element of the offense is established only if a
person acts recklessly.



      (2)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not apply to
offenses defined in R.C. Title XLV.



      (3)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not relieve the
prosecution of the burden of proving the culpable mental state required by
any definition incorporated into the offense.



   (D)   Voluntary intoxication may not be taken into consideration in
determining the existence of a mental state that is an element of a criminal
offense.  Voluntary intoxication does not relieve a person of a duty to act
if failure to act constitutes a criminal offense.  Evidence that a person
was voluntarily intoxicated may be admissible to show whether or not the
person was physically capable of performing the act with which the person is
charged.



   (E)   As used in this section:



   CULPABILITY.  Purpose, knowledge, recklessness, or negligence, as
defined in R.C. § 2901.22.



   INTOXICATION.  Includes but is not limited to intoxication resulting
from the ingestion of alcohol, a drug, or alcohol and a drug.



   INVOLUNTARY ACTS.  Reflexes, convulsions, body movements during
unconsciousness or sleep, and body movements that are not otherwise a product
of the actor's volition are involuntary acts.



   POSSESSION.  A voluntary act if the possessor knowingly procured or
received the thing possessed, or was aware of the possessor’s control of
the thing possessed for a sufficient time to have ended possession.



(R.C. § 2901.21)



§ 130.08  CULPABLE MENTAL STATES.



   (A)   A person acts purposely when it is the person’s specific
intention to cause a certain result, or, when the gist of the offense is a
prohibition against conduct of a certain nature, regardless of what the
offender intends to accomplish thereby, it is the offender’s specific
intention to engage in conduct of that nature.



   (B)   A person acts knowingly, regardless of purpose, when the
person is aware that the person’s conduct will probably cause a certain
result or will probably be of a certain nature. A person has knowledge of
circumstances when the person is aware that such circumstances probably
exist. When knowledge of the existence of a particular fact is an element of
an offense, such knowledge is established if a person subjectively believes
that there is a high probability of its existence and fails to make inquiry
or acts with a conscious purpose to avoid learning the fact.



   (C)   A person acts recklessly when, with heedless indifference to
the consequences, the person disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk
that the person’s conduct is likely to cause a certain result or is likely
to be of a certain nature. A person is reckless with respect to circumstances
when, with heedless indifference to the consequences, the person disregards a
substantial and unjustifiable risk that such circumstances are likely to
exist.



   (D)   A person acts negligently when, because of a substantial lapse
from due care, the person fails to perceive or avoid a risk that the
person’s conduct may cause a certain result or may be of a certain
nature.  A person is negligent with respect to circumstances when, because
of a substantial lapse from due care, the person fails to perceive or avoid a
risk that such circumstances may exist.



   (E)   When the section defining an offense provides that negligence
suffices to establish an element thereof, then recklessness, knowledge, or
purpose is also sufficient culpability for such element.  When recklessness
suffices to establish an element of an offense, then knowledge or purpose is
also sufficient culpability for such element.  When knowledge suffices to
establish an element of an offense, then purpose is also sufficient
culpability for such element.



(R.C. § 2901.22)



§ 130.09  ORGANIZATIONAL CRIMINAL LIABILITY.



   (A)   An organization may be convicted of an offense under any of
the following circumstances:



      (1)   The offense is a minor misdemeanor committed by an
officer, agent, or employee of the organization acting in its behalf and
within the scope of the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s office or
employment, except that if the section defining the offense designates the
officers, agents, or employees for whose conduct the organization is
accountable or the circumstances under which it is accountable, those
provisions shall apply.



      (2)   A purpose to impose organizational liability plainly
appears in the section defining the offense, and the offense is committed by
an officer, agent, or employee of the organization acting in its behalf and
within the scope of the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s office or
employment, except that if the section defining the offense designates the
officers, agents, or employees for whose conduct the organization is
accountable or the circumstances under which it is accountable, those
provisions shall apply.



      (3)   The offense consists of an omission to discharge a
specific duty imposed by law on the organization.



      (4)   If, acting with the kind of culpability otherwise
required for the commission of the offense, its commission was authorized,
requested, commanded, tolerated, or performed by the board of directors,
trustees, partners, or by a high managerial officer, agent, or employee
acting in behalf of the organization and within the scope of such a board’s
or person’s office or employment.



   (B)   If strict liability is imposed for the commission of an
offense, a purpose to impose organizational liability shall be presumed,
unless the contrary plainly appears.



   (C)   In a prosecution of an organization for an offense other than
one for which strict liability is imposed, it is a defense that the high
managerial officer, agent, or employee having supervisory responsibility over
the subject matter of the offense exercised due diligence to prevent its
commission.  This defense is not available if it plainly appears
inconsistent with the purpose of the section defining the offense.



   (D)   As used in this section, ORGANIZATION means a corporation for
profit or not for profit, partnership, limited partnership, joint venture,
unincorporated nonprofit association, estate, trust, or other commercial or
legal entity.  ORGANIZATION does not include an entity organized as or by a
governmental agency for the execution of a governmental program.



(R.C. § 2901.23)



§ 130.10  PERSONAL ACCOUNTABILITY FOR ORGANIZATIONAL CONDUCT.



   (A)   An officer, agent, or employee of an organization, as defined
in R.C. § 2901.23, may be prosecuted for an offense committed by such
organization, if he or she acts with the kind of culpability required for the
commission of the offense, and any of the following apply:



      (1)   In the name of the organization or in its behalf, he or
she engages in conduct constituting the offense, or causes another to engage
in such conduct, or tolerates such conduct when it is of a type for which he
or she has direct responsibility;



      (2)   He or she has primary responsibility to discharge a duty
imposed on the organization by law, and such duty is not discharged.



   (B)   When a person is convicted of an offense by reason of this
section, he or she is subject to the same penalty as if he or she had acted
in his or her own behalf.



(R.C. § 2901.24)



§ 130.11  ATTEMPT.



   (A)   No person, purposely or knowingly, and when purpose or
knowledge is sufficient culpability for the commission of an offense, shall
engage in conduct that, if successful, would constitute or result in the
offense.



   (B)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that, in
retrospect, commission of the offense that was the object of the attempt was
either factually or legally impossible under the attendant circumstances, if
that offense could have been committed had the attendant circumstances been
as the actor believed them to be.



   (C)   No person who is convicted of committing a specific offense,
of complicity in the commission of an offense, or of conspiracy to commit an
offense, shall be convicted of an attempt to commit the same offense in
violation of this section.



   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section
that the actor abandoned his or her effort to commit the offense or otherwise
prevented its commission, under circumstances manifesting a complete and
voluntary renunciation of his or her criminal purpose.



   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of an attempt to
commit an offense.  An attempt to commit aggravated murder, murder, or an
offense for which the maximum penalty is imprisonment for life is a felony of
the first degree, to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. An attempt to
commit a drug abuse offense for which the penalty is determined by the amount
or number of unit doses of the controlled substance involved in the drug
abuse offense is an offense of the same degree as the drug abuse offense
attempted would be if that drug abuse offense had been committed and had
involved an amount or number of unit doses of the controlled substance that
is within the next lower range of controlled substance amounts than was
involved in the attempt. An attempt to commit any other offense is an offense
of the next lesser degree than the offense attempted.  In the case of an
attempt to commit an offense other than a violation of R.C. Chapter 3734 that
is not specifically classified, an attempt is a misdemeanor of the first
degree if the offense attempted is a felony, and a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree if the offense attempted is a misdemeanor.  In the case of an attempt
to commit a violation of any provision of R.C. Chapter 3734, other than R.C.
§ 3734.18, that relates to hazardous wastes, an attempt is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.  An attempt to commit a minor
misdemeanor, or to engage in conspiracy, is not an offense under this section.



   (F)   As used in this section:



      DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.



      MOTOR VEHICLE has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.



(R.C. § 2923.02) Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Conspiracy, see R.C. § 2923.01



   Solid and hazardous wastes, see R.C. Chapter 3734



§ 130.12  COMPLICITY.



   (A)   No person, acting with the kind of culpability required for
the commission of an offense, shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Solicit or procure another to commit the offense;



      (2)   Aid or abet another in committing the offense;



      (3)   Conspire with another to commit the offense in violation
of R.C. § 2923.01;



      (4)   Cause an innocent or irresponsible person to commit the
offense.



   (B)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that no person
with whom the accused was in complicity has been convicted as a principal
offender.



   (C)   No person shall be convicted of complicity under this section
unless an offense is actually committed, but a person may be convicted of
complicity in an attempt to commit an offense in violation of R.C. § 2923.02
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



   (D)   If an alleged accomplice of the defendant testifies against
the defendant in a case in which the defendant is charged with complicity in
the commission of or an attempt to commit an offense, an attempt to commit an
offense, or an offense, the court shall charge the jury in accordance with
R.C. § 2923.03(D).



   (E)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section
that, prior to the commission of or attempt to commit the offense, the actor
terminated his or her complicity, under circumstances manifesting a complete
and voluntary renunciation of his or her criminal purpose.



   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of complicity in the
commission of an offense, and shall be prosecuted and punished as if he or
she were a principal offender.  A charge of complicity may be stated in
terms of this section, or in terms of the principal offense.



(R.C. § 2923.03)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Conspiracy, see R.C. § 2923.01



§ 130.13  PRESUMPTION OF INNOCENCE; PROOF OF OFFENSE; AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE.



   (A)   Every person accused of an offense is presumed innocent until
proven guilty beyond a reasonable doubt, and the burden of proof for all
elements of the offense is upon the prosecution. The burden of going forward
with the evidence of an affirmative defense, and the burden of proof by a
preponderance of the evidence, for an affirmative defense other than
self-defense, defense of another, or defense of the accused's residence as
described in division (B)(1) of this section, is upon the accused.



   (B)   (1)   A person is allowed to act in self-defense, defense
of another, or defense of that person's residence. If, at the trial of a
person who is accused of an offense that involved the person's use of force
against another, there is evidence presented that tends to support that the
accused person used the force in self-defense, defense of another, or defense
of that person's residence, the prosecution must prove beyond a reasonable
doubt that the accused person did not use the force in self-defense, defense
of another, or defense of that person's residence, as the case may be.



      (2)   Subject to division (B)(3) of this section, a person is
presumed to have acted in self-defense or defense of another when using
defensive force that is intended or likely to cause death or great bodily
harm to another if the person against whom the defensive force is used is in
the process of unlawfully and without privilege to do so entering, or has
unlawfully and without privilege to do so entered, the residence or vehicle
occupied by the person using the defensive force.



      (3)   The presumption set forth in division (B)(2) of this
section does not apply if either of the following is true:



         (a)   The person against whom the defensive force is
used has a right to be in, or is a lawful resident of, the residence or
vehicle.



         (b)   The person who uses the defensive force uses it
while in a residence or vehicle and the person is unlawfully, and without
privilege to be, in that residence or vehicle.



      (4)   The presumption set forth in division (B)(2) of this
section is a rebuttable presumption and may be rebutted by a preponderance of
the evidence, provided that the prosecution's burden of proof remains proof
beyond a reasonable doubt as described in divisions (A) and (B)(1) of this
section.



   (C)   As part of its charge to the jury in a criminal case, the
court shall read the definitions of “reasonable doubt” and “proof
beyond a reasonable doubt,” contained in division (D) of this section.



   (D)   As used in this section:



      AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE.  An affirmative defense is either of the
following:



         (a)   A defense expressly designated as affirmative;



         (b)   A defense involving an excuse or justification
peculiarly within the knowledge of the accused, on which the accused can
fairly be required to adduce supporting evidence.



      DWELLING.  Means a building or conveyance of any kind that has a
roof over it and that is designed to be occupied by people lodging in the
building or conveyance at night, regardless of whether the building or
conveyance is temporary or permanent or is mobile or immobile. As used in
this division, a building or conveyance includes, but is not limited to, an
attached porch, and a building or conveyance with a roof over it includes,
but is not limited to, a tent.



      PROOF BEYOND A REASONABLE DOUBT.  Proof of such character that
an ordinary person would be willing to rely and act upon it in the most
important of the person's own affairs.



      REASONABLE DOUBT.  Reasonable doubt is present when the jurors,
after they have carefully considered and compared all the evidence, cannot
say they are firmly convinced of the truth of the charge. It is a doubt based
on reason and common sense. REASONABLE DOUBT is not mere possible doubt,
because everything relating to human affairs or depending on moral evidence
is open to some possible or imaginary doubt.



      RESIDENCE.  Means a dwelling in which a person resides either
temporarily or permanently or is visiting as a guest.



      VEHICLE.  Means a conveyance of any kind, whether or not
motorized, that is designed to transport people or property.



(R.C. § 2901.05)



§ 130.14  BATTERED WOMAN SYNDROME.



   (A)   The municipality hereby declares that it recognizes both of
the following, in relation to the “battered woman syndrome”:  that the
syndrome currently is a matter of commonly accepted scientific knowledge, and
that the subject matter and details of the syndrome are not within the
general understanding or experience of a person who is a member of the
general populace and are not within the field of common knowledge.



   (B)   If a person is charged with an offense involving the use of
force against another and the person, as a defense to the offense charged,
raises the affirmative defense of self-defense, the person may introduce
expert testimony of the “battered woman syndrome” and expert testimony
that the person suffered from that syndrome as evidence to establish the
requisite belief of an imminent danger of death or great bodily harm that is
necessary, as an element of the affirmative defense, to justify the person's
use of force in question.  The introduction of any expert testimony under
this division shall be in accordance with the Ohio Rules of Evidence.



(R.C. § 2901.06)



§ 130.15  DELINQUENCY ADJUDICATIONS DEEMED CONVICTIONS.



   (A)   If a person is alleged to have committed an offense and if the
person previously has been adjudicated a delinquent child or juvenile traffic
offender for a violation of a law or ordinance, except as provided in
division (B) of this section, the adjudication as a delinquent child or as a
juvenile traffic offender is a conviction for a violation of the law for
purposes of determining the offense with which the person should be charged
and, if the person is convicted of or pleads guilty to an offense, the
sentence to be imposed upon the person relative to the conviction or guilty
plea.



   (B)   A previous adjudication of a person as a delinquent child or
juvenile traffic offender for a violation of a law or ordinance is not a
conviction for a violation of the law or ordinance for purposes of
determining any of the following:



      (1)   Whether the person is a repeat violent offender, as
defined in R.C. § 2929.01, or whether the person should be sentenced as a
repeat violent offender under R.C. § 2929.14(B)(2) and R.C. § 2941.149;



      (2)    Whether the person is a violent career criminal as
defined in R.C. § 2923.132, whether the person has committed unlawful use of
a weapon by a violent career criminal in violation of R.C. § 2923.132 or
should be sentenced for that offense under that section, or whether the
person should be sentenced under R.C. § 2929.14(K) as a violent career
criminal who had a firearm on or about the person’s person or under the
person’s control while committing a violent felony offense and displayed or
brandished the firearm, indicated that the offender possessed a firearm, or
used the firearm to facilitate the offense.



(R.C. § 2901.08)



Statutory reference:



   DNA testing of certain delinquent children, see R.C. § 2152.74



§ 130.16  CRIMINAL LAW JURISDICTION.



   (A)   A person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in
this municipality if any of the following occur:



      (1)   The person commits an offense under the laws of this
municipality, any element of which takes place in this municipality;



      (2)   While in this municipality, the person attempts to
commit, or is guilty of complicity in the commission of, an offense in
another jurisdiction, which offense is an offense under both the laws of this
municipality and the other jurisdiction, or, while in this municipality, the
person conspires to commit an offense in another jurisdiction, which offense
is an offense under both the laws of this municipality and the other
jurisdiction, and a substantial overt act in furtherance of the conspiracy is
undertaken in this municipality by the person or another person involved in
the conspiracy, subsequent to the person’s entrance into the conspiracy. In
any case in which a person attempts to commit, is guilty of complicity in the
commission of, or conspires to commit an offense in another jurisdiction as
described in this division, the person is subject to criminal prosecution and
punishment in this municipality for the attempt, complicity, or conspiracy,
and for any resulting offense that is committed or completed in the other
jurisdiction;



      (3)   While out of this municipality, the person conspires or
attempts to commit, or is guilty of complicity in the commission of, an
offense in this municipality;



      (4)   While out of this municipality, the person omits to
perform a legal duty imposed by the laws of this municipality, which omission
affects a legitimate interest of the municipality in protecting, governing or
regulating any person, property, thing, transaction, or activity in this
municipality;



      (5)   While out of this municipality, the person unlawfully
takes or retains property and subsequently brings any of the unlawfully taken
or retained property into this municipality;



      (6)   While out of this municipality, the person unlawfully
takes or entices another person and subsequently brings the other person into
this municipality;



      (7)   The person, by means of a computer, computer system,
computer network, telecommunication, telecommunications device,
telecommunications service, or information service, causes or knowingly
permits any writing, data, image or other telecommunication to be
disseminated or transmitted into this municipality in violation of the law of
this state or municipality.



   (B)   In homicide, the element referred to in division (A)(1) of
this section includes the act that causes death, the physical contact that
causes death, the death itself, or any other element that is set forth in the
offense in question. If any part of the body of a homicide victim is found in
this municipality, the death is presumed to have occurred within this
municipality.



   (C)   (1)   This municipality includes the land and water within
its boundaries and the air space above that land and water, with respect to
which this municipality has either exclusive or concurrent legislative
jurisdiction.  Where the boundary between this municipality and another
jurisdiction is disputed, the disputed territory is conclusively presumed to
be within this municipality for purposes of this section.



      (2)   The courts of common pleas of Adams, Athens, Belmont,
Brown, Clermont, Columbiana, Gallia, Hamilton, Jefferson, Lawrence, Meigs,
Monroe, Scioto, and Washington counties have jurisdiction beyond the north or
northwest shore of the Ohio River extending to the opposite shore line,
between the extended boundary lines of any adjacent counties or adjacent
state. Each of those courts of common pleas has concurrent jurisdiction on
the Ohio River with any adjacent court of common pleas that borders on that
river and with any court of Kentucky or of West Virginia that borders on the
Ohio River and that has jurisdiction on the Ohio River under the law of
Kentucky or the law of West Virginia, whichever is applicable, or under
federal law.



   (D)   When an offense is committed under the laws of this
municipality, and it appears beyond a reasonable doubt that the offense or
any element of the offense took place either in this municipality or in
another jurisdiction or jurisdictions, but it cannot reasonably be determined
in which it took place, the offense or element is conclusively presumed to
have taken place in this municipality for purposes of this section.



   (E)   When a person is subject to criminal prosecution and
punishment in this municipality for an offense committed or completed outside
this municipality, the person is subject to all specifications for that
offense that would be applicable if the offense had been committed within
this municipality.



   (F)   Any act, conduct, or element that is a basis of a person being
subject under this section to criminal prosecution and punishment in this
municipality need not be committed personally by the person as long as it is
committed by another person who is in complicity or conspiracy with the
person.



   (G)   This section shall be liberally construed, consistent with
constitutional limitations, to allow this municipality the broadest possible
jurisdiction over offenses and persons committing offenses in, or affecting,
this municipality.



   (H)   For purposes of division (A)(2) of this section, an overt act
is substantial when it is of a character that manifests a purpose on the part
of the actor that the object of the conspiracy should be completed.



   (I)   As used in this section, COMPUTER, COMPUTER SYSTEM, COMPUTER
NETWORK, INFORMATION SERVICE, TELECOMMUNICATION, TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE,
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE, DATA and WRITING have the same meanings as in
R.C. § 2913.01.



(R.C. § 2901.11)



Statutory reference:



   State criminal law jurisdiction, see R.C. § 2901.11



§ 130.17  DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED OR FORFEITED PROPERTY HELD BY POLICE
DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   Safekeeping of property in custody.



      (1)   (a)   Any property that has been lost, abandoned,
stolen, seized pursuant to a search warrant, or otherwise lawfully seized or
forfeited and that is in the custody of the Police Department shall be kept
safely by the Police Department, pending the time it no longer is needed as
evidence or for another lawful purpose, and shall be disposed of pursuant to
this section or R.C. §§ 2981.12 and 2981.13.



         (b)   This section does not apply to the custody and
disposal of any of the following:



            1.   Vehicles subject to forfeiture under R.C.
Title 45, except as provided in division (B)(1)(f) of this section;



            2.   Abandoned junk motor vehicles or other
property of negligible value;



            3.   Property held by a department of
rehabilitation and correction institution that is unclaimed, that does not
have an identified owner, that the owner agrees to dispose of, or that is
identified by the department as having little value;



            4.   Animals taken, and devices used in unlawfully
taking animals, under R.C. § 1531.20;



            5.   Controlled substances sold by a peace officer
in the performance of the officer’s official duties under R.C. § 3719.141;



            6.   Property recovered by a township law
enforcement agency under R.C. §§ 505.105 to 505.109;



            7.   Property held and disposed of under an
ordinance of the municipality or under R.C. §§ 737.29 to 737.33, except
that if the municipality has received notice of a citizens’ reward program
as provided in division (B)(5) of this section and disposes of property under
an ordinance shall pay 25% of any moneys acquired from any sale or auction to
the citizens’ reward program.



      (2)   (a)   The Police Department shall adopt and comply
with a written internal control policy that does all of the following:



            1.   Provides for keeping detailed records as to
the amount of property acquired by the Police Department and the date
property was acquired;



            2.   Provides for keeping detailed records of the
disposition of the property, which shall include, but not be limited to, both
of the following:



               a.   The manner in which it was disposed,
the date of disposition, detailed financial records concerning any property
sold, and the name of any person who received the property. The record shall
not identify or enable identification of the individual officer who seized
any item of property.



               b.   An itemized list of the specific
expenditures made with amounts that are gained from the sale of the property
and that are retained by the agency, including the specific amount expended
on each general type of expenditure, except that the policy shall not provide
for or permit the identification of any specific expenditure that is made in
an ongoing investigation.



            3.   Complies with R.C. § 2981.13 if the Police
Department has a law enforcement trust fund or similar fund created under
that section.



         (b)   The records kept under the internal control policy
shall be open to public inspection during the Police Department’s regular
business hours. The policy adopted under this section is a public record open
for inspection under R.C. § 149.43.



      (3)   The Police Department, with custody of property to be
disposed of under this section or R.C. §§ 2981.12 or 2981.13, shall make a
reasonable effort to locate persons entitled to possession of the property,
to notify them of when and where it may be claimed, and to return the
property to them at the earliest possible time. In the absence of evidence
identifying persons entitled to possession, it is sufficient notice to
advertise in a newspaper of general circulation in the county and to briefly
describe the nature of the property in custody and inviting persons to view
and establish their right to it.



      (4)   As used in this section:



         CITIZENS’ REWARD PROGRAM has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 9.92.



         LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY includes correctional institutions.



         TOWNSHIP LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY means an organized police
department of a township, a township police district, a joint police
district, or the office of a township constable.



(R.C. § 2981.11)



   (B)   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property.



      (1)   Unclaimed or forfeited property in the custody of the
Police Department, other than property described in division (A)(1)(b) of
this section, shall be disposed of by order of any court of record that has
territorial jurisdiction over the municipality, as follows:



         (a)   Drugs shall be disposed of pursuant to R.C. §
3719.11 or placed in the custody of the Secretary of the Treasury of the
United States for disposal or use for medical or scientific purposes under
applicable federal law.



         (b)    Firearms and dangerous ordnance suitable for
police work may be given to a law enforcement agency for that purpose.
Firearms suitable for sporting use or as museum pieces or collectors’ items
may be sold at public auction pursuant to division (B)(2) of this section.
The Police Department may sell other firearms and dangerous ordnance to a
federally licensed firearms dealer in a manner that the court considers
proper. The Police Department shall destroy any firearms or dangerous
ordnance not given to a law enforcement agency or sold or shall send them to
the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation for destruction by
the Bureau.



         (c)   Obscene materials shall be destroyed.



         (d)   Beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol seized from
a person who does not hold a permit issued under R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303
or otherwise forfeited to the state for an offense under R.C. § 4301.45 or
R.C. § 4301.53 shall be sold by the Division of Liquor Control if the
Division determines that it is fit for sale or shall be placed in the custody
of the Investigations Unit in the Ohio Department of Public Safety and be
used for training relating to law enforcement activities. The Ohio Department
of Public Safety, with the assistance of the Division of Liquor Control,
shall adopt rules in accordance with R.C. Chapter 119 to provide for the
distribution to state or local law enforcement agencies upon their request.
If any tax imposed under R.C. Title 43 has not been paid in relation to the
beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol, any moneys acquired from the sale
shall first be used to pay the tax. All other money collected under this
division (B)(1)(d) shall be paid into the State Treasury. Any beer,
intoxicating liquor, or alcohol that the Division determines to be unfit for
sale shall be destroyed.



         (e)   Money received by an inmate of a correctional
institution from an unauthorized source or in an unauthorized manner shall be
returned to the sender, if known, or deposited in the inmates’ industrial
and entertainment fund of the institution if the sender is not known.



         (f)   1.   Any mobile instrumentality forfeited under
R.C. Chapter 2981 may be given to the law enforcement agency that initially
seized the mobile instrumentality for use in performing its duties, if the
agency wants the mobile instrumentality. The agency shall take the mobile
instrumentality subject to any security interest or lien on the mobile
instrumentality.



            2.   Vehicles and vehicle parts forfeited under
R.C. §§ 4549.61 to 4549.63 may be given to a law enforcement agency for use
in performing its duties. Those parts may be incorporated into any other
official vehicle. Parts that do not bear vehicle identification numbers or
derivatives of them may be sold or disposed of as provided by rules of the
Director of Public Safety. Parts from which a vehicle identification number
or derivative of it has been removed, defaced, covered, altered, or destroyed
and that are not suitable for police work or incorporation into an official
vehicle shall be destroyed and sold as junk or scrap.



         (g)   Computers, computer networks, computer systems,
and computer software suitable for police work may be given to a law
enforcement agency for that purpose or disposed of under division (B)(2) of
this section.



         (h)   Money seized in connection with a violation of
R.C. § 2905.32, 2907.21, or 2907.22 shall be deposited in the Victims of
Human Trafficking Fund created by R.C. § 5101.87.



      (2)   Unclaimed or forfeited property that is not described in
division (B)(1) of this section or division (A)(1)(b) of this section, with
court approval, may be used by the law enforcement agency in possession of
it. If it is not used by the agency, it may be sold without appraisal at a
public auction to the highest bidder for cash or disposed of in another
manner that the court considers proper.



      (3)   Except as provided in divisions (B)(1) and (B)(5) of
this section and after compliance with division (B)(4) of this section when
applicable, any moneys acquired from the sale of property disposed of
pursuant to this section shall be placed in the general revenue fund of the
state, or the general fund of the municipality.



      (4)   If the property was in the possession of the Police
Department in relation to a delinquent child proceeding in a juvenile court,
10% of any moneys acquired from the sale of property disposed of under this
section shall be applied to one or more community addiction services
providers, as defined in R.C. § 5119.01. A juvenile court shall not specify
a services provider, except as provided in this division, unless the services
provider is in the same county as the court or in a contiguous county. If no
services provider is located in any of those counties, the juvenile court may
specify a services provider anywhere in Ohio. The remaining 90% of the
proceeds or cash shall be applied as provided in division (B)(3) of this
section.



      (5)   (a)   If the Board of County Commissioners recognizes
a citizens’ reward program under R.C. § 9.92, the Board shall notify the
Police Department of the recognition by filing a copy of its resolution
conferring that recognition with the Police Department. When the Board
recognizes a citizens’ reward program and the county includes a part, but
not all, of the territory of the municipality, the Board shall so notify the
Police Department of the recognition of the citizens' reward program only if
the county contains the highest percentage of the municipality’s population.



         (b)   Upon being so notified, the Police Department
shall pay 25% of any forfeited proceeds or cash derived from each sale of
property disposed of pursuant to this section to the citizens’ reward
program for use exclusively to pay rewards. No part of the funds may be used
to pay expenses associated with the program. If a citizens’ reward program
that operates in more than one county or in another state in addition to this
state receives funds under this section, the funds shall be used to pay
rewards only for tips and information to law enforcement agencies concerning
offenses committed in the county from which the funds were received.



      (6)   Any property forfeited under R.C. Chapter 2981 not be
used to pay any fine imposed upon a person who is convicted of or pleads
guilty to an underlying criminal offense or a different offense arising out
of the same facts and circumstances.



      (7)   Any moneys acquired from the sale of personal effects,
tools, or other property seized because the personal effects, tools, or other
property were used in the commission of a violation of R.C. § 2905.32,
2907.21, or 2907.22 or derived from the proceeds of the commission of a
violation of R.C. § 2905.32, 2907.21, or 2907.22 and disposed of pursuant to
this division (B) shall be placed in the Victims of Human Trafficking Fund
created by R.C. § 5101.87.



(R.C. § 2981.12)



   (C)   Disposition of contraband, proceeds, or instrumentalities.
Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 2981.13, property ordered forfeited
as contraband, proceeds, or an instrumentality pursuant to R.C. Chapter 2981
shall be disposed of, used, or sold pursuant to division (B) of this section
or R.C. § 2981.12. If the property is to be sold under division (B) of this
section or R.C. § 2981.12, the prosecutor shall cause notice of the proposed
sale to be given in accordance with law.



(R.C. § 2981.13(A))



Statutory reference:



   Forfeiture of property generally, see R.C. Chapter 2981



§ 130.18  IMPOSING SENTENCE FOR MISDEMEANOR.



   (A)   (1)   Unless a mandatory jail term is required to be
imposed by R.C. §§ 1547.99(G), 4510.14(B), or 4511.19(G), or any other
provision of the Revised Code, or any municipal ordinance, a court that
imposes a sentence under this chapter upon an offender for a misdemeanor or
minor misdemeanor has discretion to determine the most effective way to
achieve the purposes and principles of sentencing set forth in § 130.99(B).



      (2)   Unless a specific sanction is required to be imposed or
is precluded from being imposed by the section setting forth an offense or
the penalty for an offense or by any provision of §§ 130.99 or 133.99 of
this Code or R.C. §§ 2929.23 to 2929.28, a court that imposes a sentence
upon an offender for a misdemeanor may impose on the offender any sanction or
combination of sanctions under § 130.99(C) to (G). The court shall not
impose a sentence that imposes an unnecessary burden on local government
resources.



   (B)   (1)   In determining the appropriate sentence for a
misdemeanor, the court shall consider all of the following factors:



         (a)   The nature and circumstances of the offense or
offenses;



         (b)   Whether the circumstances regarding the offender
and the offense or offenses indicate that the offender has a history of
persistent criminal activity and that the offender’s character and
condition reveal a substantial risk that the offender will commit another
offense;



         (c)   Whether the circumstances regarding the offender
and the offense or offenses indicate that the offender’s history,
character, and condition reveal a substantial risk that the offender will be
a danger to others and that the offender’s conduct has been characterized
by a pattern of repetitive, compulsive, or aggressive behavior with heedless
indifference to the consequences;



         (d)   Whether the victim’s youth, age, disability, or
other factor made the victim particularly vulnerable to the offense or made
the impact of the offense more serious;



         (e)   Whether the offender is likely to commit future
crimes in general, in addition to the circumstances described in divisions
(B)(1)(b) and (c) of this section;



         (f)   Whether the offender has an emotional, mental, or
physical condition that is traceable to the offender’s service in the armed
forces of the United States and that was a contributing factor in the
offender’s commission of the offense or offenses;



         (g)   The offender’s military service record.



      (2)   In determining the appropriate sentence for a
misdemeanor, in addition to complying with division (B)(1) of this section,
the court may consider any other factors that are relevant to achieving the
purposes and principles of sentencing set forth in § 130.99(B).



   (C)   Before imposing a jail term as a sentence for a misdemeanor, a
court shall consider the appropriateness of imposing a community control
sanction or a combination of community control sanctions under § 130.99(D),
(E), (F), and (G). A court may impose the longest jail term authorized under
§ 130.99(C) only upon offenders who commit the worst forms of the offense or
upon offenders whose conduct and response to prior sanctions for prior
offenses demonstrate that the imposition of the longest jail term is
necessary to deter the offender from committing a future crime.



   (D)   (1)   A sentencing court shall consider any relevant oral
or written statement made by the victim, the defendant, the defense attorney,
or the prosecuting authority regarding sentencing for a misdemeanor. This
division does not create any rights to notice other than those rights
authorized by R.C. Chapter 2930.



      (2)   At the time of sentencing for a misdemeanor or as soon
as possible after sentencing, the court shall notify the victim of the
offense of the victim’s right to file an application for an award of
reparations pursuant to R.C. §§ 2743.51 to 2743.72.



(R.C. § 2929.22)



§ 130.19  MULTIPLE SENTENCES.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, R.C. §
2929.14(C), or R.C. § 2971.03(D) or (E), a prison term, jail term, or
sentence of imprisonment shall be served concurrently with any other prison
term, jail term, or sentence of imprisonment imposed by a court of this
municipality, the state, another state, or the United States.  Except as
provided in division (B)(2) of this section, a jail term or sentence of
imprisonment for misdemeanor shall be served concurrently with a prison term
or sentence of imprisonment for felony served in a state or federal
correctional institution.



   (B)   (1)   A jail term or sentence of imprisonment for a
misdemeanor shall be served consecutively to any other prison term, jail
term, or sentence of imprisonment when the trial court specifies that it is
to be served consecutively or when it is imposed for a misdemeanor violation
of R.C. §§ 2907.322, 2921.34 or 2923.131.  When consecutive sentences are
imposed for misdemeanors under this division, the term to be served is the
aggregate of the consecutive terms imposed, except that the aggregate term to
be served shall not exceed 18 months.



      (2)   A jail term or sentence of imprisonment imposed for a
misdemeanor violation of R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.14, 4510.16, 4510.21, or
4511.19, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, shall be served
consecutively to a prison term that is imposed for a felony violation of R.C.
§§ 2903.06, 2903.07, 2903.08 or 4511.19 or a felony violation of R.C. §
2903.04 involving the operation of a motor vehicle by the offender and that
is served in a state correctional institution when the trial court specifies
that it is to be served consecutively. When consecutive jail terms or
sentences of imprisonment and prison terms are imposed for one or more
misdemeanors and one or more felonies under this division, the term to be
served is the aggregate of the consecutive terms imposed, and the offender
shall serve all terms imposed for a felony before serving any term imposed
for a misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 2929.41)



§ 130.20 SELF-DEFENSE:  LIMITATIONS ON DUTY TO RETREAT PRIOR TO USING FORCE.



   (A)   As used in this section, RESIDENCE and VEHICLE have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 2901.05.



   (B)   For purposes of any section of this Code that sets forth a
criminal offense, a person who lawfully is in that person’s residence has
no duty to retreat before using force in self defense, defense of another, or
defense of that person’s residence, and a person who lawfully is an
occupant of that person’s vehicle or who lawfully is an occupant in a
vehicle owned by an immediate family member of the person has no duty to
retreat before using force in self defense or defense of another.



(R.C. § 2901.09)



§ 130.21  APPREHENSION, DETENTION, OR ARREST OF PERSON ON BOND.



   (A)   No person, other than a law enforcement officer, shall
apprehend, detain, or arrest a principal on bond, wherever issued, unless
that person meets all of the following criteria:



      (1)   The person is any of the following:



         (a)   Qualified, licensed, and appointed as a surety
bail bond agent under R.C. §§ 3905.83 to 3905.95;



         (b)   Licensed as a surety bail bond agent by the state
where the bond was written;



         (c)   Licensed as a private investigator under R.C.
Chapter 4749;



         (d)   Licensed as a private investigator by the state
where the bond was written;



         (e)   An off-duty peace officer, as defined in R.C. §
2921.51.



      (2)   The person, prior to apprehending, detaining, or
arresting the principal, has entered into a written contract with the surety
or with a licensed surety bail bond agent appointed by the surety, which
contract sets forth the name of the principal who is to be apprehended,
detained, or arrested.  For purposes of this division (A)(2), SURETY has the
same meaning as in R.C. § 3905.83.



      (3)   The person, prior to apprehending, detaining, or
arresting the principal, has notified the local law enforcement agency having
jurisdiction over the area in which such activities will be performed and has
provided any form or identification or other information requested by the law
enforcement agency.



   (B)   No person shall represent the person’s self to be a bail
enforcement agent or bounty hunter, or claim any similar title, in this
municipality.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal bail bond
agent practices. 



      (1)   A violation of division (A) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of division (A) of
this section, or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (2)   A violation of division (B) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of division (B) of
this section, or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2927.27)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.99  PENALTY FOR TITLE XIII.



   (A)   Except where otherwise specifically classified within the body
of the section of a chapter of this title, a violation of such section shall
be deemed a misdemeanor punishable upon conviction by a fine of not more than
$500, imprisonment of not more than six months, or both.



(R.C. § 715.67)



   (B)   Considerations in misdemeanor sentencing.



      (1)   A court that sentences an offender for a misdemeanor or
minor misdemeanor violation of any provision of the Ohio Revised Code, or of
any municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to a misdemeanor or
minor misdemeanor violation of a provision of the Ohio Revised Code, shall be
guided by the overriding purposes of misdemeanor sentencing. The overriding
purposes of misdemeanor sentencing are to protect the public from future
crime by the offender and others and to punish the offender. To achieve those
purposes, the sentencing court shall consider the impact of the offense upon
the victim and the need for changing the offender’s behavior,
rehabilitating the defender, and making restitution to the victim of the
offense, the public, or the victim and the public.



      (2)   A sentence imposed for a misdemeanor or minor
misdemeanor violation of an Ohio Revised Code provision or for a violation of
a municipal ordinance that is subject to division (B)(1) of this section
shall be reasonably calculated to achieve the two overriding purposes of
misdemeanor sentencing set forth in division (B)(1) of this section,
commensurate with and not demeaning to the seriousness of the offender’s
conduct and its impact upon the victim, and consistent with sentences imposed
for similar offenses committed by similar offenders.



      (3)   A court that imposes a sentence upon an offender for a
misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor violation of an Ohio Revised Code provision
or for a violation of a municipal ordinance that is subject to division
(B)(1) of this section shall not base the sentence upon the race, ethnic
background, gender, or religion of the offender.



      (4)   Divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2) of this section shall not
apply to any offense that is disposed of by a traffic violations bureau of
any court pursuant to Traffic Rule 13 and shall not apply to any violation of
any provision of the Ohio Revised Code that is a minor misdemeanor and that
is disposed of without a court appearance. Divisions (B)(1) to (B)(3) of this
section do not affect any penalties established by the municipality for a
violation of its ordinances that are not substantially equivalent to a
misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor violation of a provision of the Ohio Revised
Code.



(R.C. § 2929.21)



   (C)   Misdemeanor jail terms.



      (1)   Except as provided in §§ 130.18 or 133.99 of this Code
or R.C. §§ 2929.22 or 2929.23 or division (C)(5) or (C)(6) of this section
and unless another term is required or authorized pursuant to law, if the
sentencing court imposing a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor
elects or is required to impose a jail term on the offender pursuant to this
chapter, the court shall impose a definite jail term that shall be one of the
following:



         (a)   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more
than 180 days;



         (b)   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more
than 90 days;



         (c)   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more
than 60 days;



         (d)   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more
than 30 days.



      (2)   (a)   A court that sentences an offender to a jail
term under division (C) of this section may permit the offender to serve the
sentence in intermittent confinement or may authorize a limited release of
the offender as provided in division (E)(2) of this section. The court
retains jurisdiction over every offender sentenced to jail to modify the jail
sentence imposed at any time, but the court shall not reduce any mandatory
jail term.



         (b)   1.   If a prosecutor, as defined in R.C. §
2935.01, has filed a notice with the court that the prosecutor wants to be
notified about a particular case and if the court is considering modifying
the jail sentence of the offender in that case, the court shall notify the
prosecutor that the court is considering modifying the jail sentence of the
offender in that case. The prosecutor may request a hearing regarding the
court's consideration of modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that
case, and, if the prosecutor requests a hearing, the court shall notify the
eligible offender of the hearing.



            2.   If the prosecutor requests a hearing
regarding the court's consideration of modifying the jail sentence of the
offender in that case, the court shall hold the hearing before considering
whether or not to release the offender from the offender's jail sentence.



      (3)   If a court sentences an offender to a jail term under
division (C) of this section and the court assigns the offender to a county
jail that has established a county jail industry program pursuant to R.C. §
5147.30, the court shall specify, as part of the sentence, whether the
offender may be considered for participation in the program. During the
offender’s term in the county jail, the court retains jurisdiction to
modify its specification regarding the offender’s participation in the
county jail industry program.



      (4)   If a person sentenced to a jail term pursuant to
division (C) of this section, the court may impose as part of the sentence
pursuant to R.C. § 2929.28 a reimbursement sanction, and, if the local
detention facility in which the term is to be served is covered by a policy
adopted pursuant to R.C. §§ 307.93, 341.14, 341.19, 341.21, 341.23, 753.02,
753.04, 753.16, 2301.56, or 2947.19 and R.C. § 2929.37, both of the
following apply:



         (a)   The court shall specify both of the following as
part of the sentence:



            1.   If the person is presented with an itemized
bill pursuant to R.C. § 2929.37 for payment of the costs of confinement, the
person is required to pay the bill in accordance with that section.



            2.   If the person does not dispute the bill
described in division (C)(4)(a)1. of this section and does not pay the bill
by the times specified in R.C. § 2929.37, the clerk of the court may issue a
certificate of judgment against the person as described in that section.



         (b)   The sentence automatically includes any
certificate of judgment issued as described in division (C)(4)(a)2. of this
section.



      (5)   If an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of R.C. § 4511.19(B), or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, also is convicted of or also pleads guilty to a specification of
the type described in R.C. § 2941.1414 and if the court imposes a jail term
on the offender for the underlying offense, the court shall impose upon the
offender an additional definite jail term of not more than six months. The
additional jail term shall not be reduced pursuant to any provision of the
Revised Code. The offender shall serve the additional jail term consecutively
to and prior to the jail term imposed for the underlying offense and
consecutively to any other mandatory term imposed in relation to the offense.



      (6)   (a)   If an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty
to a misdemeanor violation of R.C. §2907.23, § 2907.24, § 2907.241 or §
2907.25, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and to a
specification of the type described in R.C. §2941.1421 and if the court
imposes a jail term on the offender for the misdemeanor violation, the court
may impose upon the offender an additional definite jail term as follows:



            1.   Subject to division (B)(6)(a)2. of this
section, an additional definite jail term of not more than 60 days;



            2.   If the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to one or more misdemeanor or felony violations of R.C.
§ 2907.22, § 2907.23, § 2907.24, § 2907.241 or § 2907.25, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and also was convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a specification of the type described in R.C. § 2941.1421
regarding one or more of those violations, an additional definite jail term
of not more than 120 days.



         (b)   In lieu of imposing an additional definite jail
term under division (B)(6)(a) of this section, the court may directly impose
on the offender a sanction that requires the offender to wear a real-time
processing, continual tracking electronic monitoring device during the period
of time specified by the court. The period of time specified by the court
shall equal the duration of an additional jail term that the court could have
imposed upon the offender under division (B)(6)(a) of this section. A
sanction imposed under this division shall commence on the date specified by
the court, provided that the sanction shall not commence until after the
offender has served the jail term imposed for the misdemeanor violation of
R.C. § 2907.23, § 2907.24, § 2907.241 or § 2907.25, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, and any residential sanction imposed for the
violation under division (D) of this section or R.C. § 2929.26. A sanction
imposed under this division shall be considered to be a community control
sanction for purposes of division (C) of this section or R.C. § 2929.25, and
all provisions of this Code and the Ohio Revised Code that pertain to
community control sanctions shall apply to a sanction imposed under this
division, except to the extent that they would by their nature be clearly
inapplicable.



The offender shall pay all costs associated with a sanction imposed under
this division, including the cost of the use of the monitoring device.



      (7)   If an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
misdemeanor violation of R.C. § 2903.13 and also is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a specification of the type described in R.C. § 2941.1423 that
charges that the victim of the violation was a woman whom the offender knew
was pregnant at the time of the violation, the court shall impose on the
offender a mandatory jail term that is a definite term of at least 30 days.



      (8)   If a court sentences an offender to a jail term under
this division (C), the sentencing court retains jurisdiction over the
offender and the jail term. Upon motion of either party or upon the court’s
own motion, the court, in the court’s sole discretion and as the
circumstances warrant, may substitute one or more community control sanctions
under division (E) or (F) of this section for any jail days that are not
mandatory jail days.



(R.C. § 2929.24)



   (D)   Misdemeanor community control sanctions.



      (1)   (a)   Except as provided in §§ 130.18 and 133.99 of
this Code or R.C. §§ 2929.22 and 2929.23 or when a jail term is required by
law, in sentencing an offender for a misdemeanor, other than a minor
misdemeanor, the sentencing court may do either of the following:



            1.   Directly impose a sentence that consists of
one or more community control sanctions authorized by divisions (E), (F), or
(G) of this section. The court may impose any other conditions of release
under a community control sanction that the court considers appropriate. If
the court imposes a jail term upon the offender, the court may impose any
community control sanction or combination of community control sanctions in
addition to the jail term.



            2.   Impose a jail term under division (C) of this
section from the range of jail terms authorized under that division for the
offense, suspend all or a portion of the jail term imposed, and place the
offender under a community control sanction or combination of community
control sanctions authorized under divisions (E), (F), or (G) of this section.



         (b)   The duration of all community control sanctions
imposed upon an offender and in effect for an offender at any time shall not
exceed five years.



         (c)   At sentencing, if a court directly imposes a
community control sanction or combination of community control sanctions
pursuant to division (D)(1)(a)1. of this section, the court shall state the
duration of the community control sanctions imposed and shall notify the
offender that if any of the conditions of the community control sanctions are
violated the court may do any of the following:



            1.   Impose a longer time under the same community
control sanction if the total time under all of the offender’s community
control sanctions does not exceed the five-year limit specified in division
(D)(1)(b) of this section;



            2.   Impose a more restrictive community control
sanction under division (E), (F), or (G) of this section, but the court is
not required to impose any particular sanction or sanctions;



            3.   Impose a definite jail term from the range of
jail terms authorized for the offense under division (C) of this section.



      (2)   If a court sentences an offender to any community
control sanction or combination of community control sanctions pursuant to
division (D)(1)(a)1. of this section, the sentencing court retains
jurisdiction over the offender and the period of community control for the
duration of the period of community control. Upon the motion of either party
or on the court’s own motion, the court, in the court’s sole discretion
and as the circumstances warrant, may modify the community control sanctions
or conditions of release previously imposed, substitute a community control
sanction or condition of release for another community control sanction or
condition of release previously imposed, or impose an additional community
control sanction or condition of release.



      (3)   (a)   If a court sentences an offender to any
community control sanction or combination of community control sanctions
authorized under division (E), (F), or (G) of this section, the court shall
place the offender under the general control and supervision of the court or
of a department of probation in the jurisdiction that serves the court for
purposes of reporting to the court a violation of any of the conditions of
the sanctions imposed. If the offender resides in another jurisdiction and a
department of probation has been established to serve the municipal court or
county court in that jurisdiction, the sentencing court may request the
municipal court or the county court to receive the offender into the general
control and supervision of that department of probation for purposes of
reporting to the sentencing court a violation of any of the conditions of the
sanctions imposed. The sentencing court retains jurisdiction over any
offender whom it sentences for the duration of the sanction or sanctions
imposed.



         (b)   The sentencing court shall require as a condition
of any community control sanction that the offender abide by the law and not
leave the state without the permission of the court or the offender’s
probation officer. In the interests of doing justice, rehabilitating the
offender, and ensuring the offender’s good behavior, the court may impose
additional requirements on the offender.  The offender’s compliance with
the additional requirements also shall be a condition of the community
control sanction imposed upon the offender.



      (4)   (a)   If the court imposing sentence upon an offender
sentences the offender to any community control sanction or combination of
community control sanctions authorized under division (E), (F), or (G) of
this section, and the offender violates any of the conditions of the
sanctions, the public or private person or entity that supervises or
administers the program or activity that comprises the sanction shall report
the violation directly to the sentencing court or to the department of
probation or probation officer with general control and supervision over the
offender. If the public or private person or entity reports the violation to
the department of probation or probation officer, the department or officer
shall report the violation to the sentencing court.



         (b)   If an offender violates any condition of a
community control sanction, the sentencing court may impose upon the violator
one or more of the following penalties:



            1.   A longer time under the same community
control sanction if the total time under all of the community control
sanctions imposed on the violator does not exceed the five-year limit
specified in division (D)(1)(b) of this section;



            2.   A more restrictive community control sanction;



            3.   A combination of community control sanctions,
including a jail term.



         (c)   If an offender was acting pursuant to R.C. §
2925.11(B)(2)(b), or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and in
so doing violated the conditions of a community control sanction based on a
minor drug possession offense, as defined in R.C. § 2925.11, the sentencing
court may consider the offender’s conduct in seeking or obtaining medical
assistance for another in good faith or for self or may consider the offender
being the subject of another person seeking or obtaining medical assistance
in accordance with that division as a mitigating factor before imposing any
of the penalties described in division (D)(4)(b) of this section.



         (d)   If the court imposes a jail term upon a violator
pursuant to division (D)(4)(b) of this section, the total time spent in jail
for the misdemeanor offense and the violation of a condition of the community
control sanction shall not exceed the maximum jail term available for the
offense for which the sanction that was violated was imposed. The court may
reduce the longer period of time that the violator is required to spend under
the longer sanction or the more restrictive sanction imposed under division
(D)(4)(b) of this section by all or part of the time the violator
successfully spent under the sanction that was initially imposed.



      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if an
offender, for a significant period of time, fulfills the conditions of a
community control sanction imposed pursuant to division (E), (F), or (G) of
this section in an exemplary manner, the court may reduce the period of time
under the community control sanction or impose a less restrictive community
control sanction. Fulfilling the conditions of a community control sanction
does not relieve the offender of a duty to make restitution under division
(G) of this section.



(R.C. § 2929.25)



   (E)   Community residential sanction.



      (1)   Except when a mandatory jail term is required by law,
the court imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a minor
misdemeanor, may impose upon the offender any community residential sanction
or combination of community residential sanctions under this division (E). 
Community residential sanctions include, but are not limited to, the
following:



         (a)   A term of up to 180 days in a halfway house or a
term in a halfway house not to exceed the longest jail term available for the
offense, whichever is shorter, if the political subdivision that would have
responsibility for paying the costs of confining the offender in a jail has
entered into a contract with the halfway house for use of the facility for
misdemeanor offenders;



         (b)   If the offender is an eligible offender, as
defined in R.C. § 307.932, a term in a community alternative sentencing
center or district community alternative sentencing center established and
operated in accordance with that section, in the circumstances specified in
that section, with one of the conditions of the sanction being that the
offender complete successfully complete the portion of the sentence to be
served in the center.



      (2)   A sentence to a community residential sanction under
division (E)(1)(b) of this section shall be in accordance with R.C. §
307.932. In all other cases, the court that sentences an offender to a
community residential sanction under this division (E) may do either or both
of the following:



         (a)   Permit the offender to serve the offender’s
sentence in intermittent confinement, overnight, on weekends or at any other
time or times that will allow the offender to continue at the offender’s
occupation or care for the offender’s family;



         (b)   Authorize the offender to be released so that the
offender may seek or maintain employment, receive education or training,
receive treatment, perform community service, or otherwise fulfill an
obligation imposed by law or by the court. A release pursuant to this
division shall be only for the duration of time that is needed to fulfill the
purpose of the release and for travel that reasonably is necessary to fulfill
the purposes of release.



      (3)   The court may order that a reasonable portion of the
income earned by the offender upon a release pursuant to division (E)(2) of
this section be applied to any financial sanction imposed under division (G)
of this section.



      (4)   No court shall sentence any person to a prison term for
a misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor or to a jail term for a minor misdemeanor.



      (5)    If a court sentences a person who has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor to a community residential sanction as
described in division (E)(1) of this section, at the time of reception and at
other times the person in charge of the operation of the halfway house,
community alternative sentencing center, district community alternative
sentencing center, or other place at which the offender will serve the
residential sanction determines to be appropriate, the person in charge of
the operation of the halfway house, community alternative sentencing center,
district community alternative sentencing center, or other place may cause
the convicted offender to be examined and tested for tuberculosis, HIV
infection, hepatitis, including, but not limited to, hepatitis A, B, and C,
and other contagious diseases. The person in charge of the operation of the
halfway house, community alternative sentencing center, district community
alternative sentencing center, or other place at which the offender will
serve the residential sanction may cause a convicted offender in the halfway
house, community alternative sentencing center, district community
alternative sentencing center, or other place who refuses to be tested or
treated for tuberculosis, HIV infection, hepatitis, including, but not
limited to, hepatitis A, B, and C, or another contagious disease to be tested
and treated involuntarily.



      (6)   The municipality may enter into a contract with a
halfway house for use of the halfway house to house misdemeanor offenders
under a sanction imposed under division (E)(1)(a) of this section.



(R.C. § 2929.26)



   (F)   Nonresidential sanction where jail term is not mandatory.



      (1)   Except when a mandatory jail term is required by law,
the court imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a minor
misdemeanor, may impose upon the offender any nonresidential sanction or
combination of nonresidential sanctions authorized under this division. 
Nonresidential sanctions include, but are not limited to, the following:



         (a)   A term of day reporting;



         (b)   A term of house arrest with electronic monitoring
or continuous alcohol monitoring or both electronic monitoring and continuous
alcohol monitoring, a term of electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol
monitoring without house arrest, or a term of house arrest without electronic
monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring;



         (c)   A term of community service of up to  500 hours
for misdemeanor of the first degree or 200 hours for a misdemeanor of the
second, third, or fourth degree;



         (d)   A term in a drug treatment program with a level of
security for the offender as determined necessary by the court;



         (e)   A term of intensive probation supervision;



         (f)   A term of basic probation supervision;



         (g)   A term of monitored time;



         (h)   A term of drug and alcohol use monitoring,
including random drug testing;



         (i)   A curfew term;



         (j)   A requirement that the offender obtain employment;



         (k)   A requirement that the offender obtain education
or training;



         (l)   Provided the court obtains the prior approval of
the victim, a requirement that the offender participate in victim-offender
mediation;



         (m)   If authorized by law, suspension of the
offender’s privilege to operate a motor vehicle, immobilization or
forfeiture of the offender’s motor vehicle, a requirement that the offender
obtain a valid motor vehicle operator’s license, or any other related
sanction;



         (n)   A requirement that the offender obtain counseling
if the offense is a violation of R.C. § 2919.25 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or a violation of R.C. § 2903.13 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance involving a person who was a
family or household member at the time of the violation, if the offender
committed the offense in the vicinity of one or more children who are not
victims of the offense, and if the offender or the victim of the offense is a
parent, guardian, custodian, or person in loco parentis of one or more of
those children. This division does not limit the court in requiring that the
offender obtain counseling for any offense or in any circumstance not
specified in this division.



      (2)   If the court imposes a term of community service
pursuant to division (F)(1)(c) of this section, the offender may request that
the court modify the sentence to authorize the offender to make a reasonable
contribution, as determined by the court, to the general fund of the county,
municipality, or other local entity that provides funding to the court. The
court may grant the request if the offender demonstrates a change in
circumstances from the date the court imposes the sentence or that the
modification would otherwise be in the interests of justice. If the court
grants the request, the offender shall make a reasonable contribution to the
court, and the clerk of the court shall deposit that contribution into the
general fund of the county, municipality, or other local entity that provides
funding to the court. If more than one entity provides funding to the court,
the clerk shall deposit a percentage of the reasonable contribution equal to
the percentage of funding the entity provides to the court in that entity’s
general fund.



      (3)   In addition to the sanctions authorized under division
(F)(1) of this section, the court imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor,
other than a minor misdemeanor, upon an offender who is not required to serve
a mandatory jail term may impose any other sanction that is intended to
discourage the offender or other persons from committing a similar offense if
the sanction is reasonably related to the overriding purposes and principles
of misdemeanor sentencing.



      (4)   The court imposing a sentence for a minor misdemeanor
may impose a term of community service in lieu of all or part of a fine. The
term of community service imposed for a minor misdemeanor shall not exceed 30
hours. After imposing a term of community service, the court may modify the
sentence to authorize a reasonable contribution, as determined by the court,
to the appropriate general fund as provided in division (F)(2) of this
section.



(R.C. § 2929.27)



   (G)   Financial sanctions.



      (1)   In addition to imposing court costs pursuant to R.C. §
2947.23, the court imposing a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor,
including a minor misdemeanor, may sentence the offender to any financial
sanction or combination of financial sanctions authorized under this division
(G). If the court in its discretion imposes one or more financial sanctions,
the financial sanctions that may be imposed pursuant to this section include,
but are not limited to, the following:



         (a)   Restitution.



            1.   Unless the misdemeanor offense is a minor
misdemeanor or could be disposed of by the Traffic Violations Bureau serving
the court under Traffic Rule 13, restitution by the offender to the victim of
the offender’s crime or any survivor of the victim, in an amount based upon
the victim’s economic loss. The court may not impose restitution as a
sanction pursuant to this division if the offense is a minor misdemeanor or
could be disposed of by the Traffic Violations Bureau serving the court under
Traffic Rule 13. If the court requires restitution, the court shall order
that the restitution be made to the victim in open court or to the adult
probation department that serves the jurisdiction or the clerk of the court
on behalf of the victim.



            2.   If the court imposes restitution, the court
shall determine the amount of restitution to be paid by the offender. If the
court imposes restitution, the court may base the amount of restitution it
orders on an amount recommended by the victim, the offender, a presentence
investigation report, estimates or receipts indicating the cost of repairing
or replacing property, and other information, provided that the amount the
court orders as restitution shall not exceed the amount of economic loss
suffered by the victim as a direct and proximate result of the commission of
the offense. If the court decides to impose restitution, the court shall hold
an evidentiary hearing on restitution if the offender, victim, or survivor
disputes the amount of restitution. If the court holds an evidentiary
hearing, at the hearing the victim or survivor has the burden to prove by a
preponderance of the evidence the amount of restitution sought from the
offender.



            3.    All restitution payments shall be credited
against any recovery of economic loss in a civil action brought by the victim
or any survivor of the victim against the offender.  No person may introduce
evidence of an award of restitution under this section in a civil action for
purposes of imposing liability against an insurer under R.C. § 3937.18.



            4.   If the court imposes restitution, the court
may order that the offender pay a surcharge, of not more than 5% of the
amount of the restitution otherwise ordered, to the entity responsible for
collecting and processing restitution payments.



            5.   The victim or survivor of the victim may
request that the prosecutor in the case file a motion, or the offender may
file a motion, for modification of the payment terms of any restitution
ordered. If the court grants the motion, it may modify the payment terms as
it determines appropriate.



         (b)   Fines. A fine of the type described in divisions
(G)(1)(b)1. and 2. of this section payable to the appropriate entity as
required by law:



            1.   A fine in the following amount:



               a.   For a misdemeanor of the first degree,
not more than $1,000;



               b.   For a misdemeanor of the second degree,
not more than $750;



               c.   For a misdemeanor of the third degree,
not more than $500;



               d.   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree,
not more than $250;



               e.   For a minor misdemeanor, not more than
$150.



            2.   A state fine or cost as defined in R.C. §
2949.111.



         (c)   Reimbursement.



            1.   Reimbursement by the offender of any or all
of the costs of sanctions incurred by the government, including, but not
limited to, the following:



               a.   All or part of the costs of
implementing any community control sanction, including a supervision fee
under R.C. § 2951.021;



               b.   All or part of the costs of confinement
in a jail or other residential facility, including, but not limited to, a per
diem fee for room and board, the costs of medical and dental treatment, and
the costs of repairing property damaged by the offender while confined.



               c.   All or part of the cost of purchasing
and using an immobilizing or disabling device, including a certified ignition
interlock device, or a remote alcohol monitoring device that a court orders
an offender to use under R.C. § 4510.13.



            2.   The amount of reimbursement under division
(G)(1)(c)1. of this section shall not exceed the total amount of
reimbursement the offender is able to pay and shall not exceed the actual
cost of the sanctions. The court may collect any amount of reimbursement the
offender is required to pay under that division. If the court does not order
reimbursement under that division, confinement costs may be assessed pursuant
to a repayment policy adopted under R.C. § 2929.37. In addition, the
offender may be required to pay the fees specified in R.C. § 2929.38 in
accordance with that section.



      (2)   (a)   If the court determines a hearing is necessary,
the court may hold a hearing to determine whether the offender is able to pay
the financial sanction imposed pursuant to this division (G) or court costs
or is likely in the future to be able to pay the sanction or costs.



         (b)    If the court determines that the offender is
indigent and unable to pay the financial sanction or court costs, the court
shall consider imposing and may impose a term of community service under
division (F)(1) of this section in lieu of imposing a financial sanction or
court costs. If the court does not determine that the offender is indigent,
the court may impose a term of community service under division (F)(1) of
this section in lieu of or in addition to imposing a financial sanction under
this division (G) and in addition to imposing court costs. The court may
order community service for a minor misdemeanor pursuant to division (F)(4)
of this section in lieu of or in addition to imposing a financial sanction
under this section and in addition to imposing court costs. If a person fails
to pay a financial sanction or court costs, the court may order community
service in lieu of the financial sanction or court costs.



      (3)   (a)   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed
upon the offender pursuant to division (G)(1)(c) of this section to pay the
costs incurred by a county pursuant to any sanction imposed under division
(E), (F), or (G) of this section or in operating a facility used to confine
offenders pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (E) of this section
to the county treasurer. The county treasurer shall deposit the
reimbursements in the county’s general fund. The county shall use the
amounts deposited in the fund to pay the costs incurred by the county
pursuant to any sanction imposed under division (E), (F), or (G) of this
section or in operating a facility used to confine offenders pursuant to a
sanction imposed under division (E) of this section.



         (b)   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed upon
the offender pursuant to division (G)(1)(c) of this section to pay the costs
incurred by a municipal corporation pursuant to any sanction imposed under
division (E), (F), or (G) of this section or in operating a facility used to
confine offenders pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (E) of this
section to the treasurer of the municipal corporation. The treasurer shall
deposit the reimbursements in the municipal corporation’s general fund. The
municipal corporation shall use the amounts deposited in the fund to pay the
costs incurred by the municipal corporation pursuant to any sanction imposed
under division (E), (F), or (G) of this section or in operating a facility
used to confine offenders pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (E)
of this section.



         (c)   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed
pursuant to division (G)(1)(c) of this section for the costs incurred by a
private provider pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (E), (F), or
(G) of this section to the provider.



      (4)   In addition to any other fine that is or may be imposed
under this division (G), the court imposing sentence upon an offender for
misdemeanor domestic violence or menacing by stalking may impose a fine of
not less than $70 nor more than $500, which shall be transmitted to the
Treasurer of Ohio to be credited to the address confidentiality program fund
created by R.C. § 111.48.



      (5)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this division
(G)(5), a financial sanction imposed under division (G)(1) of this section is
a judgment in favor of the state or the political subdivision that operates
the court that imposed the financial sanction, and the offender subject to
the financial sanction is the judgment debtor. A financial sanction of
reimbursement imposed pursuant to division (G)(1)(c)1.a. of this section upon
an offender is a judgment in favor of the entity administering the community
control sanction, and the offender subject to the financial sanction is the
judgment debtor. A financial sanction of reimbursement imposed pursuant to
division (G)(1)(c)1.b. of this section upon an offender confined in a jail or
other residential facility is a judgment in favor of the entity operating the
jail or other residential facility, and the offender subject to the financial
sanction is the judgment debtor. A financial sanction of restitution imposed
pursuant to division (G)(1)(a) of this section is an order in favor of the
victim of the offender’s criminal act that can be collected through a
certificate of judgment as described in division (G)(5)(b)1. of this section,
through execution as described in division (G)(5)(b)2.  of this section or
through an order as described in division (G)(5)(b)3. of this section and the
offender shall be considered for purposes of the collection as a judgment
debtor.



         (b)   Once a financial sanction is imposed as a judgment
or order under this division, the victim, private provider, state, or
political subdivision may do any of the following:



            1.   Obtain from the clerk of the court in which
the judgment was entered a certificate of judgment that shall be in the same
manner and form as a certificate of judgment issued in a civil action;



            2.   Obtain execution of the judgment or order
through any available procedure, including any of the procedures identified
in R.C. § 2929.18(D)(1) and (D)(2) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.



            3.   Obtain an order for the assignment of wages
of the judgment debtor under R.C. § 1321.33 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.



      (6)   The civil remedies authorized under division (G)(4) of
this section for the collection of the financial sanction supplement, but do
not preclude, enforcement of the criminal sentence.



      (7)   Each court imposing a financial sanction upon an
offender under this division (G) may designate the clerk of the court or
another person to collect the financial sanction. The clerk, or another
person authorized by law or the court to collect the financial sanction may
do the following:



         (a)   Enter into contracts with one or more public
agencies or private vendors for the collection of amounts due under the
sanction. Before entering into a contract for the collection of amounts due
from an offender pursuant to any financial sanction imposed pursuant to this
division (G), a court shall comply with R.C. §§ 307.86 to 307.92.



         (b)   Permit payment of all or any portion of the
sanction in installments, by financial transaction device if the court is a
county court or a municipal court operated by a county, or by any other
reasonable method, in any time, and on any terms that the court considers
just, except that the maximum time permitted for payment shall not exceed
five years. If the court is a county court or a municipal court operated by a
county, the acceptance of payments by any financial transaction device shall
be governed by the policy adopted by the board of county commissioners of the
county pursuant to R.C. § 301.28. If the court is a municipal court not
operated by a county, the clerk may pay any fee associated with processing an
electronic transfer out of public money or may charge the fee to the offender.



         (c)   To defray administrative costs, charge a
reasonable fee to an offender who elects a payment plan rather than a lump
sum payment of any financial sanction.



      (8)   No financial sanction imposed under this division (G)
shall preclude a victim from bringing a civil action against the offender.



(R.C. § 2929.28)



   (H)   Organizational penalties.



      (1)   Regardless of the other penalties provided in this
section, an organization convicted of an offense pursuant to § 130.09 shall
be fined by the court as follows:



         (a)   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more
than $5,000;



         (b)   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more
than $4,000;



         (c)   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more
than $3,000;



         (d)   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more
than $2,000;



         (e)   For a minor misdemeanor, not more than $1,000;



         (f)   For a misdemeanor not specifically classified, not
more than $2,000;



         (g)   For a minor misdemeanor not specifically
classified, not more than $1,000.



      (2)   When an organization is convicted of an offense not
specifically classified, and the section defining the offense or penalty
plainly indicates a purpose to impose the penalty provided for violation upon
organizations, then such penalty shall be imposed in lieu of the penalty
provided in this section.



      (3)   When an organization is convicted of an offense not
specifically classified, and the penalty provided includes a higher fine than
that provided in this section, then the penalty imposed shall be pursuant to
the penalty provided for violation of the section defining the offense.



      (4)   This section does not prevent the imposition of
available civil sanctions against an organization convicted of an offense
pursuant to § 130.09, either in addition to or in lieu of a fine imposed
pursuant to this section.



(R.C. § 2929.31)



Cross-reference:



   Sentencing for sexually oriented offenses; sexual predators;
registration, see § 133.99



Statutory reference:



   Citation issuance and limitations on arrest for minor misdemeanors, see
R.C. § 2935.26



   Crime victim's reparations fund, see R.C. § 2929.32



   Habitual sex offender and sexual predator registration, see R.C.
Chapter 2950



   Reimbursement for costs of confinement, see R.C. §§ 2929.36 et seq.



   Reports to health care licensing boards of criminal offenses, see R.C.
§ 2929.42



CHAPTER 131:  OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY



Section



   131.01   Definitions



   131.02   Arson; determining property value or amount of physical harm



   131.03   Criminal damaging or endangering; vehicular vandalism



   131.04   Criminal mischief



   131.05   Damaging or endangering aircraft or airport operations



   131.06   Criminal trespass; aggravated trespass



   131.07   Tampering with coin machines



   131.08   Theft



   131.09   Unauthorized use of a vehicle



   131.10   Unauthorized use of property, including telecommunication
property and computers; possession of municipal property



   131.11   Passing bad checks



   131.12   Misuse of credit cards



   131.13   Making or using slugs



   131.14   Prima facie evidence of purpose to defraud



   131.15   Tampering with records



   131.16   Securing writings by deception



   131.17   Defrauding creditors



   131.18   Receiving stolen property



   131.19   Value of stolen property



   131.20   Degree of offense when certain property involved



   131.21   Injuring vines, bushes, trees, or crops



   131.22   Detention and arrest of shoplifters and those committing
motion picture piracy; protection of institutional property



   131.23   Insurance fraud; workers' compensation fraud; Medicaid fraud



   131.24   Injury to property by hunters



   131.25   Evidence of intent to commit theft of rented property;
evidence of lack of capacity to consent



   131.26   Forgery of identification cards



   131.27   Criminal simulation



   131.28   Personating an officer



   131.29   Trademark counterfeiting



   131.30   Diminishing or interfering with forfeitable property



   131.31   Recording credit card, telephone or Social Security numbers



   131.32   Prosecutions for theft of utilities



   131.33   Motion picture piracy



   131.34   Railroad vandalism; criminal trespass; interference with
operation of train; grade crossing device vandalism.



   131.35   Desecration



Statutory reference:



   Cable television service devices, unauthorized sale or possession,
felony, see R.C. § 2913.041



   Deceptive acts or practices in connection with consumer transactions,
see O.A.C. Ch. 109:4-3



   Disrupting public services, felony, see R.C. § 2909.04



   E-mail advertisements, civil offenses and felony forgery offense, see
R.C. § 2307.64



   E-mail spam, civil offenses and felony offenses, see R.C. § 2913.421



   Food stamps, illegal use, see R.C. § 2913.46



   Telecommunications: fraud and unlawful use of a device, felony
offenses, see R.C. §§ 2913.05 and 2913.06



   Terrorism involving agricultural products or equipment, see R.C. §
901.511



§ 131.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACTIVE DUTY SERVICE MEMBER. Any member of the armed forces of the
United States performing active duty under Title 10 of the United States Code.



   ANHYDROUS AMMONIA. A compound formed by the combination of two gaseous
elements, nitrogen and hydrogen, in the manner described below. Anhydrous
ammonia is one part nitrogen to three parts hydrogen (NH3). Anhydrous ammonia
by weight is fourteen parts nitrogen to three parts hydrogen, which is
approximately 82% nitrogen to 18% hydrogen.



   ASSISTANCE DOG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 955.011.



   CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE.  Any services provided by or through the
facilities of any cable television system or other similar closed circuit
coaxial cable communications system, or any microwave or similar transmission
service used in connection with any cable television system or other similar
closed circuit coaxial cable communications system.



   COIN MACHINE.  Any mechanical or electronic device designed to do both
of the following:



      (1)   Receive a coin or bill, or token made for that purpose;



      (2)   In return for the insertion or deposit of a coin, bill,
or token, automatically dispense property, provide a service, or grant a
license.



   COMPUTER.  An electronic device that performs logical, arithmetic, and
memory functions by the manipulation of electronic or magnetic impulses. 
COMPUTER includes, but is not limited to, all input, output, processing,
storage, computer program, or communication facilities that are connected, or
related, in a computer system or network to an electronic device of that
nature.



   COMPUTER CONTAMINANT. Means a computer program that is designed to
modify, damage, destroy, disable, deny or degrade access to, allow
unauthorized access to, functionally impair, record, or transmit information
within a computer, computer system, or computer network without the express
or implied consent of the owner or other person authorized to give consent
and that is of a type or kind described in divisions (1) through (4) of this
definition or of a type or kind similar to a type or kind described in
divisions (1) through (4) of this definition:



      (1)   A group of computer programs commonly known as
“viruses” and “worms” that are self- replicating or self-propagating
and that are designed to contaminate other computer programs, compromise
computer security, consume computer resources, modify, destroy, record, or
transmit data, or disrupt the normal operation of the computer, computer
system, or computer network;



      (2)   A group of computer programs commonly known as
“Trojans” or “Trojan horses” that are not self-replicating or
self-propagating and that are designed to compromise computer security,
consume computer resources, modify, destroy, record, or transmit data, or
disrupt the normal operation of the computer, computer system, or computer
network;



      (3)   A group of computer programs commonly known as
“zombies” that are designed to use a computer without the knowledge and
consent of the owner, or other person authorized to give consent, and that
are designed to send large quantities of data to a targeted computer network
for the purpose of degrading the targeted computer’s or network’s
performance, or denying access through the network to the targeted computer
or network, resulting in what is commonly known as “denial of service” or
“distributed denial of service” attacks;



      (4)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “trap
doors”, “back doors”, or “root kits” that are designed to bypass
standard authentication software and that are designed to allow access or use
of a computer without the knowledge or consent of the owner, or other person
authorized to give consent.



   COMPUTER HACKING.



      (1)   COMPUTER HACKING means any of the following:



         (a)   Gaining access or attempting to gain access to all
or part of a computer, computer system, or a computer network without express
or implied authorization with the intent to defraud or with intent to commit
a crime;



         (b)   Misusing computer or network services including
but not limited to mail transfer programs, file transfer programs, proxy
servers, and web servers by performing functions not authorized by the owner
of the computer, computer system, or computer network or other person
authorized to give consent. As used in this division, “misuse of computer
and network services” includes but is not limited to the unauthorized use
of any of the following:



            1.   Mail transfer programs to send mail to
persons other than the authorized users of that computer or computer network;



            2.   File transfer program services or proxy
servers to access other computers, computer systems, or computer networks;



            3.   Web servers to redirect users to other web
pages or web servers.



         (c)   1.   Subject to division (1)(c)2. of this
definition, using a group of computer programs commonly known as “port
scanners” or “probes” to intentionally access any computer, computer
system, or computer network without the permission of the owner of the
computer, computer system, or computer network or other person authorized to
give consent. The group of computer programs referred to in this division
includes but is not limited to those computer programs that use a computer
network to access a computer, computer system, or another computer network to
determine any of the following: the presence or types of computers or
computer systems on a network; the computer network’s facilities and
capabilities; the availability of computer or network services; the presence
or versions of computer software including but not limited to operating
systems, computer services, or computer contaminants; the presence of a known
computer software deficiency that can be used to gain unauthorized access to
a computer, computer system, or computer network; or any other information
about a computer, computer system, or computer network not necessary for the
normal and lawful operation of the computer initiating the access.



            2.   The group of computer programs referred to in
division (1)(c)1. of this definition does not include standard computer
software used for the normal operation, administration, management, and test
of a computer, computer system, or computer network including but not limited
to domain name services, mail transfer services, and other operating system
services, computer programs commonly called “ping”, “tcpdump”, and
“traceroute” and other network monitoring and management computer
software, and computer programs commonly knows as “nslookup” and
“whois” and other systems administration computer software.



         (d)   The intentional use of a computer, computer
system, or a computer network in a manner that exceeds any right or
permission granted by the owner of the computer, computer system, or computer
network or other person authorized to give consent.



      (2)   COMPUTER HACKING does not include the introduction of a
computer contaminant, as defined in this section, into a computer, computer
system, computer program, or computer network.



   COMPUTER NETWORK.  A set of related and remotely-connected computers
and communication facilities that includes more than one computer system that
has the capability to transmit among the connected computers and
communication facilities through the use of computer facilities.



   COMPUTER PROGRAM.  An ordered set of data representing coded
instructions or statements that, when executed by a computer, causes the
computer to process data.



   COMPUTER SERVICES.  Includes, but is not limited to, the use of a
computer system, computer network, computer program, data that is prepared
for computer use, or data that is contained within a computer system or
computer network.



   COMPUTER SOFTWARE.  Computer programs, procedures, and other
documentation associated with the operation of a computer system.



   COMPUTER SYSTEM.  A computer and related devices, whether connected or
unconnected, including, but not limited to, data input, output, and storage
devices, data communications links, and computer programs and data that make
the system capable of performing specified special purpose data processing
tasks.



   COUNTERFEIT TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE.  A telecommunications device
that, alone or with another telecommunications device, has been altered,
constructed, manufactured, or programmed to acquire, intercept, receive, or
otherwise facilitate the use of a telecommunications service or information
service without the authority or consent of the provider of the
telecommunications service or information service.  The phrase includes but
is not limited to a clone telephone, clone microchip, tumbler telephone, or
tumbler microchip; a wireless scanning device capable of acquiring,
intercepting, receiving, or otherwise facilitating the use of
telecommunications service or information service without immediate
detection; or a device, equipment, hardware, or software designed for, or
capable of, altering or changing the electronic serial number in a wireless
telephone.



   CREATE A SUBSTANTIAL RISK OF SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM TO ANY PERSON. 
Includes the creation of a substantial risk of serious physical harm to any
emergency personnel.



   CREDIT CARD.  Includes, but is not limited to, a card, code, device,
or other means of access to a customer's account for the purpose of obtaining
money, property, labor, or services on credit, or for initiating an
electronic fund transfer at a point-of-sale terminal, an automated teller
machine, or a cash dispensing machine.  It also includes a county
procurement card issued under R.C. § 301.29.



   DANGEROUS DRUG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.



   DATA.  A representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts, or
instructions that are being or have been prepared in a formalized manner and
that are intended for use in a computer, computer system, or computer network.



   DECEPTION.  To knowingly deceive another or cause another to be
deceived by any false or misleading representation, by withholding
information, by preventing another from acquiring information, or by any
other conduct, act, or omission that creates, confirms, or perpetuates a
false impression in another, including a false impression as to law, value,
state of mind, or other objective or subjective fact.



   DEFRAUD.  To knowingly obtain, by deception, some benefit for oneself
or another, or to knowingly cause, by deception, some detriment to another.



   DEPRIVE.  To do any of the following:



      (1)   To withhold property of another permanently, or for a
period that appropriates a substantial portion of its value or use, or with
purpose to restore it only upon payment of a reward or other consideration;



      (2)   To dispose of property so as to make it unlikely that
the owner will recover it;



      (3)   To accept, use, or appropriate money, property, or
services, with purpose not to give proper consideration in return for the
money, property, or services, and without reasonable justification or excuse
for not giving proper consideration.



   DISABLED ADULT.  A person who is 18 years of age or older and has some
impairment of body or mind that makes the person unable to work at any
substantially remunerative employment that the person otherwise would be able
to perform and that will, with reasonable probability, continue for a period
of at least 12 months without any present indication of recovery from the
impairment, or who is 18 years of age or older and has been certified as
permanently and totally disabled by an agency of this state or the United
States that has the function of so classifying persons.



   DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.



   ELDERLY PERSON.  A person who is 65 years of age or older.



   ELECTRONIC FUND TRANSFER.  Has the same meaning as in 92 Stat. 3728,
15 U.S.C. 1693a, as amended.



   EMERGENCY PERSONNEL. Means any of the following persons:



      (1)   A peace officer, as defined in R.C. § 2935.01;



      (2)   A member of a fire department or other firefighting
agency of a municipal corporation, township, township fire district, joint
fire district, other political subdivision, or combination of political
subdivisions;



      (3)   A member of a private fire company, as defined in R.C.
§ 9.60, or a volunteer firefighter;



      (4)    A member of a joint ambulance district or joint
emergency medical services district;



      (5)   An emergency medical technician-basic, emergency medical
technician-intermediate, emergency medical technician-paramedic, ambulance
operator, or other member of an emergency medical service that is owned or
operated by a political subdivision or a private entity;



      (6)   The State Fire Marshal, the Chief Deputy State Fire
Marshal, or an assistant state fire marshal;



      (7)   A fire prevention officer of a political subdivision or
an arson, fire, or similar investigator of a political subdivision.



   FEDERALLY-LICENSED FIREARMS DEALER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5502.63.



   FIREARM and DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.  Have the same meaning as in R.C. §
2923.11.



   FORGE.  To fabricate or create, in whole or in part and by any means,
any spurious writing, or to make, execute, alter, complete, reproduce, or
otherwise purport to authenticate any writing, when the writing in fact is
not authenticated by that conduct.



   GAIN ACCESS.  To approach, instruct, communicate with, store data in,
retrieve data from, or otherwise make use of any resources of a computer,
computer system, or computer network, or any cable service or cable system
both as defined in R.C. § 2913.04.



   INFORMATION SERVICE.



      (1)   Subject to division (2) of this definition, the offering
of a capability for generating, acquiring, storing, transforming, processing,
retrieving, utilizing, or making available information via
telecommunications, including but not limited to electronic publishing.



      (2)   INFORMATION SERVICE does not include any use of a
capability of a type described in division (1) of this definition for the
management, control, or operation of a telecommunications system or the
management of a telecommunications service.



   INTERNET. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 341.42.



   MOTOR VEHICLE.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.



   OCCUPIED STRUCTURE. Means any house, building, outbuilding, watercraft,
aircraft, railroad car, truck, trailer, tent, or other structure, vehicle, or
shelter, or any portion thereof, to which any of the following applies:



      (1)   It is maintained as a permanent or temporary dwelling,
even though it is temporarily unoccupied and whether nor not any person is
actually present;



      (2)   At the time, it is occupied as the permanent or
temporary habitation of any person, whether or not any person is actually
present;



      (3)   At the time, it is specially adapted for the overnight
accommodation of any person, whether or not any person is actually present;



      (4)   At the time, any person is present or likely to be
present in it.



   OWNER.  Unless the context requires a different meaning, any person,
other than the actor, who is the owner of, who has possession or control of,
or who has any license or interest in property or services, even though the
ownership, possession, control, license, or interest is unlawful.



   POLICE DOG OR HORSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.321.



   POLITICAL SUBDIVISION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2744.01.



   RENTED PROPERTY.  Personal property in which the right of possession
and use of the property is for a short and possibly indeterminate term in
return for consideration; the rentee generally controls the duration of
possession of the property within any applicable minimum or maximum term; and
the amount of consideration is generally determined by the duration of
possession of the property.



   SERVICES. Includes labor, personal services, professional services,
rental services, public utility services including wireless service as
defined in R.C. § 128.01(F)(1), common carrier services, and food, drink,
transportation, entertainment, and cable television services and, for
purposes of R.C. § 2913.04 or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, includes cable services as defined in that section.



   SLUG.  An object that, by virtue of its size, shape, composition, or
other quality, is capable of being inserted or deposited in a coin machine as
an improper substitute for a genuine coin, bill, or token made for that
purpose.



   STATE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2744.01.



   TELECOMMUNICATION.  The origination, emission, dissemination,
transmission, or reception of data, images, signals, sounds, or other
intelligence or equivalence or intelligence of any nature over any
communications system by any method, including but not limited to a fiber
optic, electronic, magnetic, optical, digital or analog method.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE.  Any instrument, equipment, machine, or
other device that facilitates telecommunication, including but not limited to
a computer, computer network, computer chip, computer circuit, scanner,
telephone, cellular telephone, pager, personal communications device,
transponder, receiver, radio, modem, or device that enables the use of a
modem.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE.  The providing, allowing, facilitating, or
generating of any form of telecommunication through the use of a
telecommunications device over a telecommunications system.



   THEFT OFFENSE.  Any of the following:



      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11,
2911.12, 2911.13, 2911.31, 2911.32, 2913.02, 2913.03, 2913.04, 2913.041,
2913.11, 2913.21, 2913.31, 2913.32, 2913.33, 2913.34, 2913.40, 2913.42,
2913.43, 2913.44, 2913.45, 2913.47, 2913.48, former R.C. § 2913.47 or
2913.48, or R.C. § 2913.51, 2915.05, or 2921.41;



      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance
or law of this or any other state or of the United States substantially
equivalent to any section listed in division (1) of this definition, or a
violation of R.C. § 2913.41, 2913.81 or 2915.06 as it existed prior to July
1, 1996;



      (3)   An offense under an existing or former municipal
ordinance or law of this or any other state or the United States involving
robbery, burglary, breaking and entering, theft, embezzlement, wrongful
conversion, forgery, counterfeiting, deceit, or fraud;



      (4)   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity
in committing any offense under division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.



   UTTER.  To issue, publish, transfer, use, put or send into
circulation, deliver, or display.



   WRITING.  Any computer software, document, letter, memorandum, note,
paper, plate, data, film, or other thing having in or upon it any written,
type-written, or printed matter, and any token, stamp, seal, credit card,
badge, trademark, label, or other symbol of value, right, privilege, license,
or identification.



(R.C. §§ 2909.01, 2913.01)



§ 131.02  ARSON; DETERMINING PROPERTY VALUE OR AMOUNT OF PHYSICAL HARM.



   (A)   No person, by means of fire or explosion, shall knowingly do
any of the following:



      (1)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to
any property of another without the other person’s consent;



      (2)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to
any property of the offender or another, with purpose to defraud;



      (3)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to
the statehouse or a courthouse, school building, or other building or
structure that is owned or controlled by the state, any political
subdivision, or any department, agency, or instrumentality of the state or a
political subdivision, and that is used for public purposes;



      (4)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm,
through the offer or the acceptance of an agreement for hire or other
consideration, to any property of another without the other person’s
consent or to any property of the offender or another with purpose to defraud;



      (5)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to
any park, preserve, wildlands, brush-covered land, cut-over land, forest,
timberland, greenlands, woods, or similar real property that is owned or
controlled by another person, the state, or a political subdivision without
the consent of the other person, the state, or the political subdivision;



      (6)   With purpose to defraud, cause, or create a substantial
risk of, physical harm to any park, preserve, wildlands, brush-covered land,
cut-over land, forest, timberland, greenlands, woods, or similar real
property that is owned or controlled by the offender, another person, the
state, or a political subdivision.



   (B)   No person, by means of fire or explosion, shall knowingly do
any of the following:



      (1)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to
any structure of another that is not an occupied structure;



      (2)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm,
through the offer or the acceptance of an agreement for hire or other
consideration, to any structure of another that is not an occupied structure;



      (3)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to
any structure that is not an occupied structure and that is in or on any
park, preserve, wildlands, brush-covered land, cut-over land, forest,
timberland, greenlands, woods, or similar real property that is owned or
controlled by another person, the state, or a political subdivision.



   (C)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under
division (B)(1) or (B)(2) of this section that the defendant acted with the
consent of the other person.



      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division
(B)(3) of this section that the defendant acted with the consent of the other
person, the state, or the political subdivision.



   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of arson.



      (2)   A violation of division (A)(1) or (B)(1) of this section
is one of the following:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(2)(b)
of this section, a misdemeanor of the first degree;



         (b)   If the value of the property or the amount of the
physical harm involved is $1,000 or more, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



      (3)   A violation of division (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), (A)(5),
(A)(6), (B)(2) or (B)(3) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2909.03)



   (E)   Determining property value or amount of physical harm.



      (1)   The following criteria shall be used in determining the
value of property or amount of physical harm involved in a violation of
division (A)(1) or (B)(1) of this section:



         (a)   If the property is an heirloom, memento,
collector's item, antique, museum piece, manuscript, document, record, or
other thing that is either irreplaceable or is replaceable only on the
expenditure of substantial time, effort, or money, the value of the property
or the amount of physical harm involved is the amount that would compensate
the owner for its loss.



         (b)   If the property is not covered under division
(B)(1)(a) of this section, and the physical harm is such that the property
can be restored substantially to its former condition, the amount of physical
harm involved is the reasonable cost of restoring the property.



         (c)   If the property is not covered under division
(B)(1)(a) of this section, and the physical harm is such that the property
cannot be restored substantially to its former condition, the value of the
property, in the case of personal property, is the cost of replacing the
property with new property of like kind and quality, and in the case of real
property or real property fixtures, is the difference in the fair market
value of the property immediately before and immediately after the offense.



      (2)   As used in this section, FAIR MARKET VALUE has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 2913.61.



      (3)   Prima facie evidence of the value of property, as
provided in R.C. § 2913.61(D), may be used to establish the value of
property pursuant to this section.



(R.C. § 2909.11(B) - (D))  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Aggravated arson, felony provisions, see R.C. § 2909.02



   Arson offender registration, see R.C. §§ 2909.13, 2909.14 and 2909.15



   Convicted arsonist to make restitution to public agency, see R.C. §
2929.28



§ 131.03  CRIMINAL DAMAGING OR ENDANGERING; VEHICULAR VANDALISM.



   (A)   Criminal damaging or endangering.



      (1)   No person shall cause or create a substantial risk of
physical harm to any property of another without the other person's consent:



         (a)   Knowingly, by any means; or



         (b)   Recklessly, by means of fire, explosion, flood,
poison gas, poison, radioactive material, caustic or corrosive material, or
other inherently dangerous agency or substance.



      (2)   Whoever violates this division (A) is guilty of criminal
damaging or endangering, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If violation of
this division (A) creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal
damaging or endangering is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the property
involved in a violation of this division (A) is an aircraft, an aircraft
engine, propeller, appliance, spare part, or any other equipment or implement
used or intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft and if the
violation creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal damaging or
endangering is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the
property involved in a violation of this division (A) is an aircraft, an
aircraft engine, propeller, appliance, spare part, or any other equipment or
implement used or intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft and if
the violation creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person or if
the property involved in a violation of this division (A) is an occupied
aircraft, criminal damaging or endangering is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2909.06)



   (B)   Vehicular vandalism.



      (1)   As used in this division (B):



         ALLEY, STREET, and VEHICLE. Have the same meanings as in
R.C. § 4511.01.



         HIGHWAY. Means any highway as defined in R.C. § 4511.01 or
any lane, road, street, alley, bridge, or overpass.



         VESSEL and WATERS IN THIS STATE. Have the same meanings as
in R.C. § 1546.01.



      (2)   No person shall knowingly, and by any means, drop or
throw any object at, onto, or in the path of any of the following:



         (a)   Any vehicle on a highway;



         (b)   Any boat or vessel on any of the waters in this
state.



      (3)   Whoever violates this division (B) is guilty of
vehicular vandalism. Except as otherwise provided in this division (B)(3),
vehicular vandalism is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation of
this division (B) creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person
or the violation of this division (B) causes serious physical harm to
property, vehicular vandalism is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law. If the violation of this division (B) causes physical harm to any
person or serious physical harm to any person, vehicular vandalism is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2909.09)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Disrupting public services, felony offense, see R.C. § 2909.04



   Railroad grade crossing device vandalism, see R.C. § 2909.101



   Railroad vandalism, see R.C. § 2909.10



   Vandalism, felony offense, see R.C. § 2909.05



§ 131.04  CRIMINAL MISCHIEF.



   (A)   No person shall:



      (1)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface,
damage, destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper with the either of the
following:



         (a)   The property of another;



         (b)   One’s own residential real property with the
purpose to decrease the value of or enjoyment of the residential real
property, if both of the following apply:



            1.   The residential real property is subject to a
mortgage.



            2.   The person has been served with a summons and
complaint in a pending residential mortgage loan foreclosure action relating
to that real property. As used in this division, “pending” includes the
time between judgment entry and confirmation of sale.



      (2)   With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of
property of another, employ a tear gas device, stink bomb, smoke generator,
or other device releasing a substance that is harmful or offensive to persons
exposed, or that tends to cause public alarm;



      (3)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface,
damage, destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper with a bench mark,
triangulation station, boundary marker, or other survey station, monument, or
marker;



      (4)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface,
damage, destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper with any safety device, the
property of another, or the property of the offender when required or placed
for the safety of others, so as to destroy or diminish its effectiveness or
availability for its intended purpose;



      (5)   With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of
the property of another, set a fire on the land of another or place personal
property that has been set on fire on the land of another, which fire or
personal property is outside and apart from any building, other structure, or
personal property that is on that land.



      (6)   Without privilege to do so, and with intent to impair
the functioning of any computer, computer system, computer network, computer
software, or computer program, knowingly do any of the following:



         (a)   In any manner or by any means, including but not
limited to, computer hacking, alter, damage, destroy, or modify a computer,
computer system, computer network, computer software, or computer program or
data contained in a computer, computer system, computer network, computer
software, or computer program;



         (b)   Introduce a computer contaminant into a computer,
computer system, computer network, computer software, or computer program.



   (B)   As used in this section, SAFETY DEVICE means any fire
extinguisher, fire hose, or fire axe, or any fire escape, emergency exit, or
emergency escape equipment, or any life line, life-saving ring, life
preserver, or life boat or raft, or any alarm, light, flare, signal, sign, or
notice intended to warn of danger or emergency, or intended for other safety
purposes, or any guard railing or safety barricade, or any traffic sign or
signal, or any railroad grade crossing sign, signal, or gate, or any first
aid or survival equipment, or any other device, apparatus, or equipment
intended for protecting or preserving the safety of persons or property.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal mischief,
and shall be punished as provided in division (C)(1) or (C)(2) of this
section.



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, criminal
mischief committed in violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4),
or (A)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third degree. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, if the violation of division (A)(1),
(A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5) of this section creates a risk of physical
harm to any person, criminal mischief committed in violation of division
(A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the property involved in the violation of division
(A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5) of this section is an aircraft, an
aircraft engine, propeller, appliance, spare part, fuel, lubricant, hydraulic
fluid, any other equipment, implement, or material used or intended to be
used in the operation of an aircraft, or any cargo carried or intended to be
carried in an aircraft and if the violation creates any risk of physical harm
to any person, or if the aircraft in question is an occupied aircraft,
criminal mischief committed in violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3),
(A)(4), or (A)(5) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, criminal
mischief committed in violation of division (A)(6) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the computer, computer
system, computer network, computer software, computer program, or data
involved in the violation of division (A)(6) of this section or the loss to
the victim resulting from the violation is $1,000 or more, or if the
computer, computer system, computer network, computer software, computer
program, or data involved in the violation of division (A)(6) is used or
intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft and the violation creates
any risk of physical harm to any person, or if the aircraft in question is an
occupied aircraft, criminal mischief committed in violation of division
(A)(6) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.



(R.C. § 2909.07)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 131.05  DAMAGING OR ENDANGERING AIRCRAFT OR AIRPORT OPERATIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



   AIR GUN.  A hand pistol or rifle that propels its projectile by means
of releasing compressed air, carbon dioxide, or other gas.



   AIRPORT OPERATIONAL SURFACE.  Any surface of land or water that is
developed, posted, or marked so as to give an observer reasonable notice that
the surface is designed and developed for the purpose of storing, parking,
taxiing, or operating aircraft, or any surface of land or water that is
actually being used for any of those purposes.



   FIREARM.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2923.11.



   SPRING-OPERATED GUN.  A hand pistol or rifle that propels a projectile
not less than four or more than five millimeters in diameter by means of a
spring.



   (B)   No person shall do either of the following:



      (1)   Knowingly throw an object at, or drop an object upon,
any moving aircraft.



      (2)   Knowingly shoot with a bow and arrow, or knowingly
discharge a firearm, air gun, or spring-operated gun, at or toward any
aircraft.



   (C)   No person shall knowingly or recklessly shoot with a bow and
arrow, or shall knowingly or recklessly discharge a firearm, air gun, or
spring-operated gun, upon or over any airport operational surface.  This
division does not apply to the following:



      (1)   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any other
state or of the United States, or a law enforcement officer, authorized to
discharge firearms and acting within the scope of his or her duties.



      (2)   A person who, with the consent of the owner or operator
of the airport operational surface or the authorized agent of either, is
lawfully engaged in any hunting or sporting activity or is otherwise lawfully
discharging a firearm.



   (D)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
endangering aircraft, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the violation
creates any risk of physical harm to any person, or if the aircraft that is
the subject of the violation is occupied, endangering aircraft is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



   (E)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of
endangering airport operations, a misdemeanor of the second degree.  If the
violation creates a risk of physical harm to any person or substantial risk
of serious harm to any person, endangering airport operations is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.  In addition to any other penalty
or sanction imposed for the violation, the hunting license or permit of a
person who violates division (C) of this section while hunting shall be
suspended or revoked pursuant to R.C. § 1533.68.



(R.C. § 2909.08(A) - (E))  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 131.06  CRIMINAL TRESPASS; AGGRAVATED TRESPASS.



   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall do any of the
following:



      (1)   Knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of
another;



      (2)   Knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of
another, the use of which is lawfully restricted to certain persons,
purposes, modes, or hours, when the offender knows the offender is in
violation of any such restriction or is reckless in that regard;



      (3)   Recklessly enter or remain on the land or premises of
another, as to which notice against unauthorized access or presence is given
by actual communication to the offender, or in a manner prescribed by law, or
by posting in a manner reasonably calculated to come to the attention of
potential intruders, or by fencing or other enclosure manifestly designed to
restrict access;



      (4)   Being on the land or premises of another, negligently
fail or refuse to leave upon being notified by signage posted in a
conspicuous place or otherwise being notified to do so by the owner or
occupant, or the agent or servant of either.



   (B)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that the land
or premises involved was owned, controlled, or in custody of a public agency.



   (C)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that the
offender was authorized to enter or remain on the land or premises involved,
when the authorization was secured by deception.



   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is
guilty of criminal trespass, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



      (2)   Notwithstanding R.C. § 2929.28, if the person, in
committing the violation of this section, used a snowmobile, off-highway
motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle, the court shall impose a fine of two
times the usual amount imposed for the violation.



      (3)   If an offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section, R.C. § 2911.21 or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and the offender, in
committing each violation, used a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or
all-purpose vehicle, the court, in addition to or independent of all other
penalties imposed for the violation, may impound the certificate of
registration of that snowmobile or off-highway motorcycle or the certificate
of registration and license plate of that all-purpose vehicle for not less
than 60 days. In such a case, R.C. § 4519.47 applies.



   (E)   Notwithstanding any provision of the Ohio Revised Code, if the
offender, in committing the violation of this section, used an all-purpose
vehicle, the Clerk of the Court shall pay the fine imposed pursuant to this
section to the State Recreational Vehicle Fund created by R.C. § 4519.11.



   (F)   As used in this section:



      (1)   ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLE, OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLE, and
SNOWMOBILE have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4519.01.



      (2)   LAND or PREMISES includes any land, building, structure,
or place belonging to, controlled by, or in custody of another, and any
separate enclosure or room, or portion thereof.



(R.C. § 2911.21)



   (G)   Aggravated trespass.



      (1)   No person shall enter or remain on the land or premises
of another with purpose to commit on that land or those premises a
misdemeanor, the elements of which involve causing physical harm to another
person or causing another person to believe that the offender will cause
physical harm to him or her.



      (2)   Whoever violates this division (G) is guilty of
aggravated trespass, a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 2911.211)



   (H)   Criminal trespass on a place of public amusement.



      (1)   As used in this division (H), PLACE OF PUBLIC AMUSEMENT
means a stadium, theater, or other facility, whether licensed or not, at
which a live performance, sporting event, or other activity takes place for
entertainment of the public and to which access is made available to the
public, regardless of whether admission is charged.



      (2)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly
enter or remain on any restricted portion of a place of public amusement and,
as a result of that conduct, interrupt or cause the delay of the live
performance, sporting event, or other activity taking place at the place of
public amusement after a printed written notice has been given as provided in
division (H)(4)(a) of this section that the general public is restricted from
access to that restricted portion of the place of public amusement. A
restricted portion of a place of public amusement may include, but is not
limited to, a playing field, an athletic surface, or a stage located at the
place of public amusement.



      (3)   An owner or lessee of a place of public amusement, an
agent of the owner or lessee, or a performer or participant at a place of
public amusement may use reasonable force to restrain and remove a person
from a restricted portion of the place of public amusement if the person
enters or remains on the restricted portion of the place of public amusement
and, as a result of that conduct, interrupts or causes the delay of the live
performance, sporting event, or other activity taking place at the place of
public amusement. This division does not provide immunity from criminal
liability for any use of force beyond reasonable force by an owner or lessee
of a place of public amusement, an agent of either the owner or lessee, or a
performer or participant at a place of public amusement.



      (4)   (a)   Notice has been given that the general public
is restricted from access to a portion of a place of public amusement if a
printed written notice of the restricted access has been conspicuously posted
or exhibited at the entrance to that portion of the place of public
amusement. If a printed written notice is posted or exhibited as described in
this division regarding a portion of a place of public amusement, in addition
to that posting or exhibition, notice that the general public is restricted
from access to that portion of the place of public amusement also may be
given, but is not required to be given, by either of the following means:



            1.   By notifying the person personally, either
orally or in writing, that access to that portion of the place of public
amusement is restricted;



            2.   By broadcasting over the public address
system of the place of public amusement an oral warning that access to that
portion of the place of public amusement is restricted.



         (b)   If notice that the general public is restricted
from access to a portion of a place of public amusement is provided by the
posting or exhibition of a printed written notice as described in division
(H)(4)(a) of this section, the municipality, in a criminal prosecution for a
violation of division (H)(2) of this section, is not required to prove that
the defendant received actual notice that the general public is restricted
from access to a portion of a place of public amusement.



      (5)   (a)   Whoever violates division (H)(2) of this
section is guilty of criminal trespass on a place of public amusement, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.



         (b)   In addition to any jail term, fine, or other
sentence, penalty, or sanction it imposes upon the offender pursuant to
division (H)(5)(a) of this section, a court may require an offender who
violates this section to perform not less than 30 and not more than 120 hours
of supervised community service work.



(R.C. § 2911.23)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Cross-reference:



   Jurisdictional limitation on Mayor regarding violations of division (F)
of this section, see § 33.01(E)



   Violation of protection orders, see § 135.23



§ 131.07  TAMPERING WITH COIN MACHINES.



   (A)   No person, with purpose to commit theft or to defraud, shall
knowingly enter, force an entrance into, tamper with, or insert any part of
an instrument into any coin machine.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of tampering with coin
machines, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the offender previously has
been convicted of a violation of this section or of any theft offense as
defined in R.C. § 2913.01, tampering with coin machines is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2911.32)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 131.08  THEFT.



   (A)   No person, with purpose to deprive the owner of property or
services, shall knowingly obtain or exert control over either the property or
services in any of the following ways:



      (1)   Without the consent of the owner or person authorized to
give consent;



      (2)   Beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of
the owner or person authorized to give consent;



      (3)   By deception;



      (4)   By threat;



      (5)   By intimidation.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of theft.  Except as
otherwise provided in this division, a violation of this section is petty
theft, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If any of the following criteria
are met, then a violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law:



      (1)    If the value of the property or services is $1,000 or
more;



      (2)   If the property stolen is any of the property listed in
R.C. § 2913.71;



      (3)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person,
disabled adult, active duty service member, or spouse of an active duty
service member;



      (4)   If the property stolen is a firearm or dangerous
ordnance;



      (5)   If the property stolen is a motor vehicle;



      (6)   If the property stolen is any dangerous drug, or if the
offender previously has been convicted of a felony drug abuse offense;



      (7)   If the property stolen is a police dog or horse or an
assistance dog and the offender knows or should know that the property stolen
is a police dog or horse or an assistance dog;



      (8)   If the property stolen is anhydrous ammonia; or



      (9)    If the property stolen is a special purchase article as
defined in R.C. § 4737.04 or is a bulk merchandise container as defined in
R.C. § 4737.012.



   (C)   In addition to the penalties described in division (B) of this
section, if the offender committed the violation by causing a motor vehicle
to leave the premises of an establishment at which gasoline is offered for
retail sale without the offender making full payment for gasoline that was
dispensed into the fuel tank of the motor vehicle or into another container,
the court may do one of the following:



      (1)   Unless division (C)(2) of this section applies, suspend
for not more than six months the offenders driver’s license, probationary
driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, or nonresident operating privilege;



      (2)   If the offender’s driver’s license, probationary
driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, or nonresident operating privilege has previously been suspended
pursuant to division (C)(1) of this section, or any other substantially
equivalent state or local law, impose a class seven suspension of the
offender’s license, permit, or privilege from the range specified in R.C.
§ 4510.02(A)(7), provided that the suspension shall be at least six months ;



      (3)   The court, in lieu of suspending the offender’s
driver’s or commercial driver’s license, probationary driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, or nonresident operating privilege pursuant to
division (C)(1) or (C)(2) of this section, instead may require the offender
to perform community service for a number of hours determined by the court.



   (D)   In addition to the penalties described in division (B) of this
section, if the offender committed the violation by stealing rented property
or rental services, the court may order that the offender make restitution
pursuant to R.C. § 2929.18 or R.C. § 2929.28. Restitution may include, but
is not limited to, the cost of repairing or replacing the stolen property, or
the cost of repairing the stolen property and any loss of revenue resulting
from deprivation of the property due to theft of rental services that is less
than or equal to the actual value of the property at the time it was rented.
Evidence of intent to commit theft of rented property or rental services
shall be determined pursuant to the provisions of R.C. § 2913.72.



   (E)   The sentencing court that suspends an offender’s license,
permit, or nonresident operating privilege under division (C) of this section
may grant the offender limited driving privileges during the period of the
suspension in accordance with R.C. Chapter 4510.



(R.C. § 2913.02)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Felony theft provisions, see R.C. § 2913.02(B)



§ 131.09  UNAUTHORIZED USE OF A VEHICLE.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly use or operate an aircraft, motor
vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat, or other motor-propelled vehicle without the
consent of the owner or person authorized to give consent.



   (B)   No person shall knowingly use or operate an aircraft, motor
vehicle, motorboat, or other motor- propelled vehicle without the consent of
the owner or person authorized to give consent, and either remove it from
this state, or keep possession of it for more than 48 hours.



   (C)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this
section:



      (1)   At the time of the alleged offense, the actor, though
mistaken, reasonably believed that he or she was authorized to use or operate
the property.



      (2)   At the time of the alleged offense, the actor reasonably
believed that the owner or person empowered to give consent would authorize
the actor to use or operate the property.



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unauthorized use of
a vehicle.



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (D)(1), a
violation of division (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.  If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled adult
and if the victim incurs a loss as a result of the violation, a violation of
division (A) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.



      (2)   A violation of division (B) of this section is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2913.03)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Theft offense involving a motor vehicle, offender to pay towing and
storage fees, see R.C. § 2913.82



§ 131.10  UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PROPERTY, INCLUDING TELECOMMUNICATION
PROPERTY AND COMPUTERS; POSSESSION OF MUNICIPAL PROPERTY.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly use or operate the property of
another without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give consent.



   (B)    Except as permitted under R.C. § 5503.101, no person, in any
manner and by any means, including but not limited to computer hacking, shall
knowingly gain access to, attempt to gain access to, or cause access to be
gained to any computer, computer system, computer network, cable service,
cable system, telecommunications device, telecommunications service, or
information service without the consent of, or beyond the scope of the
express or implied consent of, the owner of the computer, computer system,
computer network, cable service, cable system, telecommunications device,
telecommunications service, or information service or other person authorized
to give consent.



   (C)   No person shall knowingly gain access to, attempt to gain
access to, cause access to be granted to, or disseminate information gained
from access to the law enforcement automated database system created pursuant
to R.C. § 5503.10 without the consent of, or beyond the scope of the express
or implied consent of, the chair of the Law Enforcement Automated Data System
Steering Committee.



   (D)   No person shall knowingly gain access to, attempt to gain
access to, cause access to be granted to, or disseminate information gained
from access to the Ohio law enforcement gateway established and operated
pursuant to R.C. § 109.57(C)(1) without the consent of, or beyond the scope
of the express or implied consent of, the Superintendent of the Bureau of
Criminal Identification and Investigation.



   (E)   The affirmative defenses contained in R.C. § 2913.03(C) are
affirmative defenses to a charge under this section.



   (F)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of property.  Except as otherwise provided in this
division, unauthorized use of property is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



      (1)   If unauthorized use of property is committed for the
purpose of devising or executing a scheme to defraud or to obtain property or
services, unauthorized use of property is whichever of the following is
applicable:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided below, unauthorized
use of property is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



         (b)    If the value of the property or services or the
loss to the victim is $1,000 or more, it is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



      (2)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or
disabled adult, unauthorized use of property is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.



   (G)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of computer, cable, or telecommunication property, a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



   (H)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of the law enforcement automated database system, a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



   (I)   Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of the Ohio law enforcement gateway, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.



   (J)   As used in this section:



      CABLE OPERATOR means any person or group of persons that does
either of the following:



         (a)   Provides cable service over a cable system and
directly through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in that
cable system;



         (b)   Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through
any arrangement, the management and operation of a cable system.



      CABLE SERVICE means any of the following:



         (a)   The one-way transmission to subscribers of video
programming or of information that a cable operator makes available to all
subscribers generally;



         (b)   Subscriber interaction, if any, that is required
for the selection or use of video programming or of information that a cable
operator makes available to all subscribers generally, both as described in
division (a) of this definition;



         (c)   Any cable television service.



      CABLE SYSTEM means any facility, consisting of a set of closed
transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control
equipment that is designed to provide cable service that includes video
programming and that is provided to multiple subscribers within a
community.  CABLE SYSTEM does not include any of the following:



         (a)   Any facility that serves only to retransmit the
television signals of one or more television broadcast stations;



         (b)   Any facility that serves subscribers without using
any public right-of-way;



         (c)   Any facility of a common carrier that, under 47
U.S.C. 522(7)(c), is excluded from the term “cable system” as defined in
47 U.S.C. 522(7);



         (d)   Any open video system that complies with 47 U.S.C.
573;



         (e)   Any facility of any electric utility used solely
for operating its electric utility system.



(R.C. § 2913.04)



   (K)   Possession of municipal property.



      (1)   No person shall, without being authorized, have in his
or her control or possession any equipment, tools, implements or other
property belonging to the municipality.



(R.C. § 5589.12)



      (2)   Whoever violates this division (K) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 5589.99(B))  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Telecommunications: fraud and unlawful use of a device, felony
offenses, see R.C. §§ 2913.05 and 2913.06



§ 131.11  PASSING BAD CHECKS.



   (A)   As used in this section:



      CHECK. Includes any form of debit from a demand deposit account,
including but not limited to any of the following:



         (a)   A check, bill of exchange, draft, order of
withdrawal, or similar negotiable or non- negotiable instrument;



         (b)   An electronic check, electronic transaction, debit
card transaction, check card transaction, substitute check, web check, or any
form of automated clearing house transaction.



      ISSUE A CHECK. Causing any form of debit from a demand deposit
account.



   (B)   No person, with purpose to defraud, shall issue or transfer or
cause to be issued or transferred a check or other negotiable instrument,
knowing that it will be dishonored or knowing that a person has ordered or
will order stop payment on the check or other negotiable instrument.



   (C)   For purposes of this section, a person who issues or transfers
a check or other negotiable instrument is presumed to know that it will be
dishonored if either of the following occurs:



      (1)   The drawer has no account with the drawee at the time of
issue or the stated date, whichever is later.



      (2)   The check or other negotiable instrument was properly
refused payment for insufficient funds upon presentment within 30 days after
issue or the stated date, whichever is later, and the liability of the
drawer, indorser, or any party who may be liable thereon is not discharged by
payment or satisfaction within ten days after receiving notice of dishonor.



   (D)   For purposes of this section, a person who issues or transfers
a check, bill of exchange, or other draft is presumed to have the purpose to
defraud if the drawer fails to comply with R.C. § 1349.16 by doing any of
the following when opening a checking account intended for personal, family,
or household purposes at a financial institution:



      (1)   Falsely stating that he or she has not been issued a
valid driver's or commercial driver's license or identification card issued
under R.C. § 4507.50;



      (2)   Furnishing the license or card, or another
identification document that contains false information;



      (3)   Making a false statement with respect to the drawer's
current address or any additional relevant information reasonably required by
the financial institution.



   (E)   In determining the value of the payment for purposes of
division (F) of this section, the court may aggregate all checks and other
negotiable instruments that the offender issued or transferred or caused to
be issued or transferred in violation of division (B) of this section within
a period of 180 consecutive days.



   (F)    Whoever violates this section is guilty of passing bad
checks. Except as otherwise provided in this division, passing bad checks is
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the check or checks or other negotiable
instrument or instruments are issued or transferred to a single vendor or
single other person for the payment of $1,000 or more, or if the check or
checks or other negotiable instrument or instruments are issued or
transferred to multiple vendors or persons for the payment of $1,500 or more,
passing bad checks is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2913.11)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 131.12  MISUSE OF CREDIT CARDS.



   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Practice deception for the purpose of procuring the
issuance of a credit card, when a credit card is issued in actual reliance
thereon;



      (2)    Knowingly buy or sell a credit card from or to a person
other than the issuer;



      (3)   As an officer, employee, or appointee of a political
subdivision or as a public servant as defined under R.C. § 2921.01,
knowingly misuse a credit card account held by a political subdivision.



   (B)   No person, with purpose to defraud, shall do any of the
following:



      (1)   Obtain control over a credit card as security for a debt;



      (2)   Obtain property or services by the use of a credit card,
in one or more transactions, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe
that the card has expired or been revoked, or was obtained, is retained, or
is being used in violation of law;



      (3)   Furnish property or services upon presentation of a
credit card, knowing that the card is being used in violation of law;



      (4)   Represent or cause to be represented to the issuer of a
credit card that property or services have been furnished, knowing that the
representation is false.



   (C)   No person, with purpose to violate this section, shall
receive, possess, control, or dispose of a credit card.



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of misuse of credit
cards.



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3) of this
section, a violation of division (A), (B)(1), or (C) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (2)    Except as otherwise provided in this division or
division (D)(3) of this section, a violation of division (B)(2), (3), or (4)
of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the cumulative
retail value of the property and services involved in one or more violations
of division (B)(2), (3), or (4) of this section which violations involve one
or more credit card accounts and occur within a period of 90 consecutive days
commencing on the date of the first violation, is $1,000 or more, misuse of
credit cards is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (3)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or
disabled adult, and if the offense involves a violation of division (B)(1) or
(B)(2) of this section, misuse of credit cards is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2913.21)



§ 131.13  MAKING OR USING SLUGS.



   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Insert or deposit a slug in a coin machine, with purpose
to defraud;



      (2)   Make, possess, or dispose of a slug, with purpose of
enabling another to defraud by inserting or depositing it in a coin machine.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making or using
slugs, a misdemeanor of the second degree.



(R.C. § 2913.33)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 131.14  PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF PURPOSE TO DEFRAUD.



   In a prosecution of a person for a theft offense that alleges that the
person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she was facilitating a
fraud, hired or rented an aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat,
sailboat, camper, trailer, horse, buggy, or other property or equipment, kept
or operated any of the same that has been hired or rented, or engaged
accommodations at a hotel, motel, inn, campground, or other hostelry, it is
prima facie evidence of purpose to defraud if the person did any of the
following:



   (A)   Used deception to induce the rental agency to furnish the
person with the aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat, sailboat,
camper, trailer, horse, buggy, or other property or equipment, or used
deception to induce the hostelry to furnish the person with accommodations;



   (B)   Hired or rented any aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle,
motorboat, sailboat, camper, trailer, horse, buggy, or other property or
equipment, or engaged accommodations, knowing that he or she is without
sufficient means to pay the hire or rental;



   (C)   Absconded without paying the hire or rental;



   (D)   Knowingly failed to pay the hire or rental as required by the
contract of hire or rental, without reasonable excuse for the failure;



   (E)   Knowingly failed to return hired or rented property as
required by the contract of hire or rental, without reasonable excuse for the
failure.



(R.C. § 2913.41)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 131.15  TAMPERING WITH RECORDS.



   (A)   No person, knowing that he or she has no privilege to do so,
and with purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she is facilitating a
fraud, shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Falsify, destroy, remove, conceal, alter, deface, or
mutilate any writing, computer software, data, or record;



      (2)   Utter any writing or record, knowing it to have been
tampered with as provided in division (A)(1) of this section.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of tampering with
records.



      (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(3) of this section,
if the offense does not involve data or computer software, tampering with
records is whichever of the following is applicable:



         (a)   If division (B)(1)(b) of this section does not
apply, it is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



         (b)   If the writing or record is a will unrevoked at
the time of the offense, it is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.



      (2)   Except as provided in division (B)(3) of this section,
if the offense involves a violation of division (A) of this section involving
data or computer software, tampering with records is whichever of the
following is applicable:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2)(b)
of this section, it is a misdemeanor of the first degree;



         (b)   If the value of the data or computer software
involved in the offense or the loss to the victim is $1,000 or more or if the
offense is committed for the purpose of devising or executing a scheme to
defraud or to obtain property or services and the value of the property or
services or the loss to the victim is $7,500 or more, it is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (3)   If the writing, data, computer software, or record is
kept by or belongs to a local, state, or federal governmental entity, it is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2913.42)



§ 131.16  SECURING WRITINGS BY DECEPTION.



   (A)   No person, by deception, shall cause another to execute any
writing that disposes of or encumbers property, or by which a pecuniary
obligation is incurred.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of securing writings
by deception.  Except as otherwise provided in this division, securing
writings by deception is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the value of
the property or the obligation involved is $1,000 or more, securing writings
by deception is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate to state law. If
the victim of the offense is an elderly person, disabled adult, active duty
service member, or spouse of an active duty service member, securing writings
by deception is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2913.43)



§ 131.17  DEFRAUDING CREDITORS.



   (A)   No person, with purpose to defraud one or more of his or her
creditors, shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Remove, conceal, destroy, encumber, convey, or otherwise
deal with any of his or her property;



      (2)   Misrepresent or refuse to disclose to a fiduciary
appointed to administer or manage his or her affairs or estate, the
existence, amount, or location of any of his or her property, or any other
information regarding the property which he or she is legally required to
furnish to the fiduciary.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of defrauding
creditors.  Except as otherwise provided in this division, defrauding
creditors is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the value of the
property involved is $500 or more, defrauding creditors is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2913.45)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 131.18  RECEIVING STOLEN PROPERTY.



   (A)   No person shall receive, retain, or dispose of property of
another knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the property has
been obtained through commission of a theft offense.



   (B)   It is not a defense to a charge of receiving stolen property
in violation of this section that the property was obtained by means other
than through the commission of a theft offense if the property was explicitly
represented to the accused person as being obtained through the commission of
a theft offense.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of receiving stolen
property.  Except as otherwise provided in this division, receiving stolen
property is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If any of the following
criteria are met, then a violation of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law:



      (1)    The value of the property involved is $1,000 or more;



      (2)   The property involved is any of the property listed in
R.C. § 2913.71;



      (3)   The property involved is a firearm or dangerous
ordnance, as defined in R.C. § 2923.11;



      (4)   The property involved is a motor vehicle as defined in
R.C. § 4501.01;



      (5)   The property involved is any dangerous drug, as defined
in R.C. § 4729.01; or



      (6)   The property involved in violation of this section is a
special purchase article as defined in R.C. § 4737.04 or a bulk merchandise
container as defined in R.C. § 4737.012.



(R.C. § 2913.51)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 131.19  VALUE OF STOLEN PROPERTY.



   (A)   If more than one item of property or services is involved in a
theft offense or in a violation of R.C. § 1716.14(A) involving a victim who
is an elderly person or disabled adult, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the value of the property or services involved for the
purpose of determining the value as required by R.C. § 2913.61(A) is the
aggregate value of all property or services involved in the offense.



   (B)   (1)   When a series of offenses under R.C. § 2913.02, or a
series of violations of, attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to
violate, or complicity in violations of R.C. § 1716.14(A), R.C. § 2913.02,
2913.03, or 2913.04, R.C. § 2913.21(B)(1) or (B)(2), or R.C. § 2913.31 or
2913.43 involving a victim who is an elderly person or disabled adult, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, is
committed by the offender in the offender's same employment, capacity, or
relationship to another, all of those offenses shall be tried as a single
offense.  When a series of offenses under R.C. § 2913.02, or a series of
violations of, attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate, or
complicity in violations of R.C. § 2913.02 or 2913.43 involving a victim who
is an active duty service member or spouse of an active duty service member,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these offenses,
is committed by the offender in the offender’s same employment, capacity,
or relationship to another, all of those offenses shall be tried as a single
offense. The value of the property or services involved in the series of
offenses for the purpose of determining the value as required by R.C. §
2913.61(A) is the aggregate value of all property and services involved in
all offenses in the series.



      (2)   If an offender commits a series of offenses under R.C.
§ 2913.02 that involves a common course of conduct to defraud multiple
victims, all of the offenses may be tried as a single offense.  If an
offender is being tried for the commission of a series of violations of,
attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate, or complicity in
violations of R.C. § 1716.14(A), R.C. § 2913.02, 2913.03, or 2913.04, R.C.
§ 2913.21(B)(1) or (B)(2), or R.C. § 2913.31 or 2913.43, whether committed
against one victim or more than one victim, involving a victim who is an
elderly person or disabled adult, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance to any of these offenses,  pursuant to a scheme or course of
conduct, all of those offenses may be tried as a single offense.  If an
offender is being tried for the commission of a series of violations of,
attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate, or complicity in
violations of R.C. § 2913.02 or 2913.43, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, whether committed against one
victim or more than one victim, involving a victim who is an active duty
service member or spouse of an active duty service member pursuant to a
scheme or course of conduct, all of those offenses may be tried as a single
offense. If the offenses are tried as a single offense, the value of the
property or services involved for the purpose of determining the value as
required by R.C. § 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value of all property and
services involved in all of the offenses in the course of conduct.



      (3)    When a series of two or more offenses under R.C. §
2913.40, 2913.48, or 2921.41 is committed by the offender in the offender’s
same employment, capacity, or relationship to another, all of those offenses
may be tried as a single offense.  If the offenses are tried as a single
offense, the value of the property or services involved for the purpose of
determining the value as required by R.C. § 2913.61(A) is the aggregate
value of all property and services involved in all of the offenses in the
series of two or more offenses.



      (4)   In prosecuting a single offense under division (B)(1),
(B)(2) or (B)(3) of this section, it is not necessary to separately allege
and prove each offense in the series.  Rather, it is sufficient to allege
and prove that the offender, within a given span of time, committed one or
more theft offenses or violations of R.C. § 2913.40, 2913.48, or 2921.41 in
the offender's same employment, capacity, or relationship to another as
described in division (B)(1) or (B)(3) of this section, or committed one or
more theft offenses that involve a common course of conduct to defraud
multiple victims or a scheme or course of conduct as described in division
(B)(2) of this section. While it is not necessary to separately allege and
prove each offense in the series in order to prosecute a single offense under
division (B)(1), (B)(2), or (B)(3) of this section, it remains necessary in
prosecuting them as a single offense to prove the aggregate value of the
property or services in order to meet the requisite statutory offense level
sought by the prosecution.



   (C)   The following criteria shall be used in determining the value
of property or services involved in a theft offense:



      (1)   The value of an heirloom, memento, collector's item,
antique, museum piece, manuscript, document, record, or other thing that has
intrinsic worth to its owner and that either is irreplaceable or is
replaceable only on the expenditure of substantial time, effort, or money, is
the amount which would compensate the owner for its loss.



      (2)   The value of personal effects and household goods, and
of materials, supplies, equipment, and fixtures used in the profession,
business, trade, occupation, or avocation of its owner, which property is not
covered under division (C)(1) of this section, and which retains substantial
utility for its purpose regardless of its age or condition, is the cost of
replacing such property with new property of like kind and quality.



      (3)   The value of any real or personal property that is not
covered under division (C)(1) or (2) of this section, and the value of
services, is the fair market value of the property or services.  As used in
this section, FAIR MARKET VALUE is the money consideration which a buyer
would give and a seller would accept for property or services, assuming that
the buyer is willing to buy and the seller is willing to sell, that both are
fully informed as to all facts material to the transaction, and that neither
is under any compulsion to act.



   (D)   Without limitation on the evidence which may be used to
establish the value of property or services involved in a theft offense:



      (1)   When the property involved is personal property held for
sale at wholesale or retail, the price at which the property was held for
sale is prima facie evidence of its value.



      (2)   When the property involved is a security or commodity
traded on an exchange, the closing price or, if there is no closing price,
the asked price, given in the latest marked quotation prior to the offense,
is prima facie evidence of the value of the security or commodity.



      (3)   When the property involved is livestock, poultry, or raw
agricultural products for which a local market price is available, the latest
local market price prior to the offense is prima facie evidence of the value
of the livestock, poultry, or products.



      (4)   When the property involved is a negotiable instrument,
the face value is prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument.



      (5)   When the property involved is a warehouse receipt, bill
of lading, pawn ticket, claim check, or other instrument entitling the holder
or bearer to receive property, the face value or, if there is no face value,
the value of the property covered by the instrument less any payment
necessary to receive the property, is prima facie evidence of the value of
the instrument.



      (6)   When the property involved is a ticket of admission,
ticket for transportation, coupon, token, or other instrument entitling the
holder or bearer to receive property or services, the face value or, if there
is no face value, the value of the property or services which may be received
by the instrument is prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument.



      (7)   When the services involved are gas, electricity, water,
telephone, transportation, shipping, or other services for which the rate is
established by law, the duly established rate is prima facie evidence of the
value of the services.



      (8)   When the services involved are services for which the
rate is not established by law, and the offender has been notified prior to
the offense of the rate for the services, either in writing, or orally, or by
posting in a manner reasonably calculated to come to the attention of
potential offenders, the rate contained in the notice is prima facie evidence
of the value of the services.



(R.C. § 2913.61(B) - (E))



§ 131.20  DEGREE OF OFFENSE WHEN CERTAIN PROPERTY INVOLVED.



   Regardless of the value of the property involved, and regardless of
whether the offender previously has been convicted of a theft offense, a
violation of § 131.08 or § 131.18 is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if the property involved is any of the following:



   (A)   A credit card;



   (B)   A printed form for a check or other negotiable instrument,
that on its face identifies the drawer or maker for whose use it is designed
or identifies the account on which it is to be drawn, and that has not been
executed by the drawer or maker or on which the amount is blank;



   (C)   A motor vehicle identification license plate as prescribed by
R.C. § 4503.22, a temporary license placard or windshield sticker as
prescribed by R.C. § 4503.182, or any comparable license plate, placard, or
sticker as prescribed by the applicable law of another state or the United
States;



   (D)   A blank form for a certificate of title or a manufacturer's or
importer's certificate to a motor vehicle, as prescribed by R.C. § 4505.07;



   (E)   A blank form for any license listed in R.C. § 4507.01.



(R.C. § 2913.71)



§ 131.21  INJURING VINES, BUSHES, TREES, OR CROPS.



   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall recklessly cut
down, destroy, girdle, or otherwise injure a vine, bush, shrub, sapling,
tree, or crop standing or growing on the land of another or upon public land.



   (B)   In addition to the penalty provided in division (C) of this
section, whoever violates this section is liable in treble damages for the
injury caused.



(R.C. § 901.51)



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 901.99(A))  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 131.22  DETENTION AND ARREST OF SHOPLIFTERS AND THOSE COMMITTING MOTION
PICTURE PIRACY; PROTECTION OF INSTITUTIONAL PROPERTY.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply.



      ARCHIVAL INSTITUTION.  Any public or private building,
structure, or shelter in which are stored historical documents, devices,
records, manuscripts, or items of public interest, which historical materials
are stored to preserve the materials or the information in the materials, to
disseminate the information contained in the materials, or to make the
materials available for public inspection or for inspection by certain
persons who have a particular interest in, use for, or knowledge concerning
the materials.



      AUDIOVISUAL RECORDING FUNCTION and FACILITY. Have the same
meaning as in R.C. § 2913.07.



      MUSEUM.  Any public or private nonprofit institution that is
permanently organized for primarily educational or aesthetic purposes, owns
or borrows objects or items of public interest, and cares for and exhibits to
the public the objects or items.



      PRETRIAL DIVERSION PROGRAM. Means a rehabilitative, educational
program designed to reduce recidivism and promote personal responsibility
that is at least four hours in length and that has been approved by any court
in this state.



   (B)   A merchant, or an employee or agent of a merchant, who has
probable cause to believe that things offered for sale by a mercantile
establishment have been unlawfully taken by a person, may, for the purposes
set forth in division (D) below, detain the person in a reasonable manner for
a reasonable length of time within the mercantile establishment or its
immediate vicinity.



   (C)   Any officer, employee, or agent of a library, museum, or
archival institution may, for the purposes set forth in division (D) below or
for the purpose of conducting a reasonable investigation of a belief that the
person has acted in a manner described in divisions (C)(1) and (2) below,
detain a person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of time
within, or in the immediate vicinity of, the library, museum, or archival
institution, if the officer, employee, or agent has probable cause to believe
that the person has:



      (1)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly moved, defaced,
damaged, destroyed, or otherwise improperly tampered with property owned by
or in the custody of the library, museum, or archival institution; or



      (2)   With purpose to deprive the library, museum, or archival
institution of property owned by it or in its custody, knowingly obtained or
exerted control over the property without the consent of the owner or person
authorized to give consent, beyond the scope of the express or implied
consent of the owner or person authorized to give consent, by deception, or
by threat.



   (D)   An officer, agent, or employee of a library, museum, or
archival institution pursuant to division (C) above or a merchant or an
employee or agent of a merchant pursuant to division (B) above may detain
another person for any of the following purposes:



      (1)   To recover the property that is the subject of the
unlawful taking, criminal mischief, or theft;



      (2)   To cause an arrest to be made by a peace officer;



      (3)   To obtain a warrant of arrest ;



      (4)   To offer the person, if the person is suspected of the
unlawful taking, criminal mischief, or theft and notwithstanding any other
provision of this Code or the Ohio Revised Code, an opportunity to complete a
pretrial diversion program and to inform the person of the other legal
remedies available to the library, museum, archival institution, or merchant.



   (E)   The owner or lessee of a facility in which a motion picture is
being shown, or the owner’s or lessee’s employee or agent, who has
probable cause to believe that a person is or has been operating an
audiovisual recording function of a device in violation of R.C. § 2917.07
may, for the purpose of causing an arrest to be made by a peace officer or of
obtaining an arrest warrant, detain the person in a reasonable manner for a
reasonable length of time within the facility or its immediate vicinity.



   (F)   The officer, agent, or employee of the library, museum, or
archival institution, the merchant or an employee or agent of a merchant, or
the owner, lessee, employee, or agent of the facility acting under divisions
(B), (C) or (D) above shall not search the person detained, search or seize
any property belonging to the person detained without the person's consent,
or use undue restraint upon the person detained.



   (G)   Any peace officer may arrest without a warrant any person that
the officer has probable cause to believe has committed any act described in
divisions (C)(1) or (2) above, that the officer has probable cause to believe
has committed an unlawful taking in a mercantile establishment, or that the
officer has reasonable cause to believe has committed an act prohibited by
R.C. § 2913.07. An arrest under this division shall be made within a
reasonable time after the commission of the act or unlawful taking.



(R.C. § 2935.041)



Statutory reference:



   Arrest without a warrant generally, see R.C. § 2935.03



   Probable cause, see R.C. § 2933.22



§ 131.23  INSURANCE FRAUD; WORKERS' COMPENSATION FRAUD; MEDICAID FRAUD.



   (A)   Insurance fraud.



      (1)   For the purpose of this division (A), the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



         DATA.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01 and
additionally includes any other representation of information, knowledge,
facts, concepts, or instructions that are being or have been prepared in a
formalized manner.



         DECEPTIVE.  Means that a statement, in whole or in part,
would cause another to be deceived because it contains a misleading
representation, withholds information, prevents the acquisition of
information, or by any other conduct, act, or omission creates, confirms, or
perpetuates a false impression, including, but not limited to, a false
impression as to law, value, state of mind, or other objective or subjective
fact.



         INSURER.  Means any person that is authorized to engage in
the business of insurance in this state under R.C. Title 39, the Ohio Fair
Plan Underwriting Association created under R.C. § 3929.43, any health
insuring corporation, and any legal entity that is self-insured and provides
benefits to its employees or members.



         POLICY.  Means a policy, certificate, contract, or plan
that is issued by an insurer.



         STATEMENT.  Includes but is not limited to any notice,
letter, or memorandum; proof of loss; bill of lading; receipt for payment;
invoice, account, or other financial statement; estimate of property damage;
bill for services; diagnosis or prognosis; prescription; hospital, medical,
or dental chart or other record; x-ray, photograph, videotape, or movie film;
test result; other evidence of loss, injury, or expense; computer-generated
document; and data in any form.



      (2)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the
person is facilitating a fraud, shall do either of the following:



         (a)   Present to, or cause to be presented to, an
insurer any written or oral statement that is part of, or in support of, an
application for insurance, a claim for payment pursuant to a policy, or a
claim for any other benefit pursuant to a policy, knowing that the statement,
or any part of the statement, is false or deceptive;



         (b)   Assist, aid, abet, solicit, procure, or conspire
with another to prepare or make any written or oral statement that is
intended to be presented to an insurer as part of, or in support of, an
application for insurance, a claim for payment pursuant to a policy, or a
claim for any other benefit pursuant to a policy, knowing that the statement,
or any part of the statement, is false or deceptive.



      (3)    Whoever violates this division (A) is guilty of
insurance fraud.  Except as otherwise provided in this division, insurance
fraud is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the amount of the claim that
is false or deceptive is $1,000 or more, insurance fraud is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (4)   This division (A) shall not be construed to abrogate,
waive, or modify R.C. § 2317.02(A).



(R.C. § 2913.47)



   (B)   Workers' compensation fraud.



      (1)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the
person is facilitating a fraud shall do any of the following:



         (a)   Receive workers' compensation benefits to which
the person is not entitled;



         (b)   Make or present or cause to be made or presented a
false or misleading statement with the purpose to secure payment for goods or
services rendered under R.C. Chapter 4121, 4123, 4127, or 4131 or to secure
workers' compensation benefits;



         (c)   Alter, falsify, destroy, conceal, or remove any
record or document that is necessary to fully establish the validity of any
claim filed with, or necessary to establish the nature and validity of all
goods and services for which reimbursement or payment was received or is
requested from the Bureau of Workers' Compensation, or a self-insuring
employer under R.C. Chapter 4121, 4123, 4127, or 4131;



         (d)    Enter into an agreement or conspiracy to defraud
the Bureau of Workers' Compensation or a self-insuring employer by making or
presenting or causing to be made or presented a false claim for workers'
compensation benefits;



         (e)   Make or present or cause to be made or presented a
false statement concerning manual codes, classification or employees,
payroll, paid compensation, or number of personnel, when information of that
nature is necessary to determine the actual workers’ compensation premium
or assessment owed to the Bureau by an employer;



         (f)   Alter, forge, or create a workers’ compensation
certificate or falsely show current or correct workers’ compensation
coverage;



         (g)   Fail to secure or maintain workers’ compensation
coverage as required by R.C. Chapter 4123 with the intent to defraud the
Bureau of Workers’ Compensation.



      (2)    Whoever violates this division (B) is guilty of
workers' compensation fraud. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
workers' compensation fraud is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
value of premiums and assessments unpaid pursuant to actions described in
divisions (B)(1)(e), (B)(1)(f), or (B)(1)(g) of this section, or goods,
services, property, or money stolen is $1,000 or more, workers' compensation
fraud is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (3)   Upon application of the governmental body that conducted
the investigation and prosecution of a violation of this division (B), the
court shall order the person who is convicted of the violation to pay the
governmental body its costs of investigating and prosecuting the case. 
These costs are in addition to any other costs or penalty provided under
federal, state or local law.



      (4)   The remedies and penalties provided in this division (B)
are not exclusive remedies and penalties and do not preclude the use of any
other criminal or civil remedy or penalty for any act that is in violation of
this division (B).



      (5)   For the purpose of this division (B), the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



         CLAIM.  Means any attempt to cause the Bureau of Workers'
Compensation, an independent third party with whom the administrator or an
employer contracts under R.C. § 4121.44, or a self-insuring employer to make
payment or reimbursement for workers' compensation benefits.



         EMPLOYER, EMPLOYEE, and SELF-INSURING EMPLOYER.  Have the
same meanings as in R.C. § 4123.01.



         EMPLOYMENT.  Means participating in any trade, occupation,
business, service, or profession for substantial gainful remuneration.



         FALSE.  Means wholly or partially untrue or deceptive.



         GOODS.  Includes but is not limited to medical supplies,
appliances, rehabilitative equipment, and any other apparatus or furnishing
provided or used in the care, treatment, or rehabilitation of a claimant for
workers' compensation benefits.



         RECORDS.  Means any medical, professional, financial, or
business record relating to the treatment or care of any person, to goods or
services provided to any person, or to rates paid for goods or services
provided to any person, or any record that the administrator of workers'
compensation requires pursuant to rule.



         REMUNERATION.  Includes but is not limited to wages,
commissions, rebates, and any other reward or consideration.



         SERVICES. Includes but is not limited to any service
provided by any health care provider to a claimant for workers' compensation
benefits and any and all services provided by the Bureau as part of
workers’ compensation insurance coverage.



         STATEMENT. Includes but is not limited to any oral,
written, electronic, electronic impulse, or magnetic communication notice,
letter, memorandum, receipt for payment, invoice, account, financial
statement, or bill for services; a diagnosis, prognosis, prescription,
hospital, medical, or dental chart or other record; and a computer generated
document.



         WORKERS' COMPENSATION BENEFITS.  Means any compensation or
benefits payable under R.C. Chapter 4121, 4123, 4127, or 4131.



(R.C. § 2913.48)



   (C)   Medicaid fraud.



      (1)   No person shall knowingly make or cause to be made a
false or misleading statement or representation for use in obtaining
reimbursement from the Medicaid program.



      (2)   No person, with purpose to commit fraud or knowing that
the person is facilitating a fraud, shall do either of the following:



         (a)   Contrary to the terms of the person’s provider
agreement, charge, solicit, accept or receive for goods or services that the
person provides under the Medicaid program any property, money or other
consideration in addition to the amount of reimbursement under the Medicaid
program and the person’s provider agreement for the goods or services and
any cost-sharing expenses authorized by R.C. § 5162.20 or rules adopted by
the Medicaid Director regarding the Medicaid program.



         (b)   Solicit, offer or receive any remuneration, other
than any cost-sharing expenses authorized by R.C. § 5162.20 or rules adopted
by the Medicaid Director regarding the Medicaid program, in cash or in kind,
including but not limited to a kickback or rebate, in connection with the
furnishing of goods or services for which whole or partial reimbursement is
or may be made under the Medicaid program.



      (3)   No person, having submitted a claim for or provided
goods or services under the Medicaid program, shall do either of the
following for a period of at least six years after a reimbursement pursuant
to that claim, or a reimbursement for those goods or services, is received
under the Medicaid program:



         (a)   Knowingly alter, falsify, destroy, conceal or
remove any records that are necessary to fully disclose the nature of all
goods or services for which the claim was submitted, or for which
reimbursement was received, by the person; or



         (b)   Knowingly alter, falsify, destroy, conceal or
remove any records that are necessary to disclose fully all income and
expenditures upon which rates of reimbursements were based for the person.



      (4)   Whoever violates this division (C) is guilty of Medicaid
fraud.  Except as otherwise provided in this division, Medicaid fraud is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the value of the property, services or
funds obtained in violation of this section  is $1,000 or more, Medicaid
fraud is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate State law.



      (5)   Upon application of the governmental agency, office or
other entity that conducted the investigation and prosecution in a case under
this section, the court shall order any person who is convicted of a
violation of this section for receiving any reimbursement for furnishing
goods or services under the Medicaid program to which the person is not
entitled to pay to the applicant its cost of investigating and prosecuting
the case.  The costs of investigation and prosecution that a defendant is
ordered to pay pursuant to this division shall be in addition to any other
penalties for the receipt of that reimbursement that are provided in this
section, R.C. § 2913.40 or 5164.35, or any other provision of law.



      (6)   The provisions of this section are not intended to be
exclusive remedies and do not preclude the use of any other criminal or civil
remedy for any act that is in violation of this section.



      (7)   For the purpose of this division (C), the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



         PROVIDER means any person who has signed a provider
agreement with the Department of Medicaid to provide goods or services
pursuant to the Medicaid program or any person who has signed an agreement
with a party to such a provider agreement under which the person agrees to
provide goods or services that are reimbursable under the Medicaid program.



         PROVIDER AGREEMENT has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5164.01.



         RECIPIENT means any individual who receives goods or
services from a provider under the Medicaid program.



         RECORDS means any medical, professional, financial or
business records relating to the treatment or care of any recipient, to goods
or services provided to any recipient, or to rates paid for goods or services
provided to any recipient, and any records that are required by the rules of
the Medicaid Director to be kept for the Medicaid program.



         STATEMENT OR REPRESENTATION means any oral, written,
electronic, electronic impulse or magnetic communication that is used to
identify an item of goods or a service for which reimbursement may be made
under the Medicaid program or that states income and expense and is or may be
used to determine a rate of reimbursement under the Medicaid program.



(R.C. § 2913.40)



   (D)   Medicaid eligibility fraud.



      (1)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following in an
application for enrollment in the Medicaid program or in a document that
requires a disclosure of assets for the purpose of determining eligibility
for the Medicaid program:



         (a)   Make or cause to be made a false or misleading
statement;



         (b)   Conceal an interest in property;



         (c)   1.   Except as provided in division (D)(1)(c)2.
of this section, fail to disclose a transfer of property that occurred during
the period beginning 36 months before submission of the application or
document and ending on the date the application or document was submitted;



            2.   Fail to disclose a transfer of property that
occurred during the period beginning 60 months before submission of the
application or document and ending on the date the application or document
was submitted and that was made to an irrevocable trust a portion of which is
not distributable to the applicant for or recipient of Medicaid or to a
revocable trust.



      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates this division (D) is guilty of
Medicaid eligibility fraud. Except as otherwise provided in this division, a
violation of this division (D) is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
value of the Medicaid services paid as a result of the violation is $1,000 or
more, a violation of this division (D) is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



         (b)   In addition to imposing a sentence under division
(D)(2)(a) of this section, the court shall order that a person who is guilty
of Medicaid eligibility fraud make restitution in the full amount of any
Medicaid services paid on behalf of an applicant for or recipient of Medicaid
for which the applicant or recipient was not eligible, plus interest at the
rate applicable to judgments on unreimbursed amounts from the date on which
the Medicaid services were paid to the date on which restitution is made.



         (c)   The remedies and penalties provided in this
division (D) are not exclusive and do not preclude the use of any other
criminal or civil remedy for any act that is in violation of this division
(D).



      (3)   This division (D) does not apply to a person who fully
disclosed in an application for Medicaid or in a document that requires a
disclosure of assets for the purpose of determining eligibility for Medicaid
all of the interests in property of the applicant for or recipient of
Medicaid, all transfers of property by the applicant for or recipient of
Medicaid, and the circumstances of all those transfers.



      (4)   Any amounts of Medicaid services recovered as
restitution under this division (D) and any interest on those amounts shall
be credited to the general revenue fund, and any applicable federal share
shall be returned to the appropriate agency or department of the United
States.



      (5)   For the purpose of this division (D), the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



         MEDICAID SERVICES. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5164.01.



         PROPERTY. Means any real or personal property or other
asset in which a person has any legal title or interest.



(R.C. § 2913.401)



§ 131.24  INJURY TO PROPERTY BY HUNTERS.



   (A)   No person in the act of hunting, pursuing, taking, or killing
a wild animal shall act in a negligent, careless, or reckless manner so as to
injure property.



(R.C. § 1533.171(A))



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.



(R.C. § 1533.99(C))  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Violation, license revocation, see R.C. § 1533.171(B) – (E)



§ 131.25  EVIDENCE OF INTENT TO COMMIT THEFT OF RENTED PROPERTY; EVIDENCE
OF LACK OF CAPACITY TO CONSENT.



   (A)   Evidence of intent to commit theft of rented property.



      (1)   For the purpose of this division (A), the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      RENTER.  A person who owns rented property.



      RENTEE.  A person who pays consideration to a renter for the use
of rented property.



      (2)    Each of the following shall be considered evidence of
intent to commit theft of rented property or rental services:



         (a)   At the time of entering into the rental contract,
the rentee presented the renter with identification that was materially
false, fictitious, or not current with respect to name, address, place of
employment, or other relevant information.



         (b)   After receiving a notice demanding the return of
the rented property as provided in division (A)(3) of this section, the
rentee neither returned the rented property nor made arrangements acceptable
with the renter to return the rented property.



      (3)    To establish that a rentee has an intent to commit
theft of rented property or rental services under division (A)(2)(b) above, a
renter may issue a notice to a rentee demanding the return of the rented
property.  The renter shall mail the notice by certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the rentee at the address the rentee gave when the
rental contract was executed, or to the rentee at the last address the rentee
or the rentee's agent furnished in writing to the renter.



      (4)   A demand for the return of the rented property is not a
prerequisite for the prosecution of a rentee for theft of rented property or
rental services.  The evidence specified in division (A)(2) above does not
constitute the only evidence that may be considered as evidence of intent to
commit theft of rented property or rental services.



(R.C. § 2913.72)



   (B)   Evidence of lack of capacity to consent.



      (1)   In a prosecution for any alleged violation of § 131.08
to 131.20, 131.23, 131.25 to 131.29, or 132.11, if the lack of consent of the
victim is an element of the provision that allegedly was violated, evidence
that, at the time of the alleged violation, the victim lacked the capacity to
give consent is admissible to show that the victim did not give consent.



      (2)   As used in this section, LACKS THE CAPACITY TO CONSENT
means being impaired for any reason to the extent that the person lacks
sufficient understanding or capacity to make and carry out reasonable
decisions concerning the person or the person's resources.



(R.C. § 2913.73)



§ 131.26  FORGERY OF IDENTIFICATION CARDS.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly do either of the following:



      (1)   Forge an identification card.



      (2)   Sell or otherwise distribute a card that purports to be
an identification card, knowing it was forged.



   (B)   As used in this section, IDENTIFICATION CARD means a card that
includes personal information or characteristics of an individual, a purpose
of which is to establish the identity of the bearer described on the card,
whether the words “identity,” “identification,” “identification
card,” or other similar words appear on the card.



   (C)    (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of forging
identification cards or selling or distributing forged identification
cards.  Except as otherwise provided in this division, forging
identification cards or selling or distributing forged identification cards
is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the offender  previously has been
convicted of a violation of division (A) of this section or a substantially
equivalent  state law or municipal ordinance, forging identification cards
or selling or distributing forged identification cards is a misdemeanor of
the first degree and, in addition, the court shall impose upon the offender a
fine not less than $250.



      (2)    If the victim of a violation of this section is an
elderly person, R.C. § 2913.31(C)(2)(b) applies and the offense shall be
prosecuted under R.C. § 2913.31.



(R.C. § 2913.31(B), (C)(2))



Statutory reference:



   Forgery, felony provisions, see R.C. § 2913.31(A), (C)(1)



§ 131.27  CRIMINAL SIMULATION.



   (A)   No person, with purpose to defraud, or knowing that the person
is facilitating a fraud, shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Make or alter any object so that it appears to have
value because of antiquity, rarity, curiosity, source, or authorship, which
it does not in fact possess.



      (2)   Practice deception in making, retouching, editing, or
reproducing any photograph, movie film, video tape, phonograph record, or
recording tape.



      (3)   Falsely or fraudulently make, simulate, forge, alter, or
counterfeit any wrapper, label, stamp, cork or cap prescribed by the Liquor
Control Commission under R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303, falsely or fraudulently
cause to be made, simulated, forged, altered, or counterfeited any wrapper,
label, stamp, cork or cap prescribed by the Liquor Control Commission under
R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303, or use more than once any wrapper, label, stamp,
cork or cap prescribed by the Liquor Control Commission under R.C. Chapters
4301 and 4303.



      (4)   Offer, or possess with the purpose to offer, any object
that the person knows to have been simulated as provided in divisions (A)(1),
(2) or (3) of this section.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal
simulation.  Except as otherwise provided in this division, criminal
simulation is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the loss to the victim
is $1,000 or more, criminal simulation is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2913.32)



§ 131.28  PERSONATING AN OFFICER.



   (A)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she
is facilitating a fraud, or with purpose to induce another to purchase
property or services, shall personate a law enforcement officer, or an
inspector, investigator, or agent of any governmental agency.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of personating an
officer, a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 2913.44)



Cross-reference:



   Impersonating an officer (non-fraud offense), see § 132.12



§ 131.29  TRADEMARK COUNTERFEITING.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:



      (1)   Attach, affix, or otherwise use a counterfeit mark in
connection with the manufacture of goods or services, whether or not the
goods or services are intended for sale or resale.



      (2)   Possess, sell, or offer for sale tools, machines,
instruments, materials, articles, or other items of personal property with
the knowledge that they are designed for the production or reproduction of
counterfeit marks.



      (3)   Purchase or otherwise acquire goods, and keep or
otherwise have the goods in the person's possession, with the knowledge that
a counterfeit mark is attached to, affixed to, or otherwise used in
connection with the goods and with the intent to sell or otherwise dispose of
the goods.



      (4)   Sell, offer for sale, or otherwise dispose of goods with
the knowledge that a counterfeit mark is attached to, affixed to, or
otherwise used in connection with the goods.



      (5)   Sell, offer for sale, or otherwise provide services with
the knowledge that a counterfeit mark is used in connection with that sale,
offer for sale, or other provision of the services.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of trademark
counterfeiting.



      (1)   A violation of division (A)(1) of this section is guilty
of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (2)    Except as otherwise provided in this division, a
violation of division (A)(2) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.  If the circumstances of the violation indicate that the tools,
machines, instruments, materials, articles, or other items of personal
property involved in the violation  were intended for use in the commission
of a felony, a violation of division (A)(2) is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.



      (3)    Except as otherwise provided in this division, a
violation of division (A)(3), (A)(4) or (A)(5) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the cumulative sales price of the goods
or services to which or in connection with which the counterfeit mark is
attached, affixed or otherwise used  in the offense is $1,000 or more, a
violation of division (A)(3), (A)(4) or (A)(5) is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.



   (C)   A defendant may assert as an affirmative defense to a charge
of a violation of this section defenses, affirmative defenses, and
limitations on remedies that would be available in a civil, criminal  or
administrative action or proceeding under the Lanham Act, being 15 U.S.C.
1051 - 1127, as amended, the Trademark Counterfeiting Act of 1984, being 18
U.S.C. 2320, as amended, R.C. Chapter 1329 or another section of the Ohio
Revised Code, or common law.



   (D)   (1)   Law enforcement officers may seize pursuant to
Criminal Rule 41, R.C. Chapter 2933, or R.C. Chapter 2981 either of the
following:



         (a)   Goods to which or in connection with which a
person attached, affixed, otherwise used, or intended to attach, affix or
otherwise use a counterfeit mark in violation of this section.



         (b)   Tools, machines, instruments, materials, articles,
vehicles or other items of personal property that are possessed, sold,
offered for sale, or used in a violation of this section or in an attempt to
commit or complicity in the commission of a violation of this section.



      (2)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of R.C. §§
2923.31 to 2923.35 or R.C. §§ 2933.41 to 2933.43, if a person is convicted
of or pleads guilty to a violation of this section, an attempt to violate
this section, or complicity in a violation of this section, the court
involved shall declare that the goods described in division (D)(1)(a) of this
section and the personal property described in division (D)(1)(b) of this
section are contraband and are forfeited.  Prior to the court's entry of
judgment under Criminal Rule 32, the owner of a registered trademark or
service mark that is the subject to the counterfeit mark may recommend a
manner in which the forfeited goods and forfeited personal property should be
disposed of.  If that owner makes a timely recommendation of a manner of
disposition, the court is not bound by the recommendation.  If that owner
makes a timely recommendation of a manner of disposition, the court may
include in its entry of judgment an order that requires appropriate persons
to dispose of the forfeited goods and forfeited personal property in the
recommended manner.  If the owner fails to make a timely recommendation of a
manner of disposition or if that owner makes a timely recommendation of a
manner of disposition but the court determines to not follow the
recommendation, the court shall include in its entry of judgement an order
that requires the law enforcement agency that  employs the law enforcement
officer who seized the forfeited goods or the forfeited personal property to
destroy them or cause their destruction.



   (E)   This section does not affect the rights of an owner of a
trademark or service mark, or the enforcement in a civil action or in
administrative proceedings of the rights of an owner or a trademark or
service mark under the Lanham Act, being 15 U.S.C. 1051 - 1127, as amended,
the Trademark Counterfeiting Act of 1984, being 18 U.S.C. 2320, as amended,
R.C. Chapter 1329, or another section of the Ohio Revised Code, or common law.



   (F)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning:



      COUNTERFEIT MARK.



         (a)   Except as provided in division (b) of this
definition, COUNTERFEIT MARK means a spurious trademark or a spurious service
mark that satisfies both of the following:



            1.   It is identical with or substantially
indistinguishable from a mark that is registered on the principal register in
the United States Patent and Trademark Office for the same goods or services
as the goods or services to which or in connection with which  the spurious
trademark or spurious service mark is attached, affixed, or otherwise used,
or from a mark that is registered with the Secretary of State pursuant to
R.C. §§ 1329.54 through 1329.67 for the same goods or services as the goods
or services to which or in connection with which  the spurious trademark or
spurious service mark is attached, affixed, or otherwise used, and the owner
of the registration uses that registered trademark, whether or not the
offender knows that the mark is registered in a manner described in this
division (a)1.




            2.   Its use is likely to cause confusion or
mistake or to deceive other persons.




         (b)   COUNTERFEIT MARK does not include a mark or other
designation that is attached to, affixed to, or otherwise used in connection
with goods or services if the holder of the right to use the mark or other
designation authorizes the manufacturer, producer, or vendor of those goods
or services to attach, affix, or otherwise use the mark or other designation
in connection with those goods or services at the time of their manufacture,
production or sale.



      CUMULATIVE SALES PRICE.  The product of the lowest single unit
sales price charged or sought to be charged by an offender for goods to which
or in connection with which a counterfeit mark is attached, affixed, or
otherwise used or of the lowest single service transaction price charged or
sought to be charged by an offender for services in connection with which a
counterfeit mark is used, multiplied by the total number of those goods or
services, whether or not units of goods are sold or are in an offender's
possession, custody or control.



      REGISTERED TRADEMARK OR SERVICE MARK.  A trademark or service
mark that is registered in a manner described in division (a) of the
definition of “counterfeit mark.”



      TRADEMARK and SERVICE MARK.  Have the same meanings as in R.C.
§ 1329.54.



(R.C. § 2913.34)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 131.30  DIMINISHING OR INTERFERING WITH FORFEITABLE PROPERTY.



   (A)   No person shall destroy, damage, remove, or transfer property
that is subject to forfeiture or otherwise take any action in regard to
property that is subject to forfeiture with purpose to do any of the
following:



      (1)   Prevent or impair the state’s or political
subdivision’s lawful authority to take the property into its custody or
control under R.C. Chapter 2981 or to continue holding the property under its
lawful custody or control;



      (2)   Impair or defeat the court’s continuing jurisdiction
over the person and property;



      (3)   Devalue property that the person knows, or has
reasonable cause to believe, is subject to forfeiture proceedings under R.C.
Chapter 2981.



   (B)    Whoever violates this section is guilty of interference with
or diminishing forfeitable property. Except as otherwise provided in this
division (B), interference with or diminishing forfeitable property is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the property is $1,000 or
more, interference with or diminishing forfeitable property is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2981.07) 



§ 131.31  RECORDING CREDIT CARD, TELEPHONE OR SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBERS.



   (A)   No person shall record or cause to be recorded either of the
following:



      (1)   A credit card account number of the other party to a
transaction, when a check, bill of exchange or other draft is presented for
payment; or



      (2)   The telephone number or Social Security account number
of the other party to a transaction, when payment is made by credit card
charge agreement, check, bill of exchange or other draft.



   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to a transaction,
if all of the following conditions are met:



      (1)   The credit card account number, Social Security account
number or telephone number is recorded for a legitimate business purpose,
including collection purposes.



      (2)   The other party to the transaction consents to the
recording of the credit card account number, Social Security account number
or telephone number.



      (3)   The credit card account number, Social Security account
number or telephone number that is recorded during the course of the
transaction is not disclosed to any third party for any purposes other than
collection purposes and is not used to market goods or services unrelated to
the goods or services purchased in the transaction.



   (C)   Nothing in this section prohibits the recording of the number
of a credit card account when given in lieu of a deposit to secure payment in
the event of default, loss, damage or other occurrence, or requires a person
to accept a check presented for payment, if the other party to the
transaction refuses to consent to the recording of the number of the
party’s Social Security account or license to operate a motor vehicle.



(R.C. § 1349.17)



   (D)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 1349.99)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 131.32  PROSECUTIONS FOR THEFT OF UTILITIES.



   (A)   In a prosecution for a theft offense, as defined in  R.C. §
2913.01, that involves alleged tampering with a gas, electric, steam or water
meter, conduit or attachment of a utility that has been disconnected by the
utility, proof that a meter, conduit or attachment of a utility has been
tampered with is prima facie evidence that the person who is obligated to pay
for the service rendered through the meter, conduit or attachment, and who is
in possession or control of the meter, conduit or attachment at the time the
tampering occurred has caused the tampering with intent to commit a theft
offense.



   (B)   In a prosecution for a theft offense, as defined in R.C. §
2913.01, that involves the alleged reconnection of a gas, electric, steam or
water meter, conduit or attachment of a utility that has been disconnected by
the utility, proof that a meter, conduit or attachment disconnected by a
utility has been reconnected without the consent of the utility is prima
facie evidence that the person in possession or control of the meter, conduit
or attachment at the time of the reconnection has reconnected the meter,
conduit or attachment with intent to commit a theft offense.



   (C)   As used in this section:



      TAMPER. Means to interfere with, damage or bypass a utility
meter, conduit or attachment with the intent to impede the correct
registration of a meter or the proper functions of a conduit or attachment so
as to reduce the amount of utility service that is registered on the meter.



      UTILITY. Means any electric light company, gas company, natural
gas company, pipe-line company, water-works company or heating or cooling
company, as defined in R.C. § 4905.03(C), (D), (E), (F), (G), or (H), its
lessees, trustees or receivers, or any similar utility owned or operated by a
political subdivision.



(R.C. § 4933.18)



   (D)   Each electric light company, gas company, natural gas company,
pipeline company, waterworks company or heating or cooling company, as
defined by R.C. § 4905.03(C), (D), (E), (F), (G), or (H), or its lessees,
trustees or receivers, and each similar utility owned or operated by a
political subdivision, shall notify its customers, on an annual basis, that
tampering with or bypassing a meter constitutes a theft offense that could
result in the imposition of criminal sanctions.



(R.C. § 4933.19)



§ 131.33  MOTION PICTURE PIRACY.



   (A)   As used in this section:



      AUDIOVISUAL RECORDING FUNCTION means the capability of a device
to record or transmit a motion picture or any part of a motion picture by
means of any technology existing on, or developed after, March 9, 2004.



      FACILITY means a movie theater.



   (B)   No person, without the written consent of the owner or lessee
of the facility and of the licensor of the motion picture, shall knowingly
operate an audiovisual recording function of a device in a facility in which
the motion picture is being shown.



   (C)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
motion picture piracy, a misdemeanor of the first degree on the first offense
and a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent
offense.



   (D)   This section does not prohibit or restrict a lawfully
authorized investigative, law enforcement, protective, or intelligence
gathering employee or agent of the government of this state or a political
subdivision of this state, or of the federal government, when acting in an
official capacity, from operating an audiovisual recording function of a
device in any facility in which a motion picture is being shown.



   (E)   Division (B) of this section does not limit or affect the
application of any other prohibition in this code or the Ohio Revised Code.
Any act that is a violation of both division (B) of this section and another
provision of this code or the Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under this
section, under the other provision of this code or the Ohio Revised Code, or
under both this section and the other provision of this code or the Ohio
Revised Code.



(R.C. § 2913.07)



§ 131.34  RAILROAD VANDALISM; CRIMINAL TRESPASS; INTERFERENCE WITH
OPERATION OF TRAIN; GRADE CROSSING DEVICE VANDALISM.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly, and by any means, drop or throw any
object at, onto, or in the path of, any railroad rail, railroad track,
locomotive, engine, railroad car, or other vehicle of a railroad company
while such vehicle is on a railroad track.



   (B)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall climb upon or
into any locomotive, engine, railroad car, or other vehicle of a railroad
company when it is on a railroad track.



   (C)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall disrupt, delay,
or prevent the operation of any train or other vehicle of a railroad company
while such vehicle is on a railroad track.



   (D)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly enter
or remain on the land or premises of a railroad company.



   (E)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
railroad vandalism. Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty
of criminal trespass on a locomotive, engine, railroad car, or other railroad
vehicle. Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of
interference with the operation of a train. Except as otherwise provided in
this division, railroad vandalism; criminal trespass on a locomotive, engine,
railroad car, or other railroad vehicle; and interference with the operation
of a train each is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation of
division (A), (B), or (C) of this section causes serious physical harm to
property or creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person, causes
physical harm to any person, or causes serious physical harm to any person,
the violation is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



   (F)   Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty of
criminal trespass on the land or premises of a railroad company, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 2909.10)



   (G)   No person shall knowingly deface, damage, obstruct, remove, or
otherwise impair the operation of any railroad grade crossing warning signal
or other protective device, including any gate, bell, light, crossbuck, stop
sign, yield sign, advance warning sign, or advance pavement marking.



   (H)   Whoever violates division (G) of this section is guilty of
railroad grade crossing device vandalism. Except as otherwise provided in
this division, railroad grade crossing device vandalism is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the violation of division (G) of this section causes
serious physical harm to property or creates a substantial risk of physical
harm to any person, causes physical harm to any person, or causes serious
physical harm to any person, railroad grade crossing device vandalism is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2909.101)



§ 131.35  DESECRATION.



   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall purposely deface,
damage, pollute, or otherwise physically mistreat any of the following:



      (1)   Any public monument;



      (2)   Any historical or commemorative marker, or any
structure, Indian mound or earthwork, cemetery, thing, or site of great
historical or archaeological interest;



      (3)   A place of worship, its furnishings, or religious
artifacts or sacred texts within the place of worship or within the grounds
upon which the place of worship is located;



      (4)   A work of art or museum piece;



      (5)   Any other object of reverence or sacred devotion.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of desecration. A
violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(4), or (A)(5) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the second degree. A violation of division (A)(3) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



   (C)   As used in this section, "cemetery" means any place of burial
and includes burial sites that contain American Indian burial objects placed
with or containing American Indian human remains.



(R.C. § 2927.11)



CHAPTER 132:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE



Section



   132.01   Riot



   132.02   Failure to disperse



   132.03   Justifiable use of force to suppress riot



   132.04   Disorderly conduct



   132.05   Disturbing a lawful meeting



   132.06   Misconduct at an emergency



   132.07   Telecommunications harassment



   132.08   Inducing panic



   132.09   Making false alarms



   132.10   Inciting to violence



   132.11   Unlawful display of law enforcement emblem



   132.12   Impersonating a peace officer



   132.13   Safety of crowds attending live entertainment performances



   132.14   Misconduct involving a public transportation system



   132.15   Curfew for minors



Cross-reference:



   Personating an officer (fraud offense), see § 131.28



Statutory reference:



   Misuse of “Block Parent” or “McGruff House” symbol, see R.C. §
2917.46



§ 132.01  RIOT.



   (A)   No person shall participate with four or more others in a
course of disorderly conduct in violation of R.C. § 2917.11 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance:



      (1)   With purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of a
misdemeanor, other than disorderly conduct;



      (2)   With purpose to intimidate a public official or employee
into taking or refraining from official action, or with purpose to hinder,
impede, or obstruct a function of government;



      (3)   With purpose to hinder, impede, or obstruct the orderly
process of administration or instruction at an educational institution, or to
interfere with or disrupt lawful activities carried on at the institution.



   (B)   No person shall participate with four or more others with
purpose to do an act with unlawful force or violence, even though the act
might otherwise be lawful.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of riot, a misdemeanor
of the first degree.



(R.C. § 2917.03) 



   (D)   For the purposes of prosecuting violations of this section,
the prosecution is not required to allege or prove that the offender
expressly agreed with four or more others to commit any act that constitutes
a violation this section prior to or while committing those acts.



(R.C. § 2917.031)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Aggravated riot, felony provisions, see R.C. § 2917.02



§ 132.02  FAILURE TO DISPERSE.



   (A)   Where five or more persons are participating in a course of
disorderly conduct in violation of R.C. § 2917.11 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, and there are other persons in the vicinity
whose presence creates the likelihood of physical harm to persons or property
or of serious public inconvenience, annoyance, or alarm, a law enforcement
officer or other public official may order the participants and the other
persons to disperse.  No person shall knowingly fail to obey the order.



   (B)   Nothing in this section requires persons to disperse who are
peaceably assembled for a lawful purpose.



   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to
disperse.



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(3) of this
section, failure to disperse is a minor misdemeanor.



      (3)   Failure to disperse is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree if the failure to obey the order described in division (A) of this
section creates the likelihood of physical harm to persons or is committed at
the scene of a fire, accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind.



(R.C. § 2917.04)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 132.03  JUSTIFIABLE USE OF FORCE TO SUPPRESS RIOT.



   A law enforcement officer or firefighter engaged in suppressing a riot
or in protecting persons or property during a riot:



   (A)   Is justified in using force, other than deadly force, when and
to the extent he or she has probable cause to believe such force is necessary
to disperse or apprehend rioters;



   (B)   Is justified in using force, including deadly force, when and
to the extent he or she has probable cause to believe such force is necessary
to disperse or apprehend rioters whose conduct is creating a substantial risk
of serious physical harm to persons.



(R.C. § 2917.05)



§ 132.04  DISORDERLY CONDUCT.



   (A)   No person shall recklessly cause inconvenience, annoyance, or
alarm to another, by doing any of the following:



      (1)   Engaging in fighting, in threatening harm to persons or
property, or in violent or turbulent behavior;



      (2)   Making unreasonable noise or an offensively coarse
utterance, gesture, or display, or communicating unwarranted and grossly
abusive language to any person;



      (3)   Insulting, taunting, or challenging another, under
circumstances in which that conduct is likely to provoke a violent response;



      (4)   Hindering or preventing the movement of persons on a
public street, road, highway, or right-of-way, or to, from, within, or upon
public or private property, so as to interfere with the rights of others, and
by any act that serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender;



      (5)   Creating a condition that is physically offensive to
persons or that presents a risk of physical harm to persons or property, by
any act that serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender.



   (B)   No person while voluntarily intoxicated shall do either of the
following:



      (1)   In a public place or in the presence of two or more
persons, engage in conduct likely to be offensive or to cause inconvenience,
annoyance, or alarm to persons of ordinary sensibilities, which conduct the
offender, if he or she were not intoxicated, should know is likely to have
such effect on others;



      (2)   Engage in conduct or create a condition that presents a
risk of physical harm to himself, herself or another, or to the property of
another.



   (C)   Violation of any statute or ordinance of which an element is
operating a motor vehicle, locomotive, watercraft, aircraft, or other vehicle
while under the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse is not a violation
of division (B) of this section.



   (D)   If a person appears to an ordinary observer to be intoxicated,
it is probable cause to believe that the person is voluntarily intoxicated
for purposes of division (B) of this section.



   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disorderly conduct.



      (1)    Except as otherwise provided in divisions (E)(2) and
(E)(3) of this section, disorderly conduct is a minor misdemeanor.



      (2)   Disorderly conduct is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree
if any of the following applies:



         (a)   The offender persists in disorderly conduct after
reasonable warning or request to desist.



         (b)   The offense is committed in the vicinity of a
school or in a school safety zone.



         (c)   The offense is committed in the presence of any
law enforcement officer, firefighter, rescuer, medical person, emergency
medical services person, or other authorized person who is engaged in the
person's duties at the scene of a fire, accident, disaster, riot, or
emergency of any kind.



         ( d)   The offense is committed in the presence of any
emergency facility person who is engaged in the person’s duties in an
emergency facility.



      (3)   If an offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to three or more violations of division (B) of this section,
R.C. § 2917.11(B), or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, a violation of division (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.



   (F)   As used in this section:



   COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A SCHOOL.  Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2925.01.



   EMERGENCY FACILITY.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.04.



   EMERGENCY FACILITY PERSON.  Is the singular of “emergency facility
personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2909.04.



   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSON.  Is the singular of “emergency
medical services personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2133.21.



(R.C. § 2917.11)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 132.05  DISTURBING A LAWFUL MEETING.



   (A)   No person, with purpose to prevent or disrupt a lawful
meeting, procession, or gathering, shall do either of the following:



      (1)   Do any act which obstructs or interferes with the due
conduct of the meeting, procession, or gathering.



      (2)   Make any utterance, gesture, or display which outrages
the sensibilities of the group.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disturbing a lawful
meeting, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 2917.12)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 132.06  MISCONDUCT AT AN EMERGENCY.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:



      (1)   Hamper the lawful operations of any law enforcement
officer, firefighter, rescuer, medical person, emergency medical services
person, or other authorized person engaged in the person's duties at the
scene of a fire, accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind;



      (2)   Hamper the lawful activities of any emergency facility
person who is engaged in the person’s duties in an emergency facility;



      (3)   Fail to obey the lawful order of any law enforcement
officer engaged in the law enforcement officer's duties at the scene of or in
connection with a fire, accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit access or
deny information to any news media representative in the lawful exercise of
the news media representative's duties.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of misconduct at an
emergency.  Except as otherwise provided in this division, misconduct at an
emergency is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If violation of this
section creates a risk of physical harm to persons or property, misconduct at
an emergency is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



   (D)   As used in this section:



   EMERGENCY FACILITY.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.04.



   EMERGENCY FACILITY PERSON.  Is the singular of “emergency facility
personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2909.04.



   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSON.  Is the singular of “emergency
medical services personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2133.21.



(R.C. § 2917.13)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 132.07  TELECOMMUNICATIONS HARASSMENT.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly make or cause to be made a
telecommunication, or knowingly permit a telecommunication to be made from a
telecommunications device under the person's control, to another, if the
caller does any of the following:



      (1)   Makes the telecommunication with purpose to harass,
intimidate, or abuse any person at the premises to which the
telecommunication is made, whether or not actual communication takes place
between the caller and a recipient;



      (2)   Describes, suggests, requests, or proposes that the
caller, the recipient of the telecommunication, or any other person engage in
sexual activity, and the recipient or another person at the premises to which
the telecommunication is made has requested, in a previous telecommunication
or in the immediate telecommunication, that the caller not make a
telecommunication to the recipient or to the premises to which the
telecommunication is made;



      (3)   During the telecommunication, violates R.C. § 2903.21
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;



      (4)   Knowingly states to the recipient of the
telecommunication that the caller intends to cause damage to or destroy
public or private property, and the recipient, any member of the recipient's
family, or any other person who resides at the premises to which the
telecommunication is made owns, leases, resides, or works in, will at the
time of the destruction or damaging be near or in, has the responsibility of
protecting, or insures the property that will be destroyed or damaged;



      (5)   Knowingly makes the telecommunication to the recipient
of the telecommunication, to another person at the premises to which the
telecommunication is made, or to those premises, and the recipient or another
person at those premises previously has told the caller not to make a
telecommunication to those premises or to any persons at those premises;



      (6)   Knowingly makes any comment, request, suggestion, or
proposal to the recipient of the telecommunication that is threatening,
intimidating, menacing, coercive, or obscene with the intent to abuse,
threaten, or harass the recipient;



      (7)   Without a lawful business purpose, knowingly interrupts
the telecommunication service of any person;



      (8)   Without a lawful business purpose, knowingly transmits
to any person, regardless of whether the telecommunication is heard in its
entirety, any file, document, or other communication that prevents that
person from using the person’s telephone service or electronic
communication device;



      (9)   Knowingly makes any false statement concerning the
death, injury, illness, disfigurement, reputation, indecent conduct, or
criminal conduct of the recipient of the telecommunication or family or
household member of the recipient with purpose to abuse, threaten,
intimidate, or harass the recipient;



      (10)   Knowingly incites another person through a
telecommunication or other means to harass or participate in the harassment
of a person;



      (11)   Knowingly alarms the recipient by making a
telecommunication without a lawful purpose at an hour or hours known to be
inconvenient to the recipient and in an offensive or repetitive manner.



   (B)   (1)   No person shall make or cause to be made a
telecommunication or permit a telecommunication to be made from a
telecommunications device under the person's control, with purpose to abuse,
threaten, or harass another person.



      (2)   No person shall knowingly post a text or audio statement
or an image on an internet web site or web page for the purpose of abusing,
threatening, or harassing another person.



   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of
telecommunications harassment.



      (2)   A violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(5),
(A)(6), (A)(7), (A)(8), (A)(9), (A)(10), or (A)(11) or (B) of this section is
a misdemeanor of the first degree on a first offense and a felony on each
subsequent offense, which shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(3), a
violation of division (A)(4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree on a first offense and a felony on each subsequent offense, to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.  If a violation of division (A)(4)
of this section results in economic harm of $1,000 or more,
telecommunications harassment is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.



   (D)   No cause of action may be asserted in any court of this
municipality against any provider of a telecommunications service,
interactive computer service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information
service, or against any officer, employee, or agent of a telecommunications
service, interactive computer service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or
information service, for any injury, death, or loss to person or property
that allegedly arises out of the provider’s, officer’s, employee’s, or
agent’s provision of information, facilities, or assistance in accordance
with the terms of a court order that is issued in relation to the
investigation or prosecution of an alleged violation of this section. A
provider of a telecommunications service, interactive computer service as
defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, or an officer, employee,
or agent of a telecommunications service, interactive computer service as
defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, is immune from any civil
or criminal liability for injury, death, or loss to person or property that
allegedly arises out of the provider’s, officer’s, employee’s, or
agent’s provision of information, facilities, or assistance in accordance
with the terms of a court order that is issued in relation to the
investigation or prosecution of an alleged violation of this section.



   (E)   (1)   This section does not apply to a person solely
because the person provided access or connection to or from an electronic
method of remotely transferring information not under that person’s
control, including having provided capabilities that are incidental to
providing access or connection to or from the electronic method of remotely
transferring the information, and that do not include the creation of the
content of the material that is the subject of the access or connection. In
addition, any person providing access or connection to or from an electronic
method of remotely transferring information not under that person’s control
shall not be liable for any action voluntarily taken in good faith to block
the receipt or transmission through its service of any information that the
person believes is, or will be sent, in violation of this section.



      (2)   Division (E)(1) of this section does not create an
affirmative duty for any person providing access or connection to or from an
electronic method of remotely transferring information not under that
person’s control to block the receipt or transmission through its service
of any information that it believes is, or will be sent, in violation of this
section except as otherwise provided by law.



      (3)   Division (E)(1) of this section does not apply to a
person who conspires with a person actively involved in the creation or
knowing distribution of material in violation of this section or who
knowingly advertises the availability of material of that nature.



      (4)   A provider or user of an interactive computer service,
as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, shall neither be treated as the publisher or
speaker of any information provided by another information content provider,
as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, nor held civilly or criminally liable for the
creation or development of information provided by another information
content provider, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230. Nothing in this division
shall be construed to protect a person from liability to the extent that the
person developed or created any content in violation of this section.



   (F)   Divisions (A)(5) to (A)(11) and (B)(2) of this section do not
apply to a person who, while employed or contracted by a newspaper, magazine,
press association, news agency, news wire service, cable channel or cable
operator, or radio or television station, is gathering, processing,
transmitting, compiling, editing, or disseminating information for the
general public within the scope of the person’s employment in that capacity
or the person’s contractual authority in that capacity.



   (G)   As used in this section:



      CABLE OPERATOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1332.21.



      CALLER.  Means the person described in division (A) of this
section who makes or causes to be made a telecommunication or who permits a
telecommunication to be made from a telecommunications device under that
person's control.



      ECONOMIC HARM.  Means all direct, incidental and consequential
pecuniary harm suffered by a victim as a result of the criminal conduct. 
The term includes but is not limited to all of the following:



         (a)   All wages, salaries or other compensation lost as
a result of the criminal conduct;



         (b)   The cost of all wages, salaries or other
compensation paid to employees for time those employees are prevented from
working as a result of the criminal conduct;



         (c)   The overhead costs incurred from the time that a
business is shut down as a result of the criminal conduct;



         (d)   The loss of value to tangible or intangible
property that was damaged as a result of the criminal conduct.



      FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Means any of the following:



         (a)   Any of the following who is residing or has
resided with the recipient of the telecommunication against whom the act
prohibited in division (A)(9) of this section is committed:



            1.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse, or a
former spouse of the recipient;



            2.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the
recipient, or another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the
recipient;



            3.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person
living as a spouse, or former spouse of the recipient, or another person
related by consanguinity or affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse,
or former spouse of the recipient.



         (b)   The natural parent of any child of whom the
recipient of the telecommunication against whom the act prohibited in
division (A)(9) of this section is committed is the other natural parent or
is the putative other natural parent.



      PERSON LIVING AS A SPOUSE. Means a person who is living or has
lived with the recipient of the telecommunication against whom the act
prohibited in division (A)(9) of this section is committed in a common law
marital relationship, who otherwise is cohabiting with the recipient, or who
otherwise has cohabited with the recipient within five years prior to the
date of the alleged commission of the act in question.



      SEXUAL ACTIVITY.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.01.



      TELECOMMUNICATION and TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE.  Have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.



   (H)   Nothing in this section prohibits a person from making a
telecommunication to a debtor that is in compliance with the “Fair Debt
Collection Practices Act,” 15 U.S.C. 1692, as amended, or the “Telephone
Consumer Protection Act,” 47 U.S.C. 227, as amended.



(R.C. § 2917.21)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 132.08  INDUCING PANIC.



   (A)   No person shall cause the evacuation of any public place, or
otherwise cause serious public inconvenience or alarm, by doing any of the
following:



      (1)   Initiating or circulating a report or warning of an
alleged or impending fire, explosion, crime, or other catastrophe, knowing
that the report or warning is false.



      (2)   Threatening to commit any offense of violence.



      (3)   Committing any offense, with reckless disregard of the
likelihood that its commission will cause serious public inconvenience or
alarm.



   (B)   Division (A)(1) of this section does not apply to any person
conducting an authorized fire or emergency drill.



   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of inducing
panic.



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(3),
inducing panic is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (3)    If a violation of this section results in physical harm
to any person, inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.  If a violation of this section results in economic harm of
$1,000 or more, inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.  If the public place involved in a violation of division (A)(1)
is a school or an institution of higher education, inducing panic is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.  If a violation of this
section pertains to a purported, threatened or actual use of a weapon of mass
destruction, inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.



   (D)   (1)   It is not a defense to a charge under this section
that pertains to a purported or threatened use of a weapon of mass
destruction that the offender did not possess or have the ability to use a
weapon of mass destruction or that what was represented to be a weapon of
mass destruction was not a weapon of mass destruction.



      (2)   Any act that is a violation of this section and any
other section of the Ohio Revised Code or this Code of Ordinances may be
prosecuted under this section, the other section, or both sections.



   (E)   As used in this section:



      BIOLOGICAL AGENT has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2917.33.



      ECONOMIC HARM means any of the following:



         (a)   All direct, incidental and consequential pecuniary
harm suffered by a victim as a result of the criminal conduct.  “Economic
harm” as described in this division includes but is not limited to all of
the following:



            1.   All wages, salaries or other compensation
lost as a result of the criminal conduct;



            2.   The cost of all wages, salaries or other
compensation paid to employees for time those employees are prevented from
working as a result of the criminal conduct;



            3.   The overhead costs incurred from the time
that a business is shut down as a result of the criminal conduct;



            4.   The loss of value to tangible or intangible
property that was damaged as a result of the criminal conduct.



         (b)   All costs incurred by the state or any political
subdivision as a result of, or in making any response to, the criminal
conduct that constituted the violation of this section or R.C. § 2917.32, or
any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, including but not limited
to all costs so incurred by any law enforcement officers, firefighters,
rescue personnel, or emergency medical services personnel of the state or the
political subdivision.



      EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSONNEL has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2133.21.



      INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION means any of the following:



         (a)   A state university or college as defined in R.C.
§ 3345.12(A)(1), community college, state community college, university
branch, or technical college;



         (b)   A private, nonprofit college, university or other
post-secondary institution located in this state that possesses a certificate
of authorization issued by the Ohio Board of Regents pursuant to R.C. Chapter
1713;



         (c)   A post-secondary institution with a certificate of
registration issued by the State Board of Career Colleges and Schools
pursuant to R.C. Chapter 3332.



      SCHOOL means any school operated by a board of education or any
school for which the State Board of Education prescribes minimum standards
under R.C. § 3301.07, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular
activities, or training provided by the school is being conducted at the time
a violation of this section is committed.



      WEAPON OF MASS DESTRUCTION means any of the following:



         (a)   Any weapon that is designed or intended to cause
death or serious physical harm through the release, dissemination, or impact
of toxic or poisonous chemicals, or other precursors;



         (b)   Any weapon involving a disease organism or
biological agent;



         (c)   Any weapon that is designed to release radiation
or radioactivity at a level dangerous to human life;



         (d)   Any of the following, except to the extent that
the item or device in question is expressly excepted from the definition of
“destructive device” pursuant to 18 U.S.C. 921(a)(4) and regulations
issued under that section:



            1.   Any explosive, incendiary, or poison gas
bomb, grenade, rocket having a propellant charge of more than four ounces,
missile having an explosive or incendiary charge of more than one-quarter
ounce, mine, or similar device;



            2.   Any combination of parts either designed or
intended for use in converting any item or device into any item or device
described in division (4)(a) of this definition and from which an item or
device described in that division may be readily assembled.



(R.C. § 2917.31)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 132.09  MAKING FALSE ALARMS.



   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Initiate or circulate a report or warning of an alleged
or impending fire, explosion, crime, or other catastrophe, knowing that the
report or warning is false and likely to cause public inconvenience or alarm.



      (2)   Knowingly cause a false alarm of fire or other emergency
to be transmitted to or within any organization, public or private, for
dealing with emergencies involving a risk of physical harm to persons or
property.



      (3)   Report to any law enforcement agency an alleged offense
or other incident within its concern, knowing that the offense did not occur.



   (B)   This section does not apply to any person conducting an
authorized fire or emergency drill.



   (C)    Whoever violates this section is guilty of making false
alarms.  Except as otherwise provided in this division, making false alarms
is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If a violation of this section
results in economic harm of $1,000 or more, making false alarms is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.  If a violation of this
section pertains to a purported, threatened, or actual use of a weapon of
mass destruction, making false alarms is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



   (D)   (1)   It is not a defense to a charge under this section
that pertains to a purported or threatened use of a weapon of mass
destruction that the offender did not possess or have the ability to use a
weapon of mass destruction or that what was represented to be a weapon of
mass destruction was not a weapon of mass destruction.



      (2)   Any act that is a violation of this section and any
other section of the Ohio Revised Code or this Code of Ordinances may be
prosecuted under this section, the other section, or both sections.



   (E)   As used in this section, ECONOMIC HARM and WEAPON OF MASS
DESTRUCTION have the same meaning as in R.C. § 2917.31.



(R.C. § 2917.32)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 132.10  INCITING TO VIOLENCE.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly engage in conduct designed to urge
or incite another to commit any offense of violence when either of the
following apply:



      (1)   The conduct takes place under circumstances that create
a clear and present danger that any offense of violence will be committed.



      (2)   The conduct proximately results in the commission of any
offense of violence.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of inciting to
violence.  If the offense of violence that the other person is being urged
or incited to commit is a misdemeanor, inciting to violence is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.  If the offense of violence that the other person is
being urged or incited to commit is a felony, inciting to violence is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2917.01)



§ 132.11  UNLAWFUL DISPLAY OF LAW ENFORCEMENT EMBLEM.



   (A)   No person who is not entitled to do so shall knowingly display
on a motor vehicle the emblem of a law enforcement agency or an organization
of law enforcement officers.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of the unlawful
display of the emblem of a law enforcement agency or an organization of law
enforcement officers, a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 2913.441)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 132.12  IMPERSONATING A PEACE OFFICER.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. An employee of the United States
who serves in a position the duties of which are primarily the investigation,
apprehension, or detention of individuals suspected or convicted of offenses
under the criminal laws of the United States.



      IMPERSONATE.  To act the part of, assume the identity of, wear
the uniform or any part of the uniform of, or display the identification of a
particular person or of a member of a class of persons with purpose to make
another person believe that the actor is that particular person or is a
member of that class of persons.



      INVESTIGATOR OF THE BUREAU OF CRIMINAL IDENTIFICATION AND
INVESTIGATION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2903.11.



      PEACE OFFICER. A sheriff, deputy sheriff, marshal, deputy
marshal, member of the organized police department of a municipal
corporation, or township constable, who is employed by a political
subdivision of this state; a member of a police force employed by a
metropolitan housing authority under R.C. § 3735.31(D); a member of a police
force employed by a regional transit authority under R.C. § 306.35(Y); a
state university law enforcement officer appointed under R.C. § 3345.04; a
veterans’ home police officer appointed under R.C. § 5907.02; a special
police officer employed by a port authority under R.C. § 4582.04 or 4582.28;
an officer, agent, or employee of the state or any of its agencies,
instrumentalities, or political subdivisions, upon whom, by statute, a duty
to conserve the peace or to enforce all or certain laws is imposed and the
authority to arrest violators is conferred, within limits of that statutory
duty and authority; or a state highway patrol trooper whose primary duties
are to preserve the peace, to protect life and property, and to enforce the
laws, ordinances, or rules of the state or any of its political subdivisions.



      PRIVATE POLICE OFFICER.  Any security guard, special police
officer, private detective, or other person who is privately employed in a
police capacity.



   (B)   No person shall impersonate a peace officer, private police
officer, investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation, or federal law enforcement officer.



   (C)   No person, by impersonating a peace officer, private police
officer, investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation, or federal law enforcement officer, shall arrest or detain any
person, search any person, or search the property of any person.



   (D)   No person, with purpose to commit or facilitate the commission
of an offense, shall impersonate a peace officer, a private police officer,
federal law enforcement officer, or an officer, agent or employee of the
municipality or the state, or investigator of the Bureau of Criminal
Identification and Investigation.



   (E)   No person shall commit a felony while impersonating a peace
officer, private police officer, federal law enforcement officer, an officer,
agent or employee of the municipality or of the state, or investigator of the
Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation.



   (F)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (B) of
this section that the impersonation of the peace officer, private police
officer, federal law enforcement officer, an officer, agent or employee of
the municipality or of the state, or investigator of the Bureau of Criminal
Identification and Investigation was for a lawful purpose.



   (G)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  Whoever violates division (C) or (D) of
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If  the
purpose of a violation of division (D) of this section is to commit or
facilitate the commission of a felony, a violation of division (D) is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.  Whoever violates
division (E) of this section is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2921.51)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Cross-reference:



   Personating an officer (fraud offense), see § 131.28



§ 132.13  SAFETY OF CROWDS ATTENDING LIVE ENTERTAINMENT PERFORMANCES.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



   CONCERT.  A musical performance of which the primary component is a
presentation by persons singing or playing musical instruments, that is
intended by its sponsors mainly, but not necessarily exclusively, for the
listening enjoyment of the audience, and that is held in a facility. A
CONCERT does not include any performance in which music is a part of the
presentation and the primary component of which is acting, dancing, a motion
picture, a demonstration of skills or talent other than singing or playing an
instrument, an athletic event, an exhibition or a speech.



   FACILITY.  Any structure that has a roof or partial roof and that has
walls that wholly surround the area on all sides, including, but not limited
to, a stadium, hall, arena, armory, auditorium, ballroom, exhibition hall,
convention center or music hall.



   LIVE ENTERTAINMENT PERFORMANCE.  Any live speech; any live musical
performance, including a concert; any live dramatic performance; any live
variety show; and any other live performance with respect to which the
primary intent of the audience can be construed to be viewing the performers.
A LIVE ENTERTAINMENT PERFORMANCE does not include any form of entertainment
with respect to which the person purchasing a ticket routinely participates
in amusements as well as views performers.



   PERSON.  Includes, in addition to an individual or entity specified in
R.C. § 1.59(C), any governmental entity.



   RESTRICTED ENTERTAINMENT AREA.  Any wholly or partially enclosed area,
whether indoors or outdoors, that has limited access through established
entrances or established turnstiles or similar devices.



   (B)   (1)   No person shall sell, offer to sell, or offer in
return for a donation, any ticket that is not numbered and that does not
correspond to a specific seat for admission to either of the following:



         (a)   A live entertainment performance that is not
exempted under division (D) of this section, that is held in a restricted
entertainment area, and for which more than 8,000 tickets are offered to the
public;



         (b)   A concert that is not exempted under division (D)
of this section and for which more than 3,000 tickets are offered to the
public.



      (2)   No person shall advertise any live entertainment
performance as described in division (B)(1)(a) of this section or any concert
as described in division (B)(1)(b) of this section, unless the advertisement
contains the words “Reserved Seats Only.”



   (C)   Unless exempted by division (D)(1) of this section, no person
who owns or operates any restricted entertainment area shall fail to open,
maintain and properly staff at least the number of entrances designated under
division (E) of this section for a minimum of 90 minutes prior to the
scheduled start of any live entertainment performance that is held in the
restricted entertainment area and for which more than 3,000 tickets are sold,
offered for sale or offered in return for a donation.



   (D)   (1)   A live entertainment performance, other than a
concert, is exempted from the provisions of divisions (B) and (C) of this
section if both of the following apply:



         (a)   The restricted entertainment area in which the
performance is held has at least eight entrances or, if both entrances and
separate admission turnstiles or similar devices are used, has at least eight
turnstiles or similar devices.



         (b)   The eight entrances or, if applicable, the eight
turnstiles or similar devices, are opened, maintained and properly staffed at
least one hour prior to the scheduled start of the performance.



      (2)   (a)   The officer responsible for public safety in
the municipality may, upon application of the sponsor of a concert covered by
division (B) of this section, exempt the concert from the provisions of that
division if such officer finds that the health, safety and welfare of the
participants and spectators would not be substantially affected by failure to
comply with the provisions of that division.  In determining whether to
grant an exemption, the officer shall consider the following factors:



            1.   The size and design of the facility in which
the concert is scheduled;



            2.   The size, age and anticipated conduct of the
crowd expected to attend the concert;



            3.   The ability of the sponsor to manage and
control the expected crowd.



         If the sponsor of any concert desires to obtain an
exemption under this division, the sponsor shall apply to the appropriate
official on a form prescribed by that official. The official shall issue an
order that grants or denies the exemption within five days after receipt of
the application. The sponsor may appeal any order that denies an exemption to
the Court of Common Pleas of the county in which the facility is located.



         (b)   If an official grants an exemption under division
(D)(2)(a) of this section, the official shall designate an on-duty law
enforcement officer to be present at the concert. The designated officer has
authority to issue orders to all security personnel at the concert to protect
the health, safety and welfare of the participants and spectators.



      (3)   Notwithstanding division (D)(2) of this section, in the
case of a concert held in a facility located on the campus of an educational
institution covered by R.C. § 3345.04, a state university law enforcement
officer appointed pursuant to R.C. §§ 3345.04 and 3345.21 shall do both of
the following:



         (a)   Exercise the authority to grant exemptions
provided by division (D)(2)(a) of this section in lieu of an official
designated in that division;



         (b)   If the officer grants an exemption under division
(D)(3)(a) of this section, designate an on-duty state university law
enforcement officer to be present at the concert. The designated officer has
authority to issue orders to all security personnel at the concert to protect
the health, safety and welfare of the participants and spectators.



   (E)   (1)   Unless a live entertainment performance is exempted
by division (D)(1) of this section, the officer responsible for public safety
within the municipality shall designate, for purposes of division (C) of this
section, the minimum number of entrances required to be opened, maintained
and staffed at each live entertainment performance so as to permit crowd
control and reduce congestion at the entrances.  The designation shall be
based on such factors as the size and nature of the crowd expected to attend
the live entertainment performance, the length of time prior to the live
entertainment performance that crowds are expected to congregate at the
entrances and the amount of security provided at the restricted entertainment
area.



      (2)   Notwithstanding division (E)(1) of this section, a state
university law enforcement officer appointed pursuant to R.C. §§ 3345.04
and 3345.21 shall designate the number of entrances required to be opened,
maintained and staffed in the case of a live entertainment performance that
is held at a restricted entertainment area located on the campus of an
educational institution covered by R.C. § 3345.04.



   (F)   No person shall enter into any contract for a live
entertainment performance that does not permit or require compliance with
this section.



   (G)   (1)   This section does not apply to a live entertainment
performance held in a restricted entertainment area if one admission ticket
entitles the holder to view or participate in three or more different games,
rides, activities or live entertainment performances occurring simultaneously
at different sites within the restricted entertainment area and if the
initial admittance entrance to the restricted entertainment area, for which
the ticket is required, is separate from the entrance to any specific live
entertainment performance and an additional ticket is not required for
admission to the particular live entertainment performance.



      (2)   This section does not apply to a symphony orchestra
performance, a ballet performance, horse races, dances or fairs.



   (H)   This section does not prohibit the Legislative Authority from
imposing additional requirements, not in conflict with the section, for the
promotion or holding of live entertainment performances.



   (I)   Whoever violates division (B), (C) or (F) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If any individual suffers
physical harm to his or her person as a result of a violation of this
section, the sentencing court shall consider this factor in favor of imposing
a term of imprisonment upon the offender.



(R.C. § 2917.40)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 132.14  MISCONDUCT INVOLVING A PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM.



   (A)   As used in this section, PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM means a
county transit system operated in accordance with R.C. §§ 306.01 to 306.13,
a regional transit authority operated in accordance with R.C. §§ 306.30 to
306.71, or a regional transit commission operated in accordance with R.C.
§§ 306.80 to 306.90.



   (B)   No person shall evade the payment of the known fares of a
public transportation system.



   (C)   No person shall alter any transfer, pass, ticket or token of a
public transportation system with the purpose of evading the payment of fares
or of defrauding the system.



   (D)   No person shall do any of the following while in any facility
or on any vehicle of a public transportation system:



      (1)   Play sound equipment without the proper use of a private
earphone;



      (2)   Smoke, eat or drink in any area where the activity is
clearly marked as being prohibited; or



      (3)   Expectorate upon a person, facility or vehicle.



   (E)   No person shall write, deface, draw or otherwise mark on any
facility or vehicle of a public transportation system.



   (F)   No person shall fail to comply with a lawful order of a public
transportation system police officer, and no person shall resist, obstruct or
abuse a public transportation police officer in the performance of the
officer’s duties.



   (G)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is
guilty of misconduct involving a public transportation system.



      (1)   A violation of division (B), (C), or (F) of this section
is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



      (2)   A violation of division (D) of this section is a minor
misdemeanor on a first offense. If a person previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to a violation of any division of this section or of a
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any division of this
section, a violation of division (D) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.



      (3)   A violation of division (E) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (H)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, 75% of each fine
paid to satisfy a sentence imposed for a violation of any of the provisions
of this section shall be deposited into the treasury of the County and 25%
shall be deposited with the county transit board, regional transit authority
or regional transit commission that operates the public transportation system
involved in the violation, unless the Board of County Commissioners operates
the public transportation system, in which case 100% of each fine shall be
deposited into the treasury of the County.



(R.C. § 2917.41)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 132.15  CURFEW FOR MINORS.



   (A)   No minor under the age of 16 years shall loiter, idle, wander,
stroll, or play in or upon the public street, or other public places, during
the period between 12:30 a.m. and 4:30 a.m.



   (B)   This section does not apply to a minor who is:



      (1)   Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;



      (2)   On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or
guardian, without any detour or stop;



      (3)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;



      (4)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or
returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;



      (5)   Involved in an emergency;



      (6)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or
abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not
complain to the police department about the minor's presence;



      (7)   Attending an official school, religious, or other
recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic
organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the
minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an
official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by
adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar
entity that takes responsibility for the minor;



      (8)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the
United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech, and the right of assembly; or



      (9)   Married or had been married or had disabilities of
minority removed in accordance with state law.



   (C)   The parent, guardian or person having the care, custody or
control of any minor violating any of the provisions of this section shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Ord. 1965-13, passed 7-6-65)  Penalty, see § 130.99



CHAPTER 133:  SEX OFFENSES



Section



   133.01   Definitions



   133.02   Unlawful sexual conduct with a minor



   133.03   Sexual imposition



   133.04   Public indecency



   133.05   Voyeurism



   133.06   Polygraph examinations for victims: restrictions on use



   133.07   Procuring



   133.08   Soliciting; loitering to engage in



   133.09   Prostitution



   133.10   Disseminating matter harmful to juveniles



   133.11   Displaying matter harmful to juveniles



   133.12   Deception to obtain matter harmful to juveniles



   133.13   Rules of evidence



   133.14   Declaratory judgment



   133.15   Injunction; abatement of nuisance



   133.16   Unlawful operation of viewing booths depicting sexual
conduct



   133.17   Juveniles on the premises of adult entertainment
establishments prohibited



   133.18   Sexually oriented businesses; illegal operation and activity



   133.19   Unlawful advertising of massage



   133.20   Nonconsensual dissemination of private sexual images



 



   133.99   Sentencing for sexually oriented offenses; sexual
predators; registration



Cross-reference:



       Sexual conduct with an animal, see § 95.27



Statutory reference:



   Assistance to victims of sexual assault, see  R.C. §§ 2907.28 -
2907.30



   Child victim, disposition of, see R.C. § 2945.481



   Examination of the accused for venereal disease and AIDS, see R.C. §
2907.27



   Suppression of information at trial, see R.C. § 2907.11



§ 133.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall
have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.



   HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.  That quality of any material or performance
describing or representing nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, or
sado-masochistic abuse in any form to which all of the following apply:



      (1)   The material or performance, when considered as a whole,
appeals to the prurient interest of juveniles in sex.



      (2)   The material or performance is patently offensive to
prevailing standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what
is suitable for juveniles.



      (3)   The material or performance, when considered as a whole,
lacks serious literary, artistic, political, and scientific value for
juveniles.



   JUVENILE.  Any unmarried person under 18 years of age.



   MATERIAL.  Any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, poster, print,
picture, figure, image, description, motion picture film, video cassette,
laser disc, phonograph record, cassette tape, compact disc, or other tangible
thing capable of arousing interest through sight, sound, or touch and
includes an image or text appearing on a computer monitor, television screen,
liquid crystal display, or similar display device or an image or text
recorded on a computer hard disk, computer floppy disk, compact disk,
magnetic tape, or similar data storage device.



   MENTAL HEALTH CLIENT OR PATIENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2305.51.



   MENTAL HEALTH PROFESSIONAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2305.115.



   MINOR.  A person under the age of 18.



   NUDITY.  The showing, representation, or depiction of human male or
female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a full, opaque
covering, or of a female breast with less than a full, opaque covering of any
portion thereof below the top of the nipple, or of covered male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state.



   OBSCENE.  When considered as a whole, and judged with reference to
ordinary adults or, if it is designed for sexual deviates or other specially
susceptible group, judged with reference to that group, any material or
performance is OBSCENE if any of the following apply:



      (1)   Its dominant appeal is to prurient interest.



      (2)   Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or
depicting sexual activity, masturbation, sexual excitement, or nudity in a
way that tends to represent human beings as mere objects of sexual appetite.



      (3)   Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or
depicting bestiality or extreme or bizarre violence, cruelty, or brutality.



      (4)   Its dominant tendency is to appeal to scatological
interest by displaying or depicting human bodily functions of elimination in
a way that inspires disgust or revulsion in persons with ordinary
sensibilities, without serving any genuine scientific, educational,
sociological, moral, or artistic purpose.



      (5)   It contains a series of displays or descriptions of
sexual activity, masturbation, sexual excitement, nudity, bestiality, extreme
or bizarre violence, cruelty, or brutality, or human bodily functions of
elimination, the cumulative effect of which is a dominant tendency to appeal
to prurient or scatological interest, when the appeal to such an interest is
primarily for its own sake or for commercial exploitation, rather than
primarily for a genuine scientific, educational, sociological, moral, or
artistic purpose.



   PERFORMANCE.  Any motion picture, preview, trailer, play, show, skit,
dance, or other exhibition performed before an audience.



   PROSTITUTE.  A male or female who promiscuously engages in sexual
activity for hire, regardless of whether the hire is paid to the prostitute
or to another.



   SADO-MASOCHISTIC ABUSE. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person or
the condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restrained.



   SEXUAL ACTIVITY.  Sexual conduct or sexual contact, or both.



   SEXUAL CONDUCT.  Vaginal intercourse between a male and female; anal
intercourse, fellatio, and cunnilingus between persons regardless of sex;
and, without privilege to do so, the insertion, however slight, of any part
of the body or any instrument, apparatus, or other object into the vaginal or
anal opening of another.  Penetration, however slight, is sufficient to
complete vaginal or anal intercourse.



   SEXUAL CONTACT.  Any touching of an erogenous zone of another,
including without limitation the thigh, genitals, buttock, pubic region, or,
if the person is a female, a breast, for the purpose of sexually arousing or
gratifying either person.



   SEXUAL EXCITEMENT.  The condition of human male or female genitals
when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.



   SPOUSE.  A person married to an offender at the time of an alleged
offense, except that such person shall not be considered the spouse when any
of the following apply:



      (1)   When the parties have entered into a written separation
agreement pursuant to R.C. § 3103.06.



      (2)   When an action is pending between the parties for
annulment, divorce, dissolution of marriage, or legal separation.



      (3)   In the case of an action for legal separation, after the
effective date of the judgment for legal separation.



(R.C. § 2907.01)



§ 133.02  UNLAWFUL SEXUAL CONDUCT WITH A MINOR.



   (A)   No person who is 18 years of age or older shall engage in
sexual conduct with another who is not the spouse of the offender, when the
offender knows the other person is 13 years of age or older but less than 16
years of age, or the offender is reckless in that regard.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful sexual
conduct with a minor.



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2),
unlawful sexual conduct with a minor is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(3) of this
section, if the offender is less than four years older than the other person,
unlawful sexual conduct with a minor is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (3)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a violation of R.C. § 2907.02, 2907.03 or 2907.04, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or a violation of former R.C.
§ 2907.12, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, unlawful
sexual conduct with a minor is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.



(R.C. § 2907.04)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   DNA testing of prisoners for violating this section, see R.C. § 2901.07



§ 133.03  SEXUAL IMPOSITION.



   (A)   No person shall have sexual contact with another, not the
spouse of the offender; cause another, not the spouse of the offender, to
have sexual contact with the offender; or cause two or more other persons to
have sexual contact when any of the following applies:



      (1)   The offender knows that the sexual contact is offensive
to the other person, or one of the other persons, or is reckless in that
regard.



      (2)   The offender knows that the other person's, or one of
the other person's ability to appraise the nature of or control the
offender's or touching person's conduct is substantially impaired.



      (3)   The offender knows that the other person, or one of the
other persons, submits because of being unaware of the sexual contact.



      (4)   The other person, or one of the other persons, is 13
years of age or older but less than 16 years of age, whether or not the
offender knows the age of the person, and the offender is at least 18 years
of age and four or more years older than the other person.



      (5)   The offender is a mental health professional, the other
person or one of the other persons is a mental health client or patient of
the offender, and the offender induces the other person who is the client or
patient to submit by falsely representing to the other person who is the
client or patient that the sexual contact is necessary for mental health
treatment purposes.



   (B)   No person shall be convicted of a violation of this section
solely upon the victim's testimony unsupported by other evidence.



   (C)    Whoever violates this section is guilty of sexual imposition,
a misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this section, R.C. §
2907.02, 2907.03, 2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.06, former R.C. § 2907.12, or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of
this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of this
section, R.C. § 2907.02, 2907.03, 2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.06, former R.C. §
2907.12, or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or
of any combination of those sections, a violation of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree and, notwithstanding the range of jail terms
prescribed in R.C. § 2929.24, the court may impose on the offender a
definite jail term of not more than one year.



(R.C. § 2907.06)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Gross sexual imposition, felony, see R.C. § 2907.05



   Notice to licensing board or agency upon indictment, conviction or
guilty plea of mental health professional, see R.C. §§ 2907.17 and 2907.18



§ 133.04  PUBLIC INDECENCY.



   (A)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following, under
circumstances in which the person’s conduct is likely to be viewed by and
affront others who are in the person’s physical proximity and who are not
members of the person’s household:



      (1)   Expose the person’s private parts.



      (2)   Engage in sexual conduct or masturbation.



      (3)   Engage in conduct that to an ordinary observer would
appear to be sexual conduct or masturbation.



   (B)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following, under
circumstances in which the person's conduct is likely to be viewed by and
affront another person who is in the person's physical proximity, who is a
minor, and who is not the spouse of the offender:



      (1)   Engage in masturbation.



      (2)   Engage in sexual conduct.



      (3)   Engage in conduct that to an ordinary observer would
appear to be sexual conduct or masturbation.



      (4)   Expose the person’s private parts with the purpose of
personal sexual arousal or gratification or to lure the minor into sexual
activity.



   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of public
indecency and shall be punished as provided in divisions (C)(2), (C)(3),
(C)(4) and (C)(5) of this section.



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(2), a
violation of division (A)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
one violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a violation of division (A)(1) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the third degree or, if any person who was likely to view and
be affronted by the offender’s conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the
second degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two violations of this section or a substantially equivalent state
law municipal ordinance, a violation of division (A)(1) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the second degree or, if any person who was likely to view and
be affronted by the offender’s conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to three or more violations of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of division (A)(1)
of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if any person who
was likely to view and be affronted by the offender’s conduct was a minor,
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(3), a
violation of division (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the third degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state
law or municipal ordinance, a violation of division (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the second degree or, if any person who was
likely to view and be affronted by the offender’s conduct was a minor, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law municipal ordinance, a violation of
division (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by the
offender’s conduct was a minor, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.



      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(4), a
violation of division (B)(1), (B)(2) or (B)(3) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the second degree. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of
division (B)(1), (B)(2) or (B)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law municipal ordinance, a violation of division (B)(1),
(B)(2) or (B)(3) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(5), a
violation of division (B)(4) of this section  is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
any violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law
municipal ordinance, a violation of division (B)(4) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2907.09)



   (D)   (1)   If either of the following applies, the court may
determine at the time of sentencing whether to classify the offender as a
tier I sex offender/child-victim offender for a violation of division (B)(4)
of this section:



         (a)   The offender is less than ten years older than the
other person.



         (b)   The offender is ten or more years older than the
other person and the offender has not previously been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to any violation of this section or any substantially equivalent state
law or municipal ordinance.



      (2)   If the offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of division (B)(4) of this section, is ten or more years older than
the other person, and previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
any violation of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, the court shall issue an order at the time of sentencing
that classifies the offender as a tier I sex offender/child-victim offender
subject to registration under R.C. §§ 2950.04, 2950.041, 2950.05, and
2950.06.



   (E)   A mother is entitled to breast-feed her baby in any location
of a place of public accommodation, as defined in R.C. § 4112.01, wherein
the mother otherwise is permitted.



(R.C. § 3781.55)



Statutory reference:



   Bail considerations for persons charged, see R.C. § 2907.41



§ 133.05  VOYEURISM.



   (A)   No person, for the purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying
himself or herself, shall commit trespass or otherwise surreptitiously invade
the privacy of another, to spy or eavesdrop upon another.



   (B)   No person, for the purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying
himself or herself, shall commit trespass or otherwise surreptitiously invade
the privacy of another to videotape, film, photograph, or otherwise record
the other person in a state of nudity.



   (C)   No person, for the purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying
himself or herself, shall commit trespass or otherwise surreptitiously invade
the privacy of another to videotape, film, photograph, or otherwise record,
or spy or eavesdrop upon the other person in a state of nudity if the other
person is a minor.



   (D)   No person shall secretly or surreptitiously videotape, film,
photograph, or otherwise record another person under or through the clothing
being worn by that person for the purpose of viewing the body of, or the
undergarments worn by, that other person.



   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of voyeurism.



      (1)   A violation of division (A) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the third degree.



      (2)   A violation of division (B) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the second degree.



      (3)   A violation of division (D) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (4)   A violation of division (C) of this section is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2907.08)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 133.06  POLYGRAPH EXAMINATIONS FOR VICTIMS: RESTRICTIONS ON USE.



   (A)   (1)   A peace officer, prosecutor, or other public official
shall not ask or require a victim of an alleged sex offense to submit to a
polygraph examination as a condition for proceeding with the investigation of
the alleged sex offense.



      (2)   The refusal of the victim of an alleged sex offense to
submit to a polygraph examination shall not prevent the investigation of the
alleged sex offense, the filing of criminal charges with respect to the
alleged sex offense, or the prosecution of the alleged perpetrator of the
alleged sex offense.



   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      PEACE OFFICER.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.51.



      POLYGRAPH EXAMINATION.  Any mechanical or electrical instrument
or device of any type used or allegedly used to examine, test or question an
individual for the purpose of determining the individual’s truthfulness.



      PROSECUTION.  The prosecution of criminal charges in a criminal
prosecution or the prosecution of a delinquent child complaint in a
delinquency proceeding.



      PROSECUTOR.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01.



      PUBLIC OFFICIAL.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 117.01.



      SEX OFFENSE.  A violation of any provision of §§ 133.02 to
133.05 or R.C. §§ 2907.02 to 2907.09.



(R.C. § 2907.10)



§ 133.07  PROCURING.



   (A)   No person, knowingly and for gain, shall do either of the
following:



      (1)   Entice or solicit another to patronize a prostitute or
brothel;



      (2)   Procure a prostitute for another to patronize, or take
or direct another at the other’s request to any place for the purpose of
patronizing a prostitute.



   (B)   No person, having authority or responsibility over the use of
premises, shall knowingly permit the premises to be used for the purpose of
engaging in sexual activity for hire.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of procuring. Except
as otherwise provided in this division, procuring is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the prostitute who is procured, patronized, or otherwise
involved in a violation of division (A)(2) of this section is under 18 years
of age at the time of the violation, regardless of whether the offender who
violates division (A)(2) of this section knows the prostitute’s age, or if
a prostitute who engages in sexual activity for hire in premises used in
violation of division (B) of this section is under 18 years of age at the
time of the violation, regardless of whether the offender who violates
division (B) of this section knows the prostitute’s age, procuring is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2907.23)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 133.08  SOLICITING; LOITERING TO ENGAGE IN.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall solicit another who is 18 years of
age or older to engage with the other person in sexual activity for hire.



      (2)   No person shall solicit another to engage with such
other person in sexual activity for hire if the other person is 16 or 17
years of age and the offender knows that the other person is 16 or 17 years
of age or is reckless in that regard.



      (3)   No person shall solicit another to engage with such
other person in sexual activity for hire if either of the following applies:



         (a)   The other person is less than 16 years of age,
whether or not the offender knows the age of the other person.



         (b)   The other person is a person with a developmental
disability and the offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe the
other person is a person with a developmental disability.



   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is
guilty of soliciting. A violation of division (A)(1) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the third degree. A violation of division (A)(2) or (A)(3) of
this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (2)   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of division (A) of this section or an attempt to commit a violation
of division (A) of this section and if the person, in committing or
attempting to commit the violation, was in, was on, or used a motor vehicle,
the court, in addition to or independent of all other penalties imposed for
the violation, may impose upon the offender a class six suspension of the
person’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege
from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(6). In lieu of imposing upon
the offender the class six suspension, the court instead may require the
offender to perform community service for a number of hours determined by the
court.



   (C)   As used in division (A) of this section:



      PERSONWITH A DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITY. Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2905.32.



      SEXUAL ACTIVITY FOR HIRE. Means an implicit or explicit agreement
to provide sexual activity in exchange for anything of value paid to the
person engaging in such sexual activity, to any person trafficking that
person, or to any person associated with either such person.



(R.C. § 2907.24(A), (C)(1), (D), (E))



   (D)   No person, with purpose to solicit another to engage in sexual
activity for hire and while in or near a public place, shall do any of the
following:



      (1)   Beckon to, stop or attempt to stop another;



      (2)   Engage or attempt to engage another in conversation;



      (3)   Stop or attempt to stop the operator of a vehicle or
approach a stationary vehicle;



      (4)   If the offender is the operator of or a passenger in a
vehicle, stop, attempt to stop, beckon to, attempt to beckon to, or entice
another to approach or enter the vehicle of which the offender is the
operator or in which the offender is the passenger;



      (5)   Interfere with the free passage of another.



   (E)   As used in division (D) of this section:



      PUBLIC PLACE means any of the following:



         (a)   A street, road, highway, thoroughfare, bikeway,
walkway, sidewalk, bridge, alley, alleyway, plaza, park, driveway, parking
lot or transportation facility.



         (b)   A doorway or entrance way to a building that
fronts on a place described in division (a) of this definition.



         (c)   A place not described in division (a) or (b) of
this definition that is open to the public.



      VEHICLE.   Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.



   (F)   Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty of
loitering to engage in solicitation, a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 2907.241)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Offenders with knowledge that they test HIV positive, felony, see R.C.
§§ 2907.24(B) and 2907.241(B)



   Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see R.C. § 2907.27



§ 133.09  PROSTITUTION.



   (A)   No person shall engage in sexual activity for hire.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of prostitution, a
misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 2907.25)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Offenders with knowledge that they test HIV positive, felony, see R.C.
§ 2907.25(B)



   Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see R.C. § 2907.27



§ 133.10  DISSEMINATING MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.



   (A)   No person, with knowledge of its character or content, shall
recklessly do any of following:



      (1)   Directly sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide,
exhibit, rent, or present to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law
enforcement officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement
officers posing as juveniles any material or performance that is obscene or
harmful to juveniles;



      (2)   Directly offer or agree to sell, deliver, furnish,
disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent, or present to a juvenile, a group of
juveniles, a law enforcement officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law
enforcement officers posing as juveniles any material or performance that is
obscene or harmful to juveniles;



      (3)   While in the physical proximity of the juvenile or law
enforcement officer posing as a juvenile, allow any juvenile or law
enforcement officer posing as a juvenile to review or peruse any material or
view any live performance that is harmful to juveniles.



   (B)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this
section that involves material or a performance that is harmful to juveniles
but not obscene:



      (1)   The defendant is the parent, guardian, or spouse of the
juvenile involved.



      (2)   The juvenile involved, at the time of the conduct in
question, was accompanied by his or her parent or guardian who, with
knowledge of its character, consented to the material or performance being
furnished or presented to the juvenile.



      (3)   The juvenile exhibited to the defendant or his or her
agent or employee a draft card, driver's license, birth record, marriage
license, or other official or apparently official document purporting to show
that the juvenile was 18 years of age or over or married, and the person to
whom the document was exhibited did not otherwise have reasonable cause to
believe that the juvenile was under the age of 18 and unmarried.



   (C)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this
section, involving material or a performance that is obscene or harmful to
juveniles, that the material or performance was furnished or presented for a
bona fide medical, scientific, educational, governmental, judicial, or other
proper purpose, by a physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist,
teacher, librarian, clergy, prosecutor, judge, or other proper person.



      (2)   Except as provided in division (B)(3) of this section,
mistake of age is not a defense to a charge under this section.



   (D)   (1)   A person directly sells, delivers, furnishes,
disseminates, provides, exhibits, rents, or presents or directly offers or
agrees to sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent, or
present material or a performance to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law
enforcement officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement
officers posing as juveniles in violation of this section by means of an
electronic method of remotely transmitting information if the person knows or
has reason to believe that the person receiving the information is a juvenile
or the group of persons receiving the information are juveniles.



      (2)   A person remotely transmitting information by means of a
method of mass distribution does not directly sell, deliver, furnish,
disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent, or present or directly offer or agree to
sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent, or present the
material or performance in question to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a
law enforcement officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement
officers posing as juveniles in violation of this section if either of the
following applies:



         (a)   The person has inadequate information to know or
have reason to believe that a particular recipient of the information or
offer is a juvenile.



         (b)   The method of mass distribution does not provide
the person the ability to prevent a particular recipient from receiving the
information.



   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disseminating
matter harmful to juveniles.  If the material or performance involved is
harmful to juveniles except as otherwise provided in this division, a
violation of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the
material or performance involved is obscene, violation of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2907.31)



   (F)   Presumptions, notice and defense.



      (1)   An owner or manager, or agent or employee of an owner or
manager, of a bookstore, newsstand, theater, or other commercial
establishment engaged in selling material or exhibiting performances, who, in
the course of business does any of the acts prohibited by this section is
presumed to have knowledge of the character of the material or performance
involved if the owner, manager, or agent or employee of the owner or manager
has actual notice of the nature of such material or performance, whether or
not the owner, manager, or agent or employee of the owner or manager has
precise knowledge of its contents.



      (2)   Without limitation on the manner in which such notice
may be given, actual notice of the character of material or a performance may
be given in writing by the chief legal officer of the municipality.  Such
notice, regardless of the manner in which it is given, shall identify the
sender, identify the material or performance involved, state whether it is
obscene or harmful to juveniles, and bear the date of such notice.



      (3)   This § 133.10 does not apply to a motion picture
operator or projectionist acting within the scope of his or her employment as
an employee of the owner or manager of the theater or other place for the
showing of motion pictures to the general public, and having no managerial
responsibility or financial interest in his or her place of employment, other
than wages.



      (4)   (a)   The provisions of §§ 133.10, 133.11 and
133.12(A) do not apply to a person solely because the person provided access
or connection to or from an electronic method of remotely transferring
information not under that person’s control, including having provided
capabilities that are incidental to providing access or connection to or from
the electronic method of remotely transferring the information, and that do
not include the creation of the content of the material that is the subject
of the access or connection.



         (b)   Division (F)(4)(a) of this section does not apply
to a person who conspires with an entity actively involved in the creation or
knowing distribution of material in violation of § 133.10, 133.11, or 133.12
or who knowingly advertises the availability of material of that nature.



         (c)   Division (F)(4)(a) of this section does not apply
to a person who provides access or connection to an electronic method of
remotely transferring information that is engaged in the violation of §
133.10, 133.11, or 133.12 and that contain content that person has selected
and introduced into the electronic method of remotely transferring
information or content over which that person exercises editorial control.



      (5)   An employer is not guilty of a violation of § 133.10,
133.11, or 133.12 based on the actions of an employee or agent of the
employer unless the employee’s or agent’s conduct is within the scope of
the employee’s or agent’s employment or agency, and the employer does
either of the following:



         (a)   With knowledge of the employee’s or agent’s
conduct, the employer authorizes or ratifies the conduct.



         (b)   The employer recklessly disregards the
employee’s or agent’s conduct.



      (6)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under § 133.10
or 133.11 as the section applies to an image transmitted through the internet
or other electronic method of remotely transmitting information that the
person charged with violating the section has taken, in good faith,
reasonable, effective, and appropriate actions under the circumstances to
restrict or prevent access by juveniles to material that is harmful to
juveniles, including any method that is feasible under available technology.



(R.C. § 2907.35)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 133.11  DISPLAYING MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.



   (A)   No person who has custody, control, or supervision of a
commercial establishment, with knowledge of the character or content of the
material involved, shall display at the establishment any material that is
harmful to juveniles and that is open to view by juveniles as part of the
invited general public.



   (B)   It is not a violation of division (A) of this section if the
material in question is displayed by placing it behind “blinder racks” or
similar devices that cover at least the lower two-thirds of the material, if
the material in question is wrapped or placed behind the counter, or if the
material in question otherwise is covered or located so that the portion that
is harmful to juveniles is not open to the view of juveniles.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of displaying matter
harmful to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  Each day during
which the offender is in violation of this section constitutes a separate
offense.



(R.C. § 2907.311)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Cross-reference:



   Presumptions, notice and defense, see § 133.10(E)



§ 133.12  DECEPTION TO OBTAIN MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.



   (A)   No person, for the purpose of enabling a juvenile to obtain
any material or gain admission to any performance which is harmful to
juveniles, shall do either of the following:



      (1)   Falsely represent that he or she is the parent,
guardian, or spouse of the juvenile.



      (2)   Furnish the juvenile with any identification or document
purporting to show that the juvenile is 18 years of age or over or married.



   (B)   No juvenile, for the purpose of obtaining any material or
gaining admission to any performance which is harmful to juveniles, shall do
either of the following:



      (1)   Falsely represent that he or she is 18 years of age or
over or married.



      (2)   Exhibit any identification or document purporting to
show that he or she is 18 years of age or over or married.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of deception to obtain
matter harmful to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the second degree.  A juvenile
who violates division (B) of this section shall be adjudged an unruly child,
with the disposition of the case as may be appropriate under R.C. Chapter
2151.



(R.C. § 2907.33)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Cross-reference:



   Presumptions, notice and defense, see § 133.10(E)



Statutory reference:



   Juvenile Court, see R.C. Chapter 2151



§ 133.13  RULES OF EVIDENCE.



   (A)   In any case in which it is necessary to prove that a place is
a brothel, evidence as to the reputation of such place and as to the
reputation of the persons who inhabit or frequent it is admissible on the
question of whether such place is or is not a brothel.



   (B)   In any case in which it is necessary to prove that a person is
a prostitute, evidence as to the reputation of such person is admissible on
the question of whether such person is or is not a prostitute.



   (C)   In any prosecution for a violation of §§ 133.07 to 133.09,
proof of a prior conviction of the accused of any such offense or
substantially equivalent offense is admissible in support of the charge.



   (D)   The prohibition contained in R.C. § 2317.02(D) against
testimony by a husband or wife concerning communications between them does
not apply, and the accused's spouse may testify concerning any such
communication in any of the following cases:



      (1)   When the husband or wife is charged with a violation of
§ 133.07 and the spouse testifying was the prostitute involved in the
offense or the person who used the offender's premises to engage in sexual
activity for hire;



      (2)   When the husband or wife is charged with a violation of
§ 133.08(A) or § 133.09.



(R.C. § 2907.26)



§ 133.14  DECLARATORY JUDGMENT.



   (A)   Without limitation on the persons otherwise entitled to bring
an action for a declaratory judgment pursuant to R.C. Chapter 2721, involving
the same issue, the following persons have standing to bring a declaratory
judgment action to determine whether particular materials or performances are
obscene or harmful to juveniles:



      (1)   The chief legal officer of the municipality if and when
there is reasonable cause to believe that R.C. § 2907.31 or R.C. § 2907.32,
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, is being or is about to be
violated;



      (2)   Any person who, pursuant to R.C. § 2907.35(B) or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, has received notice in writing
from the chief legal officer stating that particular materials or
performances are obscene or harmful to juveniles.



   (B)   Any party to an action for a declaratory judgment pursuant to
division (A) of this section is entitled, upon the party's request, to trial
on the merits within five days after joinder of the issues, and the court
shall render judgment within five days after trial is concluded.



   (C)   An action for a declaratory judgement pursuant to division (A)
of this section shall not be brought during the pendency of any civil action
or criminal prosecution when the character of the particular materials or
performances involved is at issue in the pending case, and either of the
following applies:



      (1)   Either of the parties to the action for a declaratory
judgment is a party to the pending case;



      (2)   A judgment in the pending case will necessarily
constitute res judicata as to the character of the materials or performances
involved.



   (D)   A civil action or criminal prosecution in which the character
of particular materials or performances is at issue, brought during the
pendency of an action for a declaratory judgment involving the same issue,
shall be stayed during the pendency of the action for a declaratory judgment.



   (E)   The fact that a violation of R.C. § 2907.31 or R.C. §
2907.32, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, occurs prior to a
judicial determination of the character of the material or performance
involved in the violation does not relieve the offender of criminal liability
for the violation, even though prosecution may be stayed pending the judicial
determination.



(R.C. § 2907.36)



§ 133.15  INJUNCTION; ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.



   (A)   Where it appears that R.C. § 2907.31 or R.C. § 2907.32, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, is being or is about to be
violated, the chief legal officer of the municipality may bring an action to
enjoin the violation.  The defendant, upon his or her request, is entitled
to trial on the merits within five days after the joinder of the issues, and
the court shall render judgment within five days after the trial is concluded.



   (B)   Premises used or occupied for repeated violations of R.C. §
2907.31 or R.C. § 2907.32, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, constitute a nuisance subject to abatement pursuant to R.C.
Chapter 3767.



(R.C. § 2907.37)



Statutory reference:



   Disseminating matter harmful to juveniles, felony, see R.C. § 2907.31



   Pandering obscenity, felony, see R.C. § 2907.32



§ 133.16  UNLAWFUL OPERATION OF VIEWING BOOTHS DEPICTING SEXUAL CONDUCT.



   (A)   As used in this section:



      COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT means an entity that is open to the
public and to which either of the following applies:



         (a)   It has a substantial or significant portion of its
stock in trade of the sale, rental, or viewing of visual materials or
performances depicting sexual conduct.



         (b)   It has as a principal business purpose the sale,
rental, or viewing of visual materials or performances depicting sexual
conduct.



      VISUAL MATERIALS OR PERFORMANCES means films, videos, CD-ROM
discs, streaming video, or other motion pictures.



   (B)   No person who has custody, control, or supervision of a
commercial establishment, with knowledge of the character of the visual
material or performance involved, shall knowingly permit the use of, or offer
the use of, viewing booths, stalls, or partitioned portions of a room located
in the commercial establishment for the purpose of viewing visual materials
or performances depicting sexual conduct unless both of the following apply:



      (1)   The inside of each booth, stall, or partitioned room is
visible from, and at least one side of each booth, stall, or partitioned room
is open to, a continuous and contiguous main aisle or hallway that is open to
the public areas of the commercial establishment and is not obscured by any
curtain, door, or other covering or enclosure.



      (2)   No booth, stall, or partitioned room is designed,
constructed, pandered, or allowed to be used for the purpose of encouraging
or facilitating nudity or sexual activity on the part of or between patrons
or members of the public, and no booth, stall, or partitioned room has any
aperture, hole, or opening for the purpose of encouraging or facilitating
nudity or sexual activity.



   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section
that either of the following applies to the involved visual materials or
performances:



      (1)   The visual materials or performances depicting sexual
conduct are disseminated or presented for a bona fide medical, scientific,
educational, religious, governmental, judicial, or other proper purpose and
by or to a physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist, teacher, person
pursuing bona fide studies or research, librarian, member of the clergy,
prosecutor, judge, or other person having a proper interest in the visual
materials or performances.



      (2)   The visual materials or performances depicting sexual
conduct, taken as a whole, would be found by a reasonable person to have
serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value or are presented
or disseminated in good faith for a serious literary, artistic, political, or
scientific purpose and are not pandered for their prurient appeal.



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of permitting unlawful
operation of viewing booths depicting sexual conduct, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.



(R.C. § 2907.38)



§ 133.17  JUVENILES ON THE PREMISES OF ADULT ENTERTAINMENT  ESTABLISHMENTS
PROHIBITED.



   (A)   As used in this section:



      ADULT ARCADE means any place to which the public is permitted or
invited in which coin-operated, slug-operated, or electronically,
electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines,
projectors, or other image-producing devices are regularly maintained to show
images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and in which the
images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon
matter exhibiting or describing specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.



      ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE, or ADULT VIDEO STORE.



         (a)   Means a commercial establishment that, for any
form of consideration, has as a significant or substantial portion of its
stock-in-trade in, derives a significant or substantial portion of its
revenues from, devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior
business or advertising to, or maintains a substantial section of its sales
or display space for the sale or rental of any of the following:



            1.   Books, magazines, periodicals, or other
printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes,
compact discs, slides, or other visual representations, that are
characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas;



            2.   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that
are designed for use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital
organs or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of self or others.



         (b)   Includes a commercial establishment as defined in
R.C. § 2907.38. An establishment may have other principal business purposes
that do not involve the offering for sale, rental, or viewing of materials
exhibiting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas and still be categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or
adult video store. The existence of other principal business purposes does
not exempt an establishment from being categorized as an adult bookstore,
adult novelty store, or adult video store so long as one of its principal
business purposes is offering for sale or rental, for some form of
consideration, such materials that exhibit or describe specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.



      ADULT CABARET means a nightclub, bar, juice bar, restaurant,
bottle club, or similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic
beverages are served, that regularly features any of the following:



         (a)   Persons who appear in a state of nudity or
seminudity;



         (b)   Live performances that are characterized by the
exposure of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities;



         (c)   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides,
or other photographic reproductions that are distinguished or characterized
by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.



      ADULT ENTERTAINMENT means the sale, rental, or exhibition, for
any form of consideration, of books, films, video cassettes, magazines,
periodicals, or live performances that are characterized by an emphasis on
the exposure or display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual
activity.



      ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT means an adult arcade, adult
bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult
motion picture theater, adult theater, nude or seminude model studio, or
sexual encounter establishment. An establishment in which a medical
practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional person
licensed by the state engages in medically approved and recognized therapy,
including, but not limited to, massage therapy, as regulated pursuant to R.C.
§ 4731.15, is not an “adult entertainment establishment”.



      ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER means a commercial establishment
where films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar
photographic reproductions that are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis upon the exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas are regularly shown for any form of consideration.



      ADULT THEATER means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or
similar commercial establishment that, for any form of consideration,
regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity or
live performances that are characterized by their emphasis upon the exposure
of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.



      DISTINGUISHED OR CHARACTERIZED BY THEIR EMPHASIS UPON means the
dominant or principal character and theme of the object described by this
phrase. For instance, when the phrase refers to films “that are
distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas”,
the films so described are those whose dominant or principal character and
theme are the exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.



      NUDE OR SEMINUDE MODEL STUDIO means any place where a person, who
regularly appears in a state of nudity or seminudity, is provided for money
or any other form of consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted,
sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons. A modeling
class or studio is not a nude or seminude model studio and is not subject to
this chapter if it is operated in any of the following ways:



         (a)   By a college or university supported entirely or
partly by taxation;



         (b)   By a private college or university that maintains
and operates educational programs, the credits for which are transferable to
a college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;



         (c)   In a structure that has no sign visible from the
exterior of the structure and no other advertising indicating that a person
appearing in a state of nudity or seminudity is available for viewing, if in
order to participate in a class in the structure, a student must enroll at
least three days in advance of the class and if not more than one nude or
seminude model is on the premises at any one time.



      NUDITY, NUDE, or STATE OF NUDITY means the showing of the human
male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft, or cleavage
with less than a fully opaque covering; or the showing of the female breasts
with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple.



      REGULARLY FEATURES or REGULARLY SHOWN means a consistent or
substantial course of conduct, such that the films or performances exhibited
constitute a substantial portion of the films or performances offered as a
part of the ongoing business of the adult entertainment establishment.



      SEMINUDE or STATE OF SEMINUDITY means a state of dress in which
opaque clothing covers not more than the genitals, pubic region, and nipple
of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting
straps or devices.



      SEXUAL ENCOUNTER ESTABLISHMENT.



         (a)   Means a business or commercial establishment that,
as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of
consideration a place where either of the following occur:



            1.   Two or more persons may congregate,
associate, or consort for the purpose of engaging in specified sexual
activities.



            2.   Two or more persons appear nude or seminude
for the purpose of displaying their nude or seminude bodies for their receipt
of consideration or compensation in any type or form.



         (b)   An establishment where a medical practitioner,
psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the
state engages in medically approved and recognized therapy, including, but
not limited to, massage therapy, as regulated pursuant to R.C. § 4731.15, is
not a “sexual encounter establishment”.



      SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS means the cleft of the buttocks, anus,
male or female genitals, or the female breast.



      SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY means any of the following:



         (a)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, or actual or
simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, or sodomy;



         (b)   Excretory functions as a part of or in connection
with any of the activities described in division (a) of this definition.



   (B)   No person knowingly shall allow an individual, including, but
not limited to, a patron, customer, or employee, who is under 18 years of age
on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment.



   (C)   No individual who is under 18 years of age knowingly shall
show or give false information concerning the individual’s name or age, or
other false identification, for the purpose of gaining entrance to an adult
entertainment establishment.



   (D)   A person shall not be found guilty of a violation of division
(B) of this section if the person raises as an affirmative defense and if the
jury or, in a nonjury trial, the court finds the person has established by a
preponderance of the evidence, all of the following:



      (1)   The individual gaining entrance to the adult
entertainment establishment exhibited to an operator, employee, agent, or
independent contractor of the adult entertainment establishment a driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or an identification card issued under R.C.
§§ 4507.50 and 4507.52 showing that the individual was then at least 18
years of age.



      (2)   The operator, employee, agent, or independent contractor
made a bona fide effort to ascertain the true age of the individual gaining
entrance to the adult entertainment establishment by checking the
identification presented, at the time of entrance, to ascertain that the
description on the identification compared with the appearance of the
individual and that the identification had not been altered in any way.



      (3)   The operator, employee, agent, or independent contractor
had reason to believe that the individual gaining entrance to the adult
entertainment establishment was at least 18 years of age.



   (E)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense
described in division (D) of this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles or the Deputy Registrar who issued a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or an identification card under R.C. §§ 4507.50 and
4507.52 shall be permitted to submit certified copies of the records, in the
Registrar’s or Deputy Registrar’s possession, of the issuance of the
license or identification card in question, in lieu of the testimony of the
personnel of the Bureau of Motor Vehicles in the action.



   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is
guilty of permitting a juvenile on the premises of an adult entertainment
establishment, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day a person violates
this division constitutes a separate offense.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty
of use by a juvenile of false information to enter an adult entertainment
establishment, a delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree if committed by an adult.



(R.C. § 2907.39)



§ 133.18  SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES; ILLEGAL OPERATION AND ACTIVITY.



   (A)   As used in this section:



      ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE. A commercial establishment
that has as a significant or substantial portion of its stock in trade or
inventory in, derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues
from, devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business
or advertising to, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or display
space for the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of books,
magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs, films,
motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides, or other visual
representations, that are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition
or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



      ADULT CABARET. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.39.



      ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A commercial establishment where
films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic
reproductions that are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas are regularly shown
to more than five individuals for any form of consideration.



      CHARACTERIZED BY. Describing the essential character or quality
of an item.



      EMPLOYEE. Any individual who performs any service on the premises
of a sexually oriented business on a full-time, part-time, or contract basis,
regardless of whether the individual is denominated an employee, independent
contractor, agent, or otherwise, but does not include an individual
exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for
the delivery of goods to the premises.



      NUDITY, NUDE, or STATE OF NUDITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 2907.39.



      OPERATOR. Any individual on the premises of a sexually oriented
business who causes the business to function or who puts or keeps in
operation the business or who is authorized to manage the business or
exercise overall operational control of the business premises.



      PATRON. Any individual on the premises of a sexually oriented
business except for any of the following:



         (a)   An operator or an employee of the sexually
oriented business;



         (b)   An individual who is on the premises exclusively
for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the
premises;



         (c)   A public employee or a volunteer firefighter
emergency medical services worker acting within the scope of the public
employee’s or volunteer’s duties as a public employee or volunteer.



      PREMISES. The real property on which the sexually oriented
business is located and all appurtenances to the real property, including,
but not limited, to the sexually oriented business, the grounds, private
walkways, and parking lots or parking garages adjacent to the real property
under the ownership, control, or supervision of the owner or operator of the
sexually oriented business.



      REGULARLY. Consistently or repeatedly.



      SEMINUDE or STATE OF SEMINUDITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 2907.39.



      SEXUAL DEVICE. Any three-dimensional object designed and marketed
for stimulation of the male or female human genitals or anus or female
breasts or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of oneself or others, including,
but not limited to, dildos, vibrators, penis pumps, and physical
representations of the human genital organs, but not including devices
primarily intended for protection against sexually transmitted diseases or
for preventing pregnancy.



      SEXUAL DEVICE SHOP. A commercial establishment that regularly
features sexual devices, but not including any pharmacy, drug store, medical
clinic, or establishment primarily dedicated to providing medical or
healthcare products or services, and not including any commercial
establishment that does not restrict access to its premises by reason of age.



      SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER. A business or commercial enterprise
that, as one of its principal business purposes, purports to offer for any
form of consideration physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling
between individuals of the opposite sex when one or more of the individuals
is nude or seminude.



      SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. An adult bookstore, adult video
store, adult cabaret, adult motion picture theater, sexual device shop, or
sexual encounter center, but does not include a business solely by reason of
its showing, selling, or renting materials that may depict sex.



      SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.  Includes human genitals, pubic
region, and buttocks and the human female breast below a point immediately
above the top of the areola.



      SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Sexual intercourse, oral copulation,
masturbation, or sodomy, or excretory functions as a part of or in connection
with any of these activities.



   (B)   No sexually oriented business shall be or remain open for
business between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. on any day, except that a
sexually oriented business that holds a liquor permit pursuant to R.C.
Chapter 4303 may remain open until the hour specified in that permit if it
does not conduct, offer, or allow sexually oriented entertainment activity in
which the performers appear nude.



   (C)   (1)   No patron who is not a member of the employee’s
immediate family shall knowingly touch any employee while that employee is
nude or seminude or touch the clothing of any employee while that employee is
nude or seminude.



      (2)   No employee who regularly appears nude or seminude on
the premises of a sexually oriented business, while on the premises of that
sexually oriented business and while nude or seminude, shall knowingly touch
a patron who is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or another
employee who is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or the
clothing of a patron who is not a member of the employee’s immediate family
or another employee who is not a member of the employee’s immediate family
or allow a patron who is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or
another employee who is not a member of the employee’s immediate family to
touch the employee or the clothing of the employee.



   (D)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
illegally operating a sexually oriented business, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.



   (E)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of
illegal sexually oriented activity in a sexually oriented business. If the
offender touches a specified anatomical area of the patron or employee, or
the clothing covering a specified anatomical area, a violation of division
(C) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
does not touch a specified anatomical area of the patron or employee, or the
clothing covering a specified anatomical area, a violation of division (C) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 2907.40)



Statutory reference:



   State indemnification for certain municipal liability stemming from
local adult business regulations, see R.C. § 715.55



§ 133.19  UNLAWFUL ADVERTISING OF MASSAGE.



   (A)   No person, by means of a statement, solicitation, or offer in
a print or electronic publication, sign, placard, storefront display, or
other medium, shall advertise massage, relaxation massage, any other massage
technique or method, or any related service, with the suggestion or promise
of sexual activity.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful
advertising of massage, a misdemeanor of the first degree.



   (C)   Nothing in this section prevents the municipality from
enacting any regulation of the advertising of massage further than and in
addition to the provisions of divisions (A) and (B) of this section.



   (D)   As used in this section, SEXUAL ACTIVITY has the same meaning
as in R.C. § 2907.01.



(R.C. § 2927.17)



§ 133.20  NONCONSENSUAL DISSEMINATION OF PRIVATE SEXUAL IMAGES.



   (A)   As used in this section:



      CABLE SERVICE PROVIDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
1332.01.



      DIRECT-TO-HOME SATELLITE SERVICE. Has the meaning defined in 47
U.S.C. § 303, as amended.



      DISSEMINATE. Means to post, distribute, or publish on a computer
device, computer network, web site, or other electronic device or medium of
communication.



      IMAGE. Means a photograph, film, videotape, digital recording, or
other depiction or portrayal of a person.



      INTERACTIVE COMPUTER SERVICE. Has the meaning defined in the
"Telecommunications Act of 1996", 47 U.S.C. § 230, as amended.



      INTERNET PROVIDER. Means a provider of internet service,
including all of the following:



         (a)   Broadband service, however defined or classified
by the Federal Communications Commission;



         (b)   Information service or telecommunications service,
both as defined in the "Telecommunications Act of 1996", 47 U.S.C. § 153, as
amended;



         (c)   Internet protocol-enabled services, as defined in
R.C. § 4927.01.



      MOBILE SERVICE. Has the meaning defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153, as
amended.



      SEXUAL ACT. Means any of the following:



         (a)   Sexual activity;



         (b)   Masturbation;



         (c)   An act involving a bodily substance that is
performed for the purpose of sexual arousal or gratification;



         (d)   Sado-masochistic abuse.



      TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER. Has the meaning defined in 47 U.S.C.
§ 153, as amended.



      VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
1332.21.



   (B)   No person shall knowingly disseminate an image of another
person if all of the following apply:



      (1)   The person in the image is 18 years of age or older.



      (2)   The person in the image can be identified from the image
itself or from information displayed in connection with the image and the
offender supplied the identifying information.



      (3)   The person in the image is in a state of nudity or is
engaged in a sexual act.



      (4)   The image is disseminated without consent from the
person in the image.



      (5)   The image is disseminated with intent to harm the person
in the image.



   (C)   This section does not prohibit the dissemination of an image
if any of the following apply:



      (1)   The image is disseminated for the purpose of a criminal
investigation that is otherwise lawful.



      (2)   The image is disseminated for the purpose of, or in
connection with, the reporting of unlawful conduct.



      (3)   The image is part of a news report or commentary or an
artistic or expressive work, such as a performance, work of art, literary
work, theatrical work, musical work, motion picture, film, or audiovisual
work.



      (4)   The image is disseminated by a law enforcement officer,
or a corrections officer or guard in a detention facility, acting within the
scope of the person's official duties.



      (5)   The image is disseminated for another lawful public
purpose.



      (6)   The person in the image is knowingly and willingly in a
state of nudity or engaged in a sexual act and is knowingly and willingly in
a location in which the person does not have a reasonable expectation of
privacy.



      (7)   The image is disseminated for the purpose of medical
treatment or examination.



   (D)   The following entities are not liable for a violation of this
section solely as a result of an image or other information provided by
another person:



      (1)   A provider of interactive computer service;



      (2)   A mobile service;



      (3)   A telecommunications carrier;



      (4)   An internet provider;



      (5)   A cable service provider;



      (6)   A direct-to-home satellite service;



      (7)   A video service provider.



   (E)   Any conduct that is a violation of this section and any other
section of this Code or the Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under this
section, the other section, or both sections.



   (F)   (1)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division
(F)(1)(b), (F)(1)(c), or (F)(1)(d) of this section, whoever violates this
section is guilty of nonconsensual dissemination of private sexual images, a
misdemeanor of the third degree.



         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to a violation of this section or any substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, nonconsensual dissemination of
private sexual images is a misdemeanor of the second degree.



         (c)   If the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section or any
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, nonconsensual
dissemination of private sexual images is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



         (d)   If the offender is under 18 years of age and the
person in the image is not more than five years older than the offender, the
offender shall not be prosecuted under this section.



      (2)   In addition to any other penalty or disposition
authorized or required by law, the court may order any person who is
convicted of a violation of this section or who is adjudicated delinquent by
reason of a violation of this section to criminally forfeit all of the
following property to the state under R.C. Chapter 2981:



         (a)   Any profits or proceeds and any property the
person has acquired or maintained in violation of this section that the
sentencing court determines to have been acquired or maintained as a result
of the violation;



         (b)   Any interest in, securities of, claim against, or
property or contractual right of any kind affording a source of influence
over any enterprise that the person has established, operated, controlled, or
conducted in violation of this section that the sentencing court determines
to have been acquired or maintained as a result of the violation.



   (G)   A victim of a violation of this section may commence a civil
cause of action against the offender, as described in R.C. § 2307.66.



(R.C. § 2917.211)



§ 133.99  SENTENCING FOR SEXUALLY ORIENTED OFFENSES; SEXUAL PREDATORS;
REGISTRATION.



   (A)   If an offender is being sentenced for a sexually oriented
offense or child-victim oriented offense that is a misdemeanor committed on
or after January 1, 1997, and the offender is a tier III sex
offender/child-victim offender relative to the offense or the offense is any
offense listed in R.C. § 2901.07(D)(1) to (D)(3), the judge shall include in
the offender’s sentence a statement that the offender is a tier III sex
offender/child-victim offender, shall comply with the requirements of R.C. §
2950.03, and shall require the offender to submit to a DNA specimen
collection procedure pursuant to R.C. § 2901.07.



   (B)   If an offender is being sentenced for a sexually oriented
offense or a child-victim oriented offense that is a misdemeanor committed on
or after January 1, 1997, the judge shall include in the sentence a summary
of the offender’s duties imposed under R.C. §§ 2950.04, 2950.041,
2950.05, and 2950.06, and the duration of the duties. The judge shall inform
the offender, at the time of sentencing, of those duties and of their
duration. If required under R.C. § 2950.03(A)(2), the judge shall perform
the duties specified in that section or, if required under R.C. §
2950.03(A)(6), the judge shall perform the duties specified in that division.



(R.C. § 2929.23) 



Cross-reference:



   Sentencing generally, see Ch. 130



CHAPTER 134:  GAMBLING OFFENSES



Section



   134.01   Definitions



   134.02   Prohibitions against gambling; exception



   134.03   Operating a gambling house



   134.04   Public gaming



   134.05   Cheating



   134.06   Regulations concerning operation of licensed bingo game



   134.07   Records to be kept



   134.08   Requirements for bingo game operators



   134.09   Bingo games for amusement only



   134.10   Prohibitions where instant bingo game is conducted



   134.11   Raffle drawings



   134.12   Instant bingo other than at bingo sessions



   134.13   Restrictions on owner or lessor of location at instant bingo



   134.14   Skill-based amusement machines; prohibited conduct



Statutory reference:



   Conducting an illegal bingo game, felony, see R.C. § 2915.07



   Licensing bingo games by Attorney General, see R.C. § 2915.08



   Licensing distributors of bingo supplies by Attorney General, see R.C.
§ 2915.081



   Licensing manufacturers of bingo supplies by Attorney General, see R.C.
§ 2915.082



§ 134.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BET. The hazarding of anything of value upon the result of an event,
undertaking, or contingency, but does not include a bona fide business risk.



   BINGO. Means either of the following:



      (1)   A game with all of the following characteristics:



         (a)   The participants use bingo cards or sheets,
including paper formats and electronic representation or image formats, that
are divided into 25 spaces arranged in 5 horizontal and 5 vertical rows of
spaces, with each space, except the central space, being designated by a
combination of a letter and a number and with the central space being
designated as a free space;



         (b)   The participants cover the spaces on the bingo
cards or sheets that correspond to combinations of letters and numbers that
are announced by a bingo game operator;



         (c)   A bingo game operator announces combinations of
letters and numbers that appear on objects that a bingo game operator selects
by chance, either manually or mechanically, from a receptacle that contains
75 objects at the beginning of each game, each object marked by a different
combination of a letter and a number that corresponds to one of the 75
possible combinations of a letter and a number that can appear on the bingo
cards or sheets;



         (d)   The winner of the bingo game includes any
participant who properly announces during the interval between the
announcements of letters and numbers, as described in division (1)(c) of this
definition, that a predetermined and preannounced pattern of spaces has been
covered on a bingo card or sheet being used by the participant.



      (2)   Instant bingo, punch boards, and raffles.



   BINGO GAME OPERATOR. Any person, except security personnel, who
performs work or labor at the site of bingo including but not limited to
collecting money from participants, handing out bingo cards or sheets or
objects to cover spaces on bingo cards or sheets, selecting from a receptacle
the objects that contain the combination of letters and numbers that appear
on bingo cards or sheets, calling out the combinations of letters and
numbers, distributing prizes, selling or redeeming instant bingo tickets or
cards, supervising the operation of a punch board, selling raffle tickets,
selecting raffle tickets from a receptacle and announcing the winning numbers
in a raffle, and preparing, selling, and serving food or beverages.



   BINGO SESSION. A period that includes both of the following:



      (1)   Not to exceed five continuous hours for the conduct of
one or more games described in division (1) of the definition of “bingo”
in this section, instant bingo, and seal cards;



      (2)   A period for the conduct of instant bingo and seal cards
for not more than two hours before and not more than two hours after the
period described in division (1) of this definition.



   BINGO SUPPLIES. Bingo  cards or sheets;  instant bingo  tickets 
or  cards;  electronic  bingo  aids; raffle tickets; punch boards; seal
cards; instant bingo ticket dispensers; and devices for selecting or
displaying the combination of bingo letters and numbers or raffle tickets. 
Items that are BINGO SUPPLIES are not gambling devices if sold or otherwise
provided, and used, in accordance with this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915. For
purposes of this chapter, BINGO SUPPLIES are not to be considered equipment
used to conduct a bingo game.



   BOOKMAKING. The business of receiving or paying off bets.



   CHAMBER OF COMMERCE. Any organization of individuals, professionals,
and businesses that has the purpose to advance the commercial, financial,
industrial, and civic interests of the community and that is, and has
received from the Internal Revenue Service a determination letter that
currently is in effect stating that the organization is, exempt from federal
income taxation under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(6).



   CHARITABLE BINGO GAME. Any bingo game described in divisions (1) or (2)
of the definition of “bingo” in this section that is conducted by a
charitable organization that has obtained a license pursuant to R.C. §
2915.08 and the proceeds of which are used for a charitable purpose.



   CHARITABLE INSTANT BINGO ORGANIZATION. An organization that is exempt
from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3)
and is a charitable organization as defined in this section. A CHARITABLE
INSTANT BINGO ORGANIZATION does not include a charitable organization that is
exempt from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC
501(c)(3) and that is created by a veteran's organization, a fraternal
organization, or a sporting organization in regards to bingo conducted or
assisted by a veteran's organization, a fraternal organization, or a sporting
organization pursuant to R.C. § 2915.13, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.



   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION.



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter,
“charitable organization” means either of the following:



         (a)   An organization that is and has received from the
Internal Revenue Service a determination letter that is currently in effect,
stating that the organization is exempt from federal income taxation under
IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3);



         (b)   A volunteer rescue service organization, volunteer
firefighter’s organization, veteran’s organization, fraternal
organization, or sporting organization that is exempt from federal income
taxation under IRC §§ 501(c)(4), 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10) or
501(c)(19).



      (2)   To qualify as a charitable organization, an organization
shall have been in continuous existence as such in this state for a period of
two years immediately preceding either the making of an application for a
bingo license under R.C. § 2915.08 or the conducting of any game of chance
as provided in R.C. § 2915.02(D), or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.



   CHARITABLE PURPOSE. Means that the net profit of bingo, other than
instant bingo, is used by, or is given, donated, or otherwise transferred to,
any of the following:



      (1)   Any organization that is described in IRC 509(a)(1),
509(a)(2), or 509(a)(3) and is either a governmental unit or an organization
that is tax exempt under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3);



      (2)   A veteran's organization that is a post, chapter, or
organization of veterans, or an auxiliary unit or society of, or a trust or
foundation for, any such post, chapter, or organization organized in the
United States or any of its possessions, at least 75% of the members of which
are veterans and substantially all of the other members of which are
individuals who are spouses, widows, or widowers of veterans, or such
individuals, provided that no part of the net earnings of such post, chapter,
or organization inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or
individual, and further provided that the net profit is used by the post,
chapter, or organization for the charitable purposes set forth in R.C. §
5739.02(B)(12), is used for awarding scholarships to or for attendance at an
institution mentioned in that division of the Revised Code, is donated to a
governmental agency, or is used for nonprofit youth activities, the purchase
of United States or Ohio flags that are donated to schools, youth groups, or
other bona fide nonprofit organizations, promotion of patriotism, or disaster
relief;



      (3)   A fraternal organization that has been in continuous
existence in this state for 15 years and that uses the net profit exclusively
for religious, charitable, scientific, literary, or educational purposes, or
for the prevention of cruelty to children or animals, if contributions for
such use would qualify as a deductible charitable contribution under IRC 170;



      (4)   A volunteer firefighter's organization that uses the net
profit for the purposes set forth in the definition of “volunteer
firefighter's organization” in this section.



   COMMUNITY ACTION AGENCY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 122.66.



   CONDUCT. To back, promote, organize, manage, carry on, sponsor, or
prepare for the operation of bingo or a game of chance, a scheme of chance,
or a sweepstakes.



   DEAL OF INSTANT BINGO TICKETS. A single game of instant bingo tickets
all with the same serial number.



   DISTRIBUTOR.  Any person who purchases or obtains bingo supplies and
who does either of the following:



      (1)   Sells, offers for sale, or otherwise provides or offers
to provide the bingo supplies to another person for use in this state;



      (2)   Modifies, converts, adds to, or removes parts from the
bingo supplies to further their promotion or sale for use in this state.



   ELECTRONIC BINGO AID.



      (1)   ELECTRONIC BINGO AID means an electronic device used by
a participant to monitor bingo cards or sheets purchased at the time and
place of a bingo session and that does all of the following:



         (a)   It provides a means for a participant to input
numbers and letters announced by a bingo caller.



         (b)   It compares the numbers and letters entered by the
participant to the bingo faces previously stored in the memory of the device.



         (c)   It identifies a winning bingo pattern.



      (2)   ELECTRONIC BINGO AID does not include any device into
which a coin, currency, token, or an equivalent is inserted to activate play.



   EXPENSES. The reasonable amount of gross profit actually expended for
all of the following:



      (1)   The purchase or lease of bingo supplies;



      (2)   The annual license fee required under R.C. § 2915.08;



      (3)   Bank fees and service charges for a bingo session or
game account described in R.C. § 2915.10;



      (4)   Audits and accounting services;



      (5)   Safes;



      (6)   Cash registers;



      (7)   Hiring security personnel;



      (8)   Advertising bingo;



      (9)   Renting premises in which to conduct a bingo session;



      (10)   Tables and chairs;



      (11)   Expenses for maintaining and operating a charitable
organization's facilities, including, but not limited to, a post home, club
house, lounge, tavern, or canteen and any grounds attached to the post home,
club house, lounge, tavern, or canteen;



      (12)   Payment of real property taxes and assessments that are
levied on a premises on which bingo is conducted;



      (13)   Any other product or service directly related to the
conduct of bingo that is authorized in rules adopted by the Attorney General
under R.C. § 2915.08(B)(1).



   FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION. Any society, order, state headquarters, or
association within this state, except a college or high school fraternity,
that is not organized for profit, that is a branch, lodge, or chapter of a
national or state organization, that exists exclusively for the common
business or sodality of its members.



   GAMBLING DEVICE. Means any of the following:



      (1)   A book, totalizer, or other equipment used for recording
bets;



      (2)   A ticket, token, or other device representing a chance,
share, or interest in a scheme of chance or evidencing a bet;



      (3)   A deck of cards, dice, gaming table, roulette wheel,
slot machine, or other apparatus designed for use in connection with a game
of chance;



      (4)   Any equipment, device, apparatus, or paraphernalia
specially designed for gambling purposes;



      (5)   Bingo supplies sold or otherwise provided, or used, in
violation of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915.



   GAMBLING OFFENSE. Means any of the following:



      (1)   A violation of R.C. §§ 2915.02, 2915.03, 2915.04,
2915.05, 2915.06, 2915.07, 2915.08, 2915.081, 2915.082, 2915.09, 2915.091,
2915.092, 2915.10, or 2915.11;



      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance
or law of this or any other state or of the United States substantially
equivalent to any section listed in division (1) of this definition or a
violation of R.C. § 2915.06 as it existed prior to July 1, 1996;



      (3)   An offense under an existing or former municipal
ordinance or law of this or any other state or of the United States, of which
gambling is an element;



      (4)   A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing, any offense under division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.



   GAME FLARE. The board or placard that accompanies each deal of instant
bingo tickets and that has printed on or affixed to it the following
information for the game:



      (1)   The name of the game;



      (2)   The manufacturer's name or distinctive logo;



      (3)   The form number;



      (4)   The ticket count;



      (5)   The prize structure, including the number of winning
instant bingo tickets by denomination and the respective winning symbol or
number combinations for the winning instant bingo tickets;



      (6)   The cost per play;



      (7)   The serial number of the game.



   GAME OF CHANCE. Poker, craps, roulette, or other game in which a player
gives anything of value in the hope of gain, the outcome of which is
determined largely by chance, but does not include bingo.



   GAME OF CHANCE CONDUCTED FOR PROFIT. Any game of chance designed to
produce income for the person who conducts or operates the game of chance,
but does not include bingo.



   GROSS ANNUAL REVENUES. The annual gross receipts derived from the
conduct of bingo described in division (1) of the definition of “bingo”
in this section plus the annual net profit derived from the conduct of bingo
described in division (2) of the definition of “bingo” in this section.



   GROSS PROFIT. Means gross receipts minus the amount actually expended
for the payment of prize awards.



   GROSS RECEIPTS. All money or assets, including admission fees, that a
person receives from bingo without the deduction of any amounts for prizes
paid out or for the expenses of conducting bingo. GROSS RECEIPTS does not
include any money directly taken in from the sale of food or beverages by a
charitable organization conducting bingo, or by a bona fide auxiliary unit or
society of a charitable organization conducting bingo, provided all of the
following apply:



      (1)   The auxiliary unit or society has been in existence as a
bona fide auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization for at
least two years prior to conducting bingo.



      (2)   The person who purchases the food or beverage receives
nothing of value except the food or beverage and items customarily received
with the purchase of that food or beverage.



      (3)   The food and beverages are sold at customary and
reasonable prices.



   HISTORIC RAILROAD.  All or a portion of the tracks and right-of-way of
a railroad that was owned and operated by a for profit common carrier in this
state at any time prior to January 1, 1950.



   INSTANT BINGO. A form of bingo that shall use folded or banded tickets
or paper cards with perforated break-open tabs, a face of which is covered or
otherwise hidden from view to conceal a number, letter, or symbol, or set of
numbers, letters, or symbols, some of which have been designated in advance
as prize winners, and may also include games in which some winners are
determined by the random selection of one or more bingo numbers by the use of
a seal card or bingo blower. In all “instant bingo” the prize amount and
structure shall be predetermined. The term does not include any device that
is activated by the insertion of a coin, currency, token, or an equivalent,
and that contains as one of its components a video display monitor that is
capable of displaying numbers, letters, symbols, or characters in winning or
losing combinations.



   INSTANT BINGO TICKET DISPENSER. A mechanical device that dispenses an
instant bingo ticket or card as the sole item of value dispensed and that has
the following characteristics:



      (1)   It is activated upon the insertion of United States
currency.



      (2)   It performs no gaming functions.



      (3)   It does not contain a video display monitor or generate
noise.



      (4)   It is not capable of displaying any numbers, letters,
symbols, or characters in winning or losing combinations.



      (5)   It does not simulate or display rolling or spinning
reels.



      (6)   It is incapable of determining whether a dispensed bingo
ticket or card is a winning or non- winning ticket or card and requires a
winning ticket or card to be paid by a bingo game operator.



      (7)   It may provide accounting and security features to aid
in accounting for the instant bingo tickets or cards it dispenses.



      (8)   It is not part of an electronic network and is not
interactive.



   IRC or INTERNAL REVENUE CODE. The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, 100
Stat. 2085, 26 U.S.C. §§ 1 et seq., as now or hereafter amended.



   MANUFACTURER. Any person who assembles completed bingo supplies from
raw materials, other items, or subparts or who modifies, converts, adds to,
or removes parts from bingo supplies to further their promotion or sale.



   MERCHANDISE PRIZE. Any item of value, but shall not include any of the
following:



      (1)   Cash, gift cards, or any equivalent thereof;



      (2)   Plays on games of chance, state lottery tickets, bingo,
or instant bingo;



      (3)   Firearms, tobacco, or alcoholic beverages; or



      (4)   A redeemable voucher that is redeemable for any of the
items listed in division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.



   NET PROFIT. Means gross profit minus expenses.



   NET PROFIT FROM THE PROCEEDS OF THE SALE OF INSTANT BINGO. Means gross
profit minus the ordinary, necessary, and reasonable expense expended for the
purchase of instant bingo supplies, and, in the case of instant bingo
conducted by a veteran’s, fraternal, or sporting organization, minus the
payment by that organization of real property taxes and assessments levied on
a premises on which instant bingo is conducted.



   PARTICIPANT. Any person who plays bingo.



   PERSON. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1.59 and includes any firm
or any other legal entity, however organized.



   POOL NOT CONDUCTED FOR PROFIT. A scheme in which a participant gives a
valuable consideration for a chance to win a prize and the total amount of
consideration wagered is distributed to a participant or participants.



   PUNCH BOARD. A board containing a number of holes or receptacles of
uniform size in which are placed, mechanically and randomly, serially
numbered slips of paper that may be punched or drawn from the hole or
receptacle when used in conjunction with instant bingo. A player may punch or
draw the numbered slips of paper from the holes or receptacles and obtain the
prize established for the game if the number drawn corresponds to a winning
number or, if the punch board includes the use of a seal card, a potential
winning number.



   RAFFLE. A form of bingo in which the one or more prizes are won by one
or more persons who have purchased a raffle ticket. The one or more winners
of the raffle are determined by drawing a ticket stub or other detachable
section from a receptacle containing ticket stubs or detachable sections
corresponding to all tickets sold for the raffle. The term does not include
the drawing of a ticket stub or other detachable section of a ticket
purchased to attend a professional sporting event if both of the following
apply:



      (1)   The ticket stub or other detachable section is used to
select the winner of a free prize given away at the professional sporting
event; and



      (2)   The cost of the ticket is the same as the cost of a
ticket to the professional sporting event on days when no free prize is given
away.



   REDEEMABLE VOUCHER. Any ticket, token, coupon, receipt, or other
noncash representation of value.



   RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION. Any church, body of communicants, or group that
is not organized or operated for profit and that gathers in common membership
for regular worship and religious observances.



   REVOKE. To void permanently all rights and privileges of the holder of
a license issued under R.C. §§ 2915.08, 2915.081, or 2915.082 or a
charitable gaming license issued by another jurisdiction.



   SCHEME OF CHANCE .



      (1)   A slot machine unless authorized under R.C. Chapter
3772, lottery unless authorized under R.C. Chapter 3770, numbers game, pool
conducted for profit, or other scheme in which a participant gives a valuable
consideration for a chance to win a prize, but does not include bingo, a
skill-based amusement machine, or a pool not conducted for profit. “Scheme
of chance” includes the use of an electronic device to reveal the results
of a game entry if valuable consideration is paid, directly or indirectly,
for a chance to win a prize. Valuable consideration is deemed to be paid for
a chance to win a prize in the following instances:



         (a)   Less than 50% of the goods or services sold by a
scheme of chance operator in exchange for game entries are used or redeemed
by participants at any one location;



         (b)   Less than 50% of participants who purchase goods
or services at any one location do not accept, use, or redeem the goods or
services sold or purportedly sold;



         (c)   More than 50% of prizes at any one location are
revealed to participants through an electronic device simulating a game of
chance or a “casino game” as defined in R.C. § 3772.01;



         (d)   The good or service sold by a scheme of chance
operator in exchange for a game entry cannot be used or redeemed in the
manner advertised;



         (e)   A participant pays more than fair market value for
goods or services offered by a scheme of chance operator in order to receive
one or more game entries;



         (f)   A participant may use the electronic device to
purchase additional game entries;



         (g)   A participant may purchase additional game entries
by using points or credits won as prizes while using the electronic device;



         (h)   A scheme of chance operator pays out in prize
money more than 20% of the gross revenue received at one location; or



         (i)   A participant makes a purchase or exchange in
order to obtain any good or service that may be used to facilitate play on
the electronic device.



      (2)   As used in this division, “electronic device” means
a mechanical, video, digital, or electronic machine or device that is capable
of displaying information on a screen or other mechanism and that is owned,
leased, or otherwise possessed by any person conducting a scheme of chance,
or by that person’s partners, affiliates, subsidiaries, or contractors.



   SEAL CARD. A form of instant bingo that uses instant bingo tickets in
conjunction with a board or placard that contains one or more seals that,
when removed or opened, reveal predesignated winning numbers, letters, or
symbols.



   SECURITY PERSONNEL. Includes any person who either is a sheriff, deputy
sheriff, marshal, deputy marshal, township constable, or member of an
organized police department of a municipal corporation or has successfully
completed a peace officer's training course pursuant to R.C. §§ 109.71 to
109.79 and who is hired to provide security for the premises on which bingo
is conducted.



   SKILL-BASED AMUSEMENT MACHINE.



      (1)   (a)   A mechanical, video, digital, or electronic
device that rewards the player or players, if at all, only with merchandise
prizes or with redeemable vouchers redeemable only for merchandise prizes,
provided that with respect to rewards for playing the game all of the
following apply:



            1.   The wholesale value of a merchandise prize
awarded as a result of the single play of a machine does not exceed $10;



            2.   Redeemable vouchers awarded for any single
play of a machine are not redeemable for a merchandise prize with a wholesale
value of more than $10;



            3.   Redeemable vouchers are not redeemable for a
merchandise prize that has a wholesale value of more than $10 times the
fewest number of single plays necessary to accrue the redeemable vouchers
required to obtain that prize; and



            4.   Any redeemable vouchers or merchandise prizes
are distributed at the site of the skill-based amusement machine at the time
of play.



         (b)   A card for the purchase of gasoline is a
redeemable voucher for purposes of division (1) of this definition even if
the skill-based amusement machine for the play of which the card is awarded
is located at a place where gasoline may not be legally distributed to the
public or the card is not redeemable at the location of, or at the time of
playing, the skill-based amusement machine.



      (2)   A device shall not be considered a skill-based amusement
machine and shall be considered a slot machine if it pays cash or one or more
of the following apply:



         (a)   The ability of a player to succeed at the game is
impacted by the number or ratio of prior wins to prior losses of players
playing the game;



         (b)   Any reward of redeemable vouchers is not based
solely on the player achieving the object of the game or the players score;



         (c)   The outcome of the game, or the value of the
redeemable voucher or merchandise prize awarded for winning the game, can be
controlled by a source other than any player playing the game;



         (d)   The success of any player is or may be determined
by a chance event that cannot be altered by player actions;



         (e)   The ability of any player to succeed at the game
is determined by game features not visible or known to the player;



         (f)   The ability of the player to succeed at the game
is impacted by the exercise of a skill that no reasonable player could
exercise.



      (3)   All of the following apply to any machine that is
operated as described in division (1) of this definition:



         (a)   As used in this definition of “skill-based
amusement machine”, GAME and PLAY mean one event from the initial
activation of the machine until the results of play are determined without
payment of additional consideration. An individual utilizing a machine that
involves a single game, play, contest, competition, or tournament may be
awarded redeemable vouchers or merchandise prizes based on the results of
play.



         (b)   Advance play for a single game, play, contest,
competition, or tournament participation may be purchased. The cost of the
contest, competition, or tournament participation may be greater than a
single non-contest, competition, or tournament play.



         (c)   To the extent that the machine is used in a
contest, competition, or tournament, that contest, competition, or tournament
has a defined starting and ending date and is open to participants in
competition for scoring and ranking results toward the awarding of redeemable
vouchers or merchandise prizes that are stated prior to the start of the
contest, competition, or tournament.



      (4)   For purposes of division (1) of this definition, the
mere presence of a device, such as a pin- setting, ball-releasing, or scoring
mechanism, that does not contribute to or affect the outcome of the play of
the game does not make the device a skill-based amusement machine.



   SLOT MACHINE.



      (1)   Means either of the following:



         (a)   Any mechanical, electronic, video, or digital
device that is capable of accepting anything of value, directly or
indirectly, from or on behalf of a player who gives the thing of value in the
hope of gain;



         (b)   Any mechanical, electronic, video, or digital
device that is capable of accepting anything of value, directly or
indirectly, from or on behalf of a player to conduct bingo or a scheme or
game of chance.



      (2)   SLOT MACHINE does not include a skill-based amusement 
machine or an instant bingo ticket dispenser.



   SPORTING ORGANIZATION. A hunting, fishing, or trapping organization,
other than a college or high school fraternity or sorority, that is not
organized for profit, that is affiliated with a state or national sporting
organization, including but not limited to, the League of Ohio Sportsmen, and
that has been in continuous existence in this state for a period of three
years.



   SUSPEND. To interrupt temporarily all rights and privileges of the
holder of a license issued under R.C. §§ 2915.08, 2915.081, or 2915.082 or
a charitable gaming license issued by another jurisdiction.



   SWEEPSTAKES. Any game, contest, advertising scheme or plan, or other
promotion where consideration is not required for a person to enter to win or
become eligible to receive any prize, the determination of which is based
upon chance. “Sweepstakes” does not include bingo as authorized under
R.C. Chapter 2915, pari-mutuel wagering as authorized by R.C. Chapter 3769,
lotteries conducted by the State Lottery Commission as authorized by R.C.
Chapter 3770, and casino gaming as authorized by R.C. Chapter 3772.



   SWEEPSTAKES TERMINAL DEVICE.



      (1)   A mechanical, video, digital, or electronic machine or
device that is owned, leased, or otherwise possessed by any person conducting
a sweepstakes, or by that person’s partners, affiliates, subsidiaries, or
contractors, that is intended to be used by a sweepstakes participant, and
that is capable of displaying information on a screen or other mechanism. A
device is a sweepstakes terminal device if any of the following apply:



         (a)   The device uses a simulated game terminal as a
representation of the prizes associated with the results of the sweepstakes
entries.



         (b)   The device utilizes software such that the
simulated game influences or determines the winning of or value of the prize.



         (c)   The device selects prizes from a predetermined
finite pool of entries.



         (d)   The device utilizes a mechanism that reveals the
content of a predetermined sweepstakes entry.



         (e)   The device predetermines the prize results and
stores those results for delivery at the time the sweepstakes entry results
are revealed.



         (f)   The device utilizes software to create a game
result.



         (g)   The device reveals the prize incrementally, even
though the device does not influence the awarding of the prize or the value
of any prize awarded.



         (h)   The device determines and associates the prize
with an entry or entries at the time the sweepstakes is entered.



      (2)   As used in this definition and in § 134.02:



         ENTER. The act by which a person becomes eligible to
receive any prize offered in a sweepstakes.



         ENTRY. One event from the initial activation of the
sweepstakes terminal device until all the sweepstakes prize results from that
activation are revealed.



         PRIZE. Any gift, award, gratuity, good, service, credit,
reward, or any other thing of value that may be transferred to a person,
whether possession of the prize is actually transferred, or placed on an
account or other record as evidence of the intent to transfer the prize.



         SWEEPSTAKES TERMINAL DEVICE FACILITY. Any location in this
state where a sweepstakes terminal device is provided to a sweepstakes
participant, except as provided in § 134.02(G) and R.C. § 2915.02(G).



   VETERAN'S ORGANIZATION. Any individual post or state headquarters of a
national veteran's association or an auxiliary unit of any individual post of
a national veteran's association, which post, state headquarters, or
auxiliary unit is incorporated as a nonprofit corporation and either has
received a letter from the state headquarters of the national veteran's
association indicating that the individual post or auxiliary unit is in good
standing with the national veteran's association or has received a letter
from the national veteran's association indicating that the state
headquarters is in good standing with the national veteran's association. As
used in this definition, NATIONAL VETERAN'S ASSOCIATION means any veteran's
association that has been in continuous existence as such for a period of at
least five years and either is incorporated by an act of the United States
Congress or has a national dues-paying membership of at least 5,000 persons.



   VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTER'S ORGANIZATION. Any organization of volunteer
firefighters, as defined in R.C. § 146.01, that is organized and operated
exclusively to provide financial support for a volunteer fire department or a
volunteer fire company and that is recognized or ratified by a county,
municipal corporation, or township.



   VOLUNTEER RESCUE SERVICE ORGANIZATION. Any organization of volunteers
organized to function as an emergency medical service organization, as
defined in R.C. § 4765.01.



   YOUTH ATHLETIC ORGANIZATION. Any organization, not organized for
profit, that is organized and operated exclusively to provide financial
support to, or to operate, athletic activities for persons who are 21 years
of age or younger by means of sponsoring, organizing, operating, or
contributing to the support of an athletic team, club, league, or association.



   YOUTH ATHLETIC PARK ORGANIZATION. Any organization, not organized for
profit, that satisfies both of the following:



      (1)   It owns, operates, and maintains playing fields that
satisfy both of the following:



         (a)   The playing fields are used at least 100 days per
year for athletic activities by one or more organizations, not organized for
profit, each of which is organized and operated exclusively to provide
financial support to, or to operate, athletic activities for persons who are
18 years of age or younger by means of sponsoring, organizing, operating, or
contributing to the support of an athletic team, club, league, or association.



         (b)   The playing fields are not used for any
profit-making activity at any time during the year.



      (2)   It uses the proceeds of bingo it conducts exclusively
for the operation, maintenance, and improvement of its playing fields of the
type described in division (1) of this definition.



(R.C. § 2915.01)



§ 134.02  PROHIBITIONS AGAINST GAMBLING; EXCEPTION.



   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Engage in bookmaking, or knowingly engage in conduct
that facilitates bookmaking.



      (2)   Establish, promote, or operate or knowingly engage in
conduct that facilitates any game of chance conducted for profit or any
scheme of chance.



      (3)   Knowingly procure, transmit, exchange, or engage in
conduct that facilitates the procurement, transmission, or exchange of
information for use in establishing odds or determining winners in connection
with bookmaking or with any game of chance conducted for profit or any scheme
of chance.



      (4)   Engage in betting or in playing any scheme or game of
chance as a substantial source of income or livelihood.



      (5)   Conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a sweepstakes
with the use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes terminal
device facility and either:



         (a)   Give to another person any item described in R.C.
§ 2915.01(VV)(1), (VV)(2), (VV)(3), or (VV)(4) as a prize for playing or
participating in a sweepstakes; or



         (b)   Give to another person any merchandise prize, or a
redeemable voucher for a merchandise prize, the wholesale value of which is
in excess of $10 and which is awarded as a single entry for playing or
participating in a sweepstakes. Redeemable vouchers shall not be redeemable
for a merchandise prize that has a wholesale value of more than $10.



      (6)   Conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a sweepstakes
with the use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes terminal
device facility without first obtaining a current annual “certificate of
registration” from the Attorney General as required by R.C. § 2915.02(F).



      (7)   With purpose to violate division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3),
(A)(4), (A)(5), or (A)(6) of this section, acquire, possess, control, or
operate any gambling device.



   (B)   For purposes of division (A)(1) of this section, a person
facilitates bookmaking if the person in any way knowingly aids an illegal
bookmaking operation, including, without limitation, placing a bet with a
person engaged in or facilitating illegal bookmaking. For purposes of
division (A)(2) of this section, a person facilitates a game of chance
conducted for profit or a scheme of chance if the person in any way knowingly
aids in the conduct or operation of any such game or scheme, including,
without limitation, playing any such game or scheme.



   (C)   This section does not prohibit conduct in connection with
gambling expressly permitted by law.



   (D)   This section does not apply to any of the following:



      (1)   Games of chance, if all of the following apply:



         (a)   The games of chance are not craps for money or
roulette for money.



         (b)   The games of chance are conducted by a charitable
organization that is and has received from the Internal Revenue Service a
determination letter that is currently in effect, stating that the
organization is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and
described in IRC 501(c)(3).



         (c)    The games of chance are conducted at festivals of
the charitable organization that are conducted not more than a total of five
days a calendar year, and are conducted on premises owned by the charitable
organization for a period of no less than one year immediately preceding the
conducting of the games of chance, on premises leased from a governmental
unit, or on premises that are leased from a veteran's or fraternal
organization and that have been owned by the lessor veteran's or fraternal
organization for a period of no less than one year immediately preceding the
conducting of the games of chance. A charitable organization shall not lease
premises from a veteran's or fraternal organization to conduct a festival
described in this division, if the veteran's or fraternal organization
already has leased the premises twelve times during the preceding year to
charitable organizations for that purpose. If a charitable organization
leases premises from a veteran's or fraternal organization to conduct a
festival described in this division, the charitable organization shall not
pay a rental rate for the premises per day of the festival that exceeds the
rental rate per bingo session that a charitable organization may pay under
R.C. § 2915.09(B)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance when
it leases premises from another charitable organization to conduct bingo
games.



         (d)   All of the money or assets received from the games
of chance after deduction only of prizes paid out during the conduct of the
games of chance are used by, given, donated or otherwise transferred to any
organization that is described in IRC 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is
either a governmental unit or an organization that is tax exempt under IRC
501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3).



         (e)   The games of chance are not conducted during or
within ten hours of a bingo game conducted for amusement purposes only
pursuant to R.C. § 2915.12 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance. No person shall receive any commission, wage, salary, reward, tip,
donation, gratuity, or other form of compensation, directly or indirectly,
for operating or assisting in the operation of any game of chance.



      (2)   Any tag fishing tournament, as defined in R.C. §
1531.01, operated under a permit issued under R.C. § 1533.92.



      (3)   Bingo conducted by a charitable organization that holds
a license issued under R.C. § 2915.08.



   (E)   Division (D) of this section shall not be construed to
authorize the sale, lease, or other temporary or permanent transfer of the
right to conduct games of chance, as granted by that division, by any
charitable organization that is granted that right.



   (F)   Any person desiring to conduct, or participate in the conduct
of, a sweepstakes with the use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a
sweepstakes terminal device facility shall first register with the Office of
the Attorney General and obtain an annual certificate of registration by
providing a filing fee of $200 and all information as required by rule
adopted under R.C. § 2915.02(H). Not later than the tenth day of each month,
each sweepstakes terminal device operator shall file a sweepstakes terminal
device monthly report with the Attorney General and provide a filing fee of
$50 and all information required by rule adopted under R.C. § 2915.02(H).
All information provided to the Attorney General under this division shall be
available to law enforcement upon request.



   (G)   (1)   A person may apply to the Attorney General, on a form
prescribed by the Attorney General, for a certificate of compliance that the
person is not operating a sweepstakes terminal device facility. The form
shall require the person to include the address of the business location
where sweepstakes terminal devices will be used and to make the following
certifications:



         (a)   That the person will not use more than two
sweepstakes terminal devices at the business location;



         (b)   That the retail value of sweepstakes prizes to be
awarded at the business location using sweepstakes terminal devices during a
reporting period will be less than 3% of the gross revenue received at the
business location during the reporting period;



         (c)   That no other form of gaming except lottery ticket
sales as authorized under R.C. Chapter 3770 will be conducted at the business
location or in an adjoining area of the business location;



         (d)   That any sweepstakes terminal device at the
business location will not allow any deposit of any money, coin, or token, or
the use of any credit card, debit card, prepaid card, or any other method of
similar payment to be used, directly or indirectly, to participate in a
sweepstakes;



         (e)   That notification of any prize will not take place
on the same day as a participant’s sweepstakes entry; and



         (f)   That the person consents to provide any other
information to the Attorney General as required by rule adopted under R.C. §
2915.02(H).



      (2)   The filing fee for a certificate of compliance is $250.
The Attorney General may charge up to an additional $250 for reasonable
expenses resulting from any investigation related to an application for a
certificate of compliance.



      (3)   A certificate of compliance is effective for one year.
The certificate holder may reapply for a certificate of compliance. A person
issued a certificate of compliance shall file semiannual reports with the
Attorney General stating the number of sweepstakes terminal devices at the
business location and that the retail value of prizes awarded at the business
location using sweepstakes terminal devices is less than 3% of the gross
revenue received at the business location.



   (H)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of gambling, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been
convicted of any gambling offense, gambling is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law. Notwithstanding this division, failing to file a
sweepstakes terminal device monthly report as required by division (F) of
this section or the semiannual report required by division (G) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 2915.02(A) - (G), (K))  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 134.03  OPERATING A GAMBLING HOUSE.



   (A)   No person, being the owner or lessee, or having custody,
control, or supervision of premises, shall:



      (1)   Use or occupy the premises for gambling in violation of
R.C. § 2915.02 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



      (2)   Recklessly permit the premises to be used or occupied
for gambling in violation of R.C. § 2915.02 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.



   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
operating a gambling house, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of a gambling offense, operating a
gambling house is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



   (C)   Premises used or occupied in violation of this section
constitute a nuisance subject to abatement under R.C. Chapter 3767.



(R.C. § 2915.03)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 134.04  PUBLIC GAMING.



   (A)   No person, while at a hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena,
hall, or other place of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort
shall make a bet or play any game of chance or scheme of chance.



   (B)   No person, being the owner or lessee, or having custody,
control, or supervision of a hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall,
or other place of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort shall
recklessly permit those premises to be used or occupied in violation of
division (A) of this section.



   (C)   Divisions (A) and (B) of this section do not prohibit conduct
in connection with gambling expressly permitted by law.



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of public gaming.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, public gaming is a minor
misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been convicted of any gambling
offense, public gaming is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



   (E)   Premises used or occupied in violation of division (B) of this
section constitute a nuisance subject to abatement under R.C. Chapter 3767.



(R.C. § 2915.04)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 134.05  CHEATING.



   (A)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person
is facilitating a fraud, shall engage in conduct designed to corrupt the
outcome of any of the following:



      (1)   The subject of a bet.



      (2)   A contest of knowledge, skill, or endurance that is not
an athletic or sporting event.



      (3)   A scheme or game of chance.



      (4)   Bingo.



   (B)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:



      (1)   Offer, give, solicit, or accept anything of value to
corrupt the outcome of an athletic or sporting event.



      (2)   Engage in conduct designed to corrupt the outcome of an
athletic or sporting event.



   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is
guilty of cheating. Except as otherwise provided in this division, cheating
is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the potential gain from the cheating
is $500 or more or if the offender previously has been convicted of any
gambling offense or of any theft offense as defined in R.C. § 2913.01,
cheating is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty
of corrupting sports. Corrupting sports is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2915.05)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 134.06  REGULATIONS CONCERNING OPERATION OF LICENSED BINGO GAME.



   (A)   No charitable organization that conducts bingo shall fail to
do any of the following:



      (1)   Own all of the equipment used to conduct bingo or lease
that equipment from a charitable organization that is licensed to conduct
bingo, or from the landlord of a premises where bingo is conducted, for a
rental rate that is not more than is customary and reasonable for that
equipment;



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (A)(3) of this
section, use all of the gross receipts from bingo for paying prizes, for
reimbursement of expenses for or for renting premises in which to conduct
bingo, for reimbursement of expenses for or for purchasing or leasing bingo
supplies used in conducting bingo, for reimbursement of expenses for or for
hiring security personnel, for reimbursement of expenses for or for
advertising bingo, or for reimbursement of other expenses or for other
expenses listed in the definition for “expenses” in R.C. § 2915.01,
provided that the amount of the receipts so spent is not more than is
customary and reasonable for a similar purchase, lease, hiring, advertising,
or expense. If the building in which bingo is conducted is owned by the
charitable organization conducting bingo and the bingo conducted includes a
form of bingo described in division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in
R.C. § 2915.01, the charitable organization may deduct from the total amount
of the gross receipts from each session a sum equal to the lesser of $600 or
45% of the gross receipts from the bingo described in that division as
consideration for the use of the premises;



      (3)   Use, or give, donate, or otherwise transfer, all of the
net profit derived from bingo, other than instant bingo, for a charitable
purpose listed in its license application and described in the definition for
“charitable purpose” in R.C. § 2915.01, or distribute all of the net
profit from the proceeds of the sale of instant bingo as stated in its
license application and in accordance with R.C. § 2915.101.



   (B)   No charitable organization that conducts a bingo game
described in division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01
shall fail to do any of the following:



      (1)   Conduct the bingo game on premises that are owned by the
charitable organization, on premises that are owned by another charitable
organization and leased from that charitable organization for a rental rate
not in excess of the lesser of $650 per bingo session or 45% of the gross
receipts of the bingo session, on premises that are leased from a person
other than a charitable organization for a rental rate that is not more than
is customary and reasonable for premises that are similar in location, size,
and quality but not in excess of $450 per bingo session, or on premises that
are owned by a person other than a charitable organization, that are leased
from that person by another charitable organization, and that are subleased
from that other charitable organization by the charitable organization for a
rental rate not in excess of $450 per bingo session. No charitable
organization is required to pay property taxes or assessments on premises
that the charitable organization leases from another person to conduct bingo
sessions. If the charitable organization leases from a person other than a
charitable organization the premises on which it conducts bingo sessions, the
lessor of the premises shall provide only the premises to the organization
and shall not provide the organization with bingo game operators, security
personnel, concessions or concession operators, bingo supplies, or any other
type of service. A charitable organization shall not lease or sublease
premises that it owns or leases to more than three other charitable
organizations per calendar week for conducting bingo sessions on the
premises. A person that is not a charitable organization shall not lease
premises that it owns, leases, or otherwise is empowered to lease to more
than three charitable organizations per calendar week for conducting bingo
sessions on the premises. In no case shall more than nine bingo sessions be
conducted on any premises in any calendar week;



      (2)   Display its license conspicuously at the premises where
the bingo session is conducted;



      (3)   Conduct the bingo session in accordance with division
(1) of the definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01.



   (C)   No charitable organization that conducts a bingo game
described in division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01
shall not do any of the following:



      (1)   Pay any compensation to a bingo game operator for
operating a bingo session that is conducted by the charitable organization or
for preparing, selling, or serving food or beverages at the site of the bingo
session, permit any auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization
to pay compensation to any bingo game operator who prepares, sells, or serves
food or beverages at a bingo session conducted by the charitable
organization, or permit any auxiliary unit or society of the charitable
organization to prepare, sell, or serve food or beverages at a bingo session
conducted by the charitable organization, if the auxiliary unit or society
pays any compensation to the bingo game operators who prepare, sell, or serve
the food or beverages;



      (2)   Pay consulting fees to any person for any services
performed in relation to the bingo session;



      (3)   Pay concession fees to any person who provides
refreshments to the participants in the bingo session;



      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(4) of this
section, conduct more than three bingo sessions in any seven-day period. A
volunteer firefighter's organization or a volunteer rescue service
organization that conducts not more than five bingo sessions in a calendar
year may conduct more than three bingo sessions in a seven-day period after
notifying the Attorney General when it will conduct the sessions;



      (5)   Pay out more than $6,000 in prizes for bingo games
described in R.C. § 2915.01(S)(1) during any bingo session that is conducted
by the charitable organization. “Prizes” does not include awards from the
conduct of instant bingo.



      (6)   Conduct a bingo session at any time during the
eight-hour period between 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m., at any time during, or
within ten hours of, a bingo game conducted for amusement only pursuant to
R.C. § 2915.12 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, at any
premises not specified on its license, or on any day of the week or during
any time period not specified on its license. This division does not prohibit
the sale of instant bingo tickets beginning at 9:00 a.m. for a bingo session
that begins at 10:00 a.m.  If circumstances make it impractical for the
charitable organization to conduct a bingo session at the premises, or on the
day of the week or at the time specified on its license or if a charitable
organization wants to conduct bingo sessions on a day of the week or at a
time other than the day or time specified on its license, the charitable
organization may apply in writing to the Attorney General for an amended
license pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08(F). A charitable organization may apply
twice in each calendar year for an amended license to conduct bingo sessions
on a day of the week or at a time other than the day or time specified on its
license. If the amended license is granted, the organization may conduct
bingo sessions at the premises, on the day of the week, and at the time
specified on its amended license;



      (7)   Permit any person whom the charitable organization
knows, or should have known, is under the age of 18 to work as a bingo game
operator;



      (8)   Permit any person whom the charitable organization
knows, or should have known, has been convicted of a felony or gambling
offense in any jurisdiction to be a bingo game operator;



      (9)   Permit the lessor of the premises on which the bingo
session is conducted, if the lessor is not a charitable organization, to
provide the charitable organization with bingo game operators, security
personnel, concessions, bingo supplies, or any other type of service;



      (10)   Purchase or lease bingo supplies from any person except
a distributor issued a license under R.C. § 2915.081;



      (11)   (a)   Use or permit the use of electronic bingo aids
except under the following circumstances:



            1.   For any single participant, not more than 90
bingo faces can be played using an electronic bingo aid or aids.



            2.   The charitable organization shall provide a
participant using an electronic bingo aid with corresponding paper bingo
cards or sheets.



            3.   The total price of bingo faces played with an
electronic bingo aid shall be equal to the total price of the same number of
bingo faces played with a paper bingo card or sheet sold at the same bingo
session but without an electronic bingo aid.



            4.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be part of an
electronic network other than a network that includes only bingo aids and
devices that are located on the premises at which the bingo is being
conducted or be interactive with any device not located on the premises at
which the bingo is being conducted.



            5.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be used to
participate in bingo that is conducted at a location other than the location
at which the bingo session is conducted and at which the electronic bingo aid
is used.



            6.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be used to
provide for the input of numbers and letters announced by a bingo caller
other than the bingo caller who physically calls the numbers and letters at
the location at which the bingo session is conducted and at which the
electronic bingo aid is used.



         (b)   The Attorney General may adopt rules in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 119 that govern the use of electronic bingo aids. The rules
may include a requirement that an electronic bingo aid be capable of being
audited by the Attorney General to verify the number of bingo cards or sheets
played during each bingo session.



      (12)   Permit any person the charitable organization knows, or
should have known, to be under 18 years of age to play bingo described in
division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01.



   (D)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3) of
this section, no charitable organization shall provide to a bingo game
operator, and no bingo game operator shall receive or accept, any commission,
wage, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity, or other form of compensation,
directly or indirectly, regardless of the source, for conducting bingo or
providing other work or labor at the site of bingo during a bingo session.



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3) of this
section, no charitable organization shall provide to a bingo game operator
any commission, wage, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity, or other form
of compensation, directly or indirectly regardless of the source, for
conducting instant bingo other than at a bingo session at the site of instant
bingo other than at a bingo session.



      (3)   Nothing in this division (D) of this section prohibits
an employee of a fraternal organization, veteran's organization, or sporting
organization from selling instant bingo tickets or cards to the
organization's members or invited guests, as long as no portion of the
employee's compensation is paid from any receipts of bingo.



   (E)   Notwithstanding division (B)(1) of this section, a charitable
organization that, prior to December 6, 1977, has entered into written
agreements for the lease of premises it owns to another charitable
organization or other charitable organizations for the conducting of bingo
sessions so that more than two bingo sessions are conducted per calendar week
on the premises, and a person that is not a charitable organization and that,
prior to December 6, 1977, has entered into written agreements for the lease
of premises it owns to charitable organizations for the conducting of more
than two bingo sessions per calendar week on the premises, may continue to
lease the premises to those charitable organizations, provided that no more
than four sessions are conducted per calendar week, that the lessor
organization or person has notified the Attorney General in writing of the
organizations that will conduct the sessions and the days of the week and the
times of the day on which the sessions will be conducted, that the initial
lease entered into with each organization that will conduct the sessions was
filed with the Attorney General prior to December 6, 1977, and that each
organization that will conduct the sessions was issued a license to conduct
bingo games by the Attorney General prior to December 6, 1977.



   (F)   This section does not prohibit a bingo licensed charitable
organization or a game operator from giving any person an instant bingo
ticket as a prize.



   (G)   Whoever violates division (A)(2) of this section is guilty of
illegally conducting a bingo game, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates division (A)(1), (A)(3), (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3), (C)(1) to (C)(11),
or (D) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender
previously has been convicted of a violation of division (A)(1), (A)(3),
(B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3), (C)(1) to (C)(11), or (D) of this section, a
violation of division (A)(1), (A)(3), (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3), (C)(1) to
(C)(11), or (D) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Whoever
violates division (C)(12) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of
division (C)(12) of this section, a violation of division (C)(12) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2915.09)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 134.07  RECORDS TO BE KEPT.



   (A)   No charitable organization that conducts bingo or a game of
chance pursuant to R.C. § 2915.02(D), or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, shall fail to maintain the following records for at
least three years from the date on which the bingo or game of chance is
conducted:



      (1)   An itemized list of the gross receipts of each bingo
session, each game of instant bingo by serial number, each raffle, each punch
board game, and each game of chance, and an itemized list of the gross
profits of each game of instant bingo by serial number;



      (2)   An itemized list of all expenses, other than prizes,
that are incurred in conducting bingo or instant bingo, the name of each
person to whom the expenses are paid, and a receipt for all of the expenses;



      (3)   A list of all prizes awarded during each bingo session,
each raffle, each punch board game, and each game of chance conducted by the
charitable organization, the total prizes awarded from each game of instant
bingo by serial number, and the name, address, and social security number of
all persons who are winners of prizes of $600 or more in value;



      (4)   An itemized list of the recipients of the net profit of
bingo or game of chance, including the name and address of each recipient to
whom the money is distributed, and if the organization uses the net profit of
bingo, or the money or assets received from a game of chance, for any
charitable or other purpose set forth in R.C. § 2915.01(V), R.C. §
2915.02(D), or R.C. § 2915.101, a list of each purpose and an itemized list
of each expenditure for each purpose;



      (5)   The number of persons who participate in any bingo
session or game of chance that is conducted by the charitable organization;



      (6)   A list of receipts from the sale of food and beverages
by the charitable organization or one of its auxiliary units or societies, if
the receipts were excluded from “gross receipts” under R.C. § 2915.01(T);



      (7)   An itemized list of all expenses incurred at each bingo
session, each raffle, each punch board game, or each game of instant bingo
conducted by the charitable organization in the sale of food and beverages by
the charitable organization or by an auxiliary unit or society of the
charitable organization, the name of each person to whom the expenses are
paid, and a receipt for all of the expenses.



   (B)   A charitable organization shall keep the records that it is
required to maintain pursuant to division (A) of this section at its
principal place of business in this state or at its headquarters in this
state and shall notify the Attorney General of the location at which those
records are kept.



   (C)   The gross profit from each bingo session or game described in
division (1) or (2) of the definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01 shall
be deposited into a checking account devoted exclusively to the bingo session
or game. Payments for allowable expenses incurred in conducting the bingo
session or game and payments to recipients of some or all of the net profit
of the bingo session or game shall be made only by checks or electronic fund
transfers drawn on the bingo session or game account.



   (D)   Each charitable organization shall conduct and record an
inventory of all of its bingo supplies as of the first day of November of
each year.



   (E)   The Attorney General may adopt rules in accordance with R.C.
Chapter 119 that establish standards of accounting, record keeping, and
reporting to ensure that gross receipts from bingo or games of chance are
properly accounted for.



   (F)   A distributor shall maintain, for a period of three years
after the date of its sale or other provision, a record of each instance of
its selling or otherwise providing to another person bingo supplies for use
in this state. The record shall include all of the following for each
instance:



      (1)   The name of the manufacturer from which the distributor
purchased the bingo supplies and the date of the purchase;



      (2)   The name and address of the charitable organization or
other distributor to which the bingo supplies were sold or otherwise provided;



      (3)   A description that clearly identifies the bingo supplies;



      (4)   Invoices that include the nonrepeating serial numbers of
all paper bingo cards and sheets and all instant bingo deals sold or
otherwise provided to each charitable organization.



   (G)   A manufacturer shall maintain, for a period of three years
after the date of its sale or other provision, a record of each instance of
its selling or otherwise providing bingo supplies for use in this state. The
record shall include all of the following for each instance:



      (1)   The name and address of the distributor to whom the
bingo supplies were sold or otherwise provided;



      (2)   A description that clearly identifies the bingo
supplies, including serial numbers;



      (3)   Invoices that include the nonrepeating serial numbers of
all paper bingo cards and sheets and all instant bingo deals sold or
otherwise provided to each distributor.



   (H)   (1)   The Attorney General or any law enforcement agency
may do all of the following:



         (a)   Investigate any charitable organization or any
officer, agent, trustee, member, or employee of the organization;



         (b)   Examine the accounts and records of the
organization;



         (c)   Conduct inspections, audits, and observations of
bingo or games of chance;



         (d)   Conduct inspections of the premises where bingo or
games of chance are conducted;



         (e)   Take any other necessary and reasonable action to
determine if a violation of any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter
2915 has occurred and to determine whether R.C. § 2915.11, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, has been complied with.



      (2)   If any law enforcement agency has reasonable grounds to
believe that a charitable organization or an officer, agent, trustee, member,
or employee of the organization has violated any provision of this chapter or
R.C. Chapter 2915, the law enforcement agency may proceed by action in the
proper court to enforce this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915, provided that the
law enforcement agency shall give written notice to the Attorney General when
commencing an action as described in this division.



   (I)   No person shall destroy, alter, conceal, withhold, or deny
access to any accounts or records of a charitable organization that have been
requested for examination, or obstruct, impede, or interfere with any
inspection, audit, or observation of bingo or a game of chance or premises
where bingo or a game of chance is conducted, or refuse to comply with any
reasonable request of, or obstruct, impede, or interfere with any other
reasonable action undertaken by, the Attorney General or a law enforcement
agency pursuant to division (H) of this section.



   (J)   Whoever violates division (A) or (I) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 2915.10)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 134.08  REQUIREMENTS FOR BINGO GAME OPERATORS.



   (A)   No person shall be a bingo game operator unless the person is
18 years of age or older.



   (B)   No person who has been convicted of a felony or a gambling
offense in any jurisdiction shall be a bingo game operator.



   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. Whoever violates division (B) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 2915.11)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 134.09  BINGO GAMES FOR AMUSEMENT ONLY.



   (A)   Sections 134.06 to 134.13 do not apply to bingo games that are
conducted for the purpose of amusement only. A bingo game is conducted for
the purpose of amusement only if it complies with all of the requirements
specified in either division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section.



      (1)   (a)   The participants do not pay any money or any
other thing of value, including an admission fee or any fee, for bingo cards
or sheets, objects to cover the spaces, or other devices used in playing
bingo, for the privilege of participating in the bingo game, or to defray any
costs of the game, or pay tips or make donations during or immediately before
or after the bingo game.



         (b)   All prizes awarded during the course of the game
are non-monetary, and in the form of merchandise, goods, or entitlement to
goods or services only, and the total value of all prizes awarded during the
game is less than $100.



         (c)   No commission, wages, salary, reward, tip,
donation, gratuity, or other form of compensation, either directly or
indirectly, and regardless of the source, is paid to any bingo game operator
for work or labor performed at the site of the bingo game.



         (d)   The bingo game is not conducted either during or
within ten hours of any of the following:



            1.   A bingo session during which a charitable
bingo game is conducted pursuant to R.C. §§ 2915.07 through 2915.11 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



            2.    A scheme or game of chance, or bingo
described in R.C. § 2915.01(O)(2).



         (e)   The number of players participating in the bingo
game does not exceed 50.



      (2)   (a)   The participants do not pay money or any other
thing of value as an admission fee, and no participant is charged more than
$0.25 to purchase a bingo card or sheet, objects to cover the spaces, or
other devices used in playing bingo.



         (b)   The total amount of money paid by all of the
participants for bingo cards or sheets, objects to cover the spaces, or other
devices used in playing bingo does not exceed $100.



         (c)   All of the money paid for bingo cards or sheets,
objects to cover spaces, or other devices used in playing bingo is used only
to pay winners monetary and nonmonetary prizes and to provide refreshments.



         (d)   The total value of all prizes awarded during the
game does not exceed $100.



         (e)   No commission, wages, salary, reward, tip,
donation, gratuity, or other form of compensation, either directly or
indirectly, and regardless of the source, is paid to any bingo game operator
for work or labor performed at the site of the bingo game.



         (f)   The bingo game is not conducted during or within
ten hours of either of the following:



            1.   A bingo session during which a charitable
bingo game is conducted pursuant to R.C. §§ 2915.07 through 2915.11 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;



            2.    A scheme of chance or a game of chance, or
bingo described in R.C. § 2915.01(O)(2).



         (g)   All of the participants reside at the premises
where the bingo game is conducted.



         (h)   The bingo games are conducted on different days of
the week and not more than twice in a calendar week.



   (B)   The Attorney General or any local law enforcement agency may
investigate the conduct of a bingo game that purportedly is conducted for
purposes of amusement only if there is reason to believe that the purported
amusement bingo game does not comply with the requirements of either division
(A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section. A local law enforcement agency may proceed
by action in the proper court to enforce this section if the local law
enforcement agency gives written notice to the Attorney General when
commencing the action.



(R.C. § 2915.12)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 134.10  PROHIBITIONS WHERE INSTANT BINGO GAME IS CONDUCTED.



   (A)   No charitable organization that conducts instant bingo shall
do any of the following:



      (1)   Fail to comply with the requirements of R.C. §
2915.09(A)(1), (A)(2), and (A)(3), or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance;



      (2)   Conduct instant bingo unless either of the following
applies:



         (a)   That organization is, and has received from the
Internal Revenue Service a determination letter that is currently in effect
stating that the organization is, exempt from federal income taxation under
IRC 501(a), is described in IRC 501(c)(3), is a charitable organization as
defined in R.C. § 2915.01, is in good standing in the state pursuant to R.C.
§ 2915.08, and is in compliance with R.C. Chapter 1716;



         (b)   That organization is, and has received from the
Internal Revenue Service a determination letter that is currently in effect
stating that the organization is, exempt from federal income taxation under
IRC 501(a), is described in IRC 501(c)(7), (c)(8), (c)(10), or (c)(19) or is
a veteran's organization described in IRC 501(c)(4), and conducts instant
bingo under R.C. § 2915.13.



      (3)   Conduct instant bingo on any day, at any time, or at any
premises not specified on the organization's license issued pursuant to R.C.
§ 2915.08;



      (4)   Permit any person whom the organization knows or should
have known has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any
jurisdiction to be a bingo game operator in the conduct of instant bingo;



      (5)   Purchase or lease supplies used to conduct instant bingo
or punch board games from any person except a distributor licensed under R.C.
§ 2915.081;



      (6)   Sell or provide any instant bingo ticket or card for a
price different from the price printed on it by the manufacturer on either
the instant bingo ticket or card or on the game flare;



      (7)   Sell an instant bingo ticket or card to a person under
18 years of age;



      (8)   Fail to keep unsold instant bingo tickets or cards for
less than three years;



      (9)   Pay any compensation to a bingo game operator for
conducting instant bingo that is conducted by the organization or for
preparing, selling, or serving food or beverages at the site of the instant
bingo game, permit any auxiliary unit or society of the organization to pay
compensation to any bingo game operator who prepares, sells, or serves food
or beverages at an instant bingo game conducted by the organization, or
permit any auxiliary unit or society of the organization to prepare, sell, or
serve food or beverages at an instant bingo game conducted by the
organization, if the auxiliary unit or society pays any compensation to the
bingo game operators who prepare, sell, or serve the food or beverages;



      (10)    Pay fees to any person for any services performed in
relation to an instant bingo game, except as provided in R.C. § 2915.093(D);



      (11)   Pay fees to any person who provides refreshments to the
participants in an instant bingo game;



      (12)   (a)   Allow instant bingo tickets or cards to be
sold to bingo game operators at a premises at which the organization sells
instant bingo tickets or cards or to be sold to employees of a D permit
holder who are working at a premises at which instant bingo tickets or cards
are sold;



         (b)   Division (A)(12)(a) of this section does not
prohibit a licensed charitable organization or a bingo game operator from
giving any person an instant bingo ticket as a prize in place of a cash prize
won by a participant in an instant bingo game. In no case shall an instant
bingo ticket or card be sold or provided for a price different from the price
printed on it by the manufacturer on either the instant bingo ticket or card
or on the game flare.



      (13)   Fail to display its bingo license, and the serial
numbers of the deal of instant bingo tickets or cards to be sold,
conspicuously at each premises at which it sells instant bingo tickets or
cards;



      (14)   Possess a deal of instant bingo tickets or cards that
was not purchased from a distributor licensed under R.C. § 2915.081 as
reflected on an invoice issued by the distributor that contains all of the
information required by R.C. § 2915.10(E);



      (15)   Fail, once it opens a deal of instant bingo tickets or
cards, to continue to sell the tickets or cards in that deal until the
tickets or cards with the top two highest tiers of prizes in that deal are
sold;



      (16)   Possess bingo supplies that were not obtained in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 2915.



   (B)   A charitable organization may purchase, lease, or use instant
bingo ticket dispensers to sell instant bingo tickets or cards.



   (C)   Pursuant to R.C. § 2915.091(C), the Attorney General may
adopt rules in accordance with R.C. Chapter 119 that govern the conduct of
instant bingo by charitable organizations.



   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section or a rule
adopted under division (C) of this section is guilty of illegal instant bingo
conduct. Except as otherwise provided in this division, illegal instant bingo
conduct is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a violation of division (A) of this section or of such a
rule adopted under division (C) of this section, illegal instant bingo
conduct is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2915.091)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 134.11  RAFFLE DRAWINGS.



   (A)   (1)   Subject to division (A)(2) of this section, a
charitable organization, a public school, a chartered nonpublic school, a
community school, or a veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or
sporting organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC
501(a) and is described in IRC 501(c)(3), 501(c)(4), 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8),
501(c)(10), or 501(c)(19) may conduct a raffle to raise money for the
organization or school and does not need a license to conduct bingo in order
to conduct a raffle drawing that is not for profit.



      (2)    If a charitable organization that is described in
division (A)(1) of this section, but that is not also described in IRC
501(c)(3), conducts a raffle, the charitable organization shall distribute at
least 50% of the net profit from the raffle to a charitable purpose described
in R.C. § 2915.01(V) or to a department or agency of the federal government,
the state, or any political subdivision.



   (B)   A chamber of commerce may conduct not more than one raffle per
year to raise money for the chamber of commerce.



   (C)   Except as provided in division (A) or (B) of this section, no
person shall conduct a raffle drawing that is for profit or a raffle drawing
that is not for profit.



   (D)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of
illegal conduct of a raffle. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
illegal conduct of a raffle is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of a violation of division (C) of this
section, illegal conduct of a raffle is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2915.092)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 134.12  INSTANT BINGO OTHER THAN AT BINGO SESSIONS.



   (A)   As used in this section, RETAIL INCOME FROM ALL COMMERCIAL
ACTIVITY means the income that a person receives from the provision of goods,
services, or activities that are provided at the location where instant bingo
other than at a bingo session is conducted, including the sale of instant
bingo tickets. A religious organization that is exempt from federal income
taxation under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3), at not more than
one location at which it conducts its charitable programs, may include
donations from its members and guests as retail income.



   (B)   (1)   If a charitable instant bingo organization conducts
instant bingo other than at a bingo session, the charitable instant bingo
organization shall enter into a written contract with the owner or lessor of
the location at which the instant bingo is conducted to allow the owner or
lessor to assist in the conduct of instant bingo other than at a bingo
session, identify each location where the instant bingo other than at a bingo
session is being conducted, and identify the owner or lessor of each location.



      (2)   A charitable instant bingo organization that conducts
instant bingo other than at a bingo session is not required to enter into a
written contract with the owner or lessor of the location at which the
instant bingo is conducted provided that the owner or lessor is not assisting
in the conduct of the instant bingo other than at a bingo session and
provided that the conduct of the instant bingo other than at a bingo session
at that location is not more than five days per calendar year and not more
than ten hours per day.



   (C)   Except as provided in division (F) of this section, charitable
instant bingo organization shall conduct instant bingo other than at a bingo
session at a location where the primary source of retail income from all
commercial activity at that location is the sale of instant bingo tickets.



   (D)   (1)   The owner or lessor of a location that enters into a
contract pursuant to division (B) of this section shall pay the full gross
profit to the charitable instant bingo organization, in return for the deal
of instant bingo tickets. The owner or lessor may retain the money that the
owner or lessor receives for selling the instant bingo tickets, provided,
however, that after the deal has been sold, the owner or lessor shall pay to
the charitable instant bingo organization the value of any unredeemed instant
bingo prizes remaining in the deal of instant bingo tickets.



      (2)   The charitable instant bingo organization shall pay 6%
of the total gross receipts of any deal of instant bingo tickets for the
purpose of reimbursing the owner or lessor for expenses described in this
division.



      (3)   As used in this division, EXPENSES means those items
provided for in R.C. § 2915.01(GG)(4), (GG)(5), (GG)(6), (GG)(7), (GG)(8),
(GG)(12), and (GG)(13) and that percentage of the owner’s or lessor’s
rent for the location where instant bingo is conducted. Expenses, in the
aggregate, shall not exceed 6% of the total gross receipts of any deal of
instant bingo tickets.



      (4)   As used in this division, FULL GROSS PROFIT means the
amount by which the total receipts of all instant bingo tickets, if the deal
has been sold in full, exceeds the amount that would be paid out if all
prizes were redeemed.



   (E)   A charitable instant bingo organization shall provide the
Attorney General with all of the following information:



      (1)   That the charitable instant bingo organization has
terminated a contract entered into pursuant to division (B) of this section
with an owner or lessor of a location;



      (2)   That the charitable instant bingo organization has
entered into a written contract pursuant to division (B) of this section with
a new owner or lessor of a location;



      (3)   That the charitable instant bingo organization is aware
of conduct by the owner or lessor of a location at which instant bingo is
conducted that is in violation of R.C. Chapter 2915.



   (F)   Division (C) of this section does not apply to a volunteer
firefighter's organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under
IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3), that conducts instant bingo other
than at a bingo session on the premises where the organization conducts
firefighter training, that has conducted instant bingo continuously for at
least five years prior to July 1, 2003, and that, during each of those five
years, had gross receipts of at least $1,500,000.



(R.C. § 2915.093)



   (G)   (1)   A veteran's organization, a fraternal organization,
or a sporting organization authorized to conduct a bingo session pursuant to
R.C. Chapter 2915 may conduct instant bingo other than at a bingo session if
all of the following apply:



         (a)   The veteran's organization, fraternal
organization, or sporting organization limits the sale of instant bingo to 12
hours during any day, provided that the sale does not begin earlier than
10:00 a.m. and ends not later than 2:00 a.m.



         (b)   The veteran's organization, fraternal
organization, or sporting organization limits the sale of instant bingo to
its own premises and to its own members and invited guests.



         (c)   The veteran's organization, fraternal
organization, or sporting organization is raising money for an organization
that is described in IRC 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is either a
governmental unit or an organization that maintains its principal place of
business in this state, that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC
501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3), and that is in good standing in this
state and executes a written contract with that organization as required in
division (G)(2) of this section.



      (2)   If a veteran's organization, fraternal organization, or
sporting organization authorized to conduct instant bingo pursuant to
division (G)(1) of this section is raising money for another organization
that is described in IRC 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is either a
governmental unit or an organization that maintains its principal place of
business in this state, that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC
501(a) and described in IRC 501(c), and that is in good standing in this
state, the veteran's organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization shall execute a written contract with the organization that is
described in IRC 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is either a governmental
unit or an organization that maintains its principal place of business in
this state, that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and
described in IRC 501(c), and that is in good standing in this state in order
to conduct instant bingo. That contract shall include a statement of the
percentage of the net proceeds that the veteran's, fraternal, or sporting
organization will be distributing to the organization that is described in
IRC 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is either a governmental unit or an
organization that maintains its principal place of business in this state,
that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and described in
IRC 501(c)(3), and that is in good standing in this state.



      (3)   (a)   If a veteran's organization, fraternal
organization, or sporting organization authorized to conduct instant bingo
pursuant to division (G)(1) of this section has been issued a liquor permit
under R.C. Chapter 4303, that permit may be subject to suspension,
revocation, or cancellation if the veteran's organization, fraternal
organization, or sporting organization violates a provision of this chapter
or R.C. Chapter 2915.



         (b)   No veteran's organization, fraternal organization,
or sporting organization that enters into a written contract pursuant to
division (G)(2) of this section shall violate any provision of this chapter
or R.C. Chapter 2915, or permit, aid, or abet any other person in violating
any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915.



      (4)   A veteran's organization, fraternal organization, or
sporting organization shall give all required proceeds earned from the
conduct of instant bingo to the organization with which the veteran's
organization, fraternal organization, or sporting organization has entered
into a written contract.



      (5)   Whoever violates division (G) of this section is guilty
of illegal instant bingo conduct. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, illegal instant bingo conduct is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of division (G)
of this section, illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2915.13)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 134.13  RESTRICTIONS ON OWNER OR LESSOR OF LOCATION AT INSTANT BINGO.



   (A)   No owner or lessor of a location shall assist a charitable
instant bingo organization in the conduct of instant bingo other than at a
bingo session at that location unless the owner or lessor has entered into a
written contract, as described in R.C. § 2915.093, with the charitable
instant bingo organization to assist in the conduct of instant bingo other
than at a bingo session.



   (B)   The location of the lessor or owner shall be designated as a
location where the charitable instant bingo organization conducts instant
bingo other than at a bingo session.



   (C)   No owner or lessor of a location that enters into a written
contract as prescribed in division (A) of this section shall violate any
provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915, or permit, aid, or abet any
other person in violating any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915.



   (D)   No owner or lessor of a location that enters into a written
contract as prescribed in division (A) of this section shall violate the
terms of the contract.



   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates division (C) or (D) of this section
is guilty of illegal instant bingo conduct. Except as otherwise provided in
this division, illegal instant bingo conduct is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of
division (C) or (D) of this section, illegal instant bingo conduct is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (2)   If an owner or lessor of a location knowingly,
intentionally, or recklessly violates division (C) or (D) of this section,
any license that the owner or lessor holds for the retail sale of any goods
on the owner's or lessor's premises that is issued by the state or a
political subdivision is subject to suspension, revocation, or payment of a
monetary penalty at the request of the Attorney General.



(R.C. § 2915.094)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 134.14  SKILL-BASED AMUSEMENT MACHINES; PROHIBITED CONDUCT.



   (A)   No person shall give to another person any item described in
division (1), (2), (3), or (4) of the definition for “merchandise prize”
in § 134.01 in exchange for a noncash prize, toy, or novelty received as a
reward for playing or operating a skill-based amusement machine or for a free
or reduced-price game won on a skill-based amusement machine.



   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
skill-based amusement machine prohibited conduct. A violation of division (A)
of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree for each redemption of a
prize that is involved in the violation. If the offender previously has been
convicted of a violation of division (A) of this section, a violation of that
division is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2915.06)



   (C)   Any regulation of skill-based amusement machines shall be
governed by this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915 and not by R.C. Chapter 1345.



(R.C. § 2915.061)



CHAPTER 135:  OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS



Section



   135.01   Definitions



   135.02   Negligent homicide



   135.03   Vehicular homicide; vehicular manslaughter; vehicular
assault



   135.04   Assault; negligent assault



   135.05   Injury to persons by hunters



   135.06   Menacing; aggravated menacing; menacing by stalking



   135.07   Unlawful restraint



   135.08   Criminal child enticement



   135.09   Coercion



   135.10   Bigamy



   135.11   Unlawful abortion; failure to perform viability testing



   135.12   Abortion trafficking



   135.13   Nonsupport of dependents



   135.14   Endangering children



   135.15   Interference with custody; interference with support orders



   135.16   Domestic violence



   135.17   Hazing prohibited



   135.18   Contributing to unruliness or delinquency of a child



   135.19   Failure to provide for functionally impaired person



   135.20   Patient abuse or neglect; patient endangerment; exceptions;
false statements; retaliation



   135.21   Interference with right of person to engage in housing
transactions because of race, religion, or the like



   135.22   Ethnic intimidation



   135.23   Violating a protection order, consent agreement,
anti-stalking protection order or order issued by a court of another state



   135.24   Adulteration of food



   135.25   Illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products,
or alternative nicotine products; transaction scans



   135.26   Nonsmoking areas in places of public assembly



   135.27   Spreading contagion



   135.28   Abuse of a corpse



   135.29   Unlawful collection of bodily substances



Statutory reference:



   Extortionate extension of credit, see R.C. §§ 2905.21 through 2905.24



   Failure to send child to school, see R.C. § 3321.38



   Permitting child abuse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.15



   Reckless homicide, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.041



   Rights of victims of crimes, see R.C. Chapter 2930



§ 135.01  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of §§ 135.01 through 135.06, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   ANOTHER'S UNBORN or OTHER PERSON'S UNBORN.  A member of the species
Homo sapiens who is or was carried in the womb of another during a period
that begins with fertilization and that continues unless and until live birth
occurs.



   UNLAWFUL TERMINATION OF ANOTHER'S PREGNANCY.  Causing the death of an
unborn member of the species Homo sapiens who is or was carried in the womb
of another, as a result of injuries inflicted during the period that begins
with fertilization and that continues unless and until live birth occurs.



   (B)   Notwithstanding division (A) of this section, in no case shall
the definitions of the terms ANOTHER'S UNBORN, OTHER PERSON'S UNBORN and
UNLAWFUL TERMINATION OF ANOTHER'S PREGNANCY that are set forth in division
(A) of this section be applied or construed in any of the following manners:



      (1)    Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(1) of this
section, in a manner so that the offense prohibits or is construed as
prohibiting any pregnant woman or her physician from performing an abortion
with the consent of the pregnant woman, with the consent of the pregnant
woman implied by law in a medical emergency, or with the approval of one
otherwise authorized by law to consent to medical treatment on behalf of the
pregnant woman.  An abortion that violates the conditions described in the
immediately preceding sentence may be punished as any violation of R.C. §
2903.01, 2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04, 2903.05, 2903.06, 2903.08, 2903.11,
2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.14, 2903.21 or 2903.22, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, as applicable.  An abortion that does not violate the
conditions described in the second immediately preceding sentence but that
does violate R.C. § 2919.12, 2919.13(B), 2919.15, 2919.151, 2919.17 or
2919.18, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, may be punished
as a violation of such section, as applicable.



      (2)   In a manner so that the offense is applied or is
construed as applying to a woman based on an act or omission of the woman
that occurs while she is or was pregnant and that results in any of the
following:



         (a)   Her delivery of a stillborn baby.



         (b)   Her causing, in any other manner, the death in
utero of a viable, unborn human that she is carrying.



         (c)   Her causing the death of her child who is born
alive but who dies from one or more injuries that are sustained while the
child is a viable, unborn human.



         (d)   Her causing her child who is born alive to sustain
one or more injuries while the child is a viable, unborn human.



         (e)   Her causing, threatening to cause, or attempting
to cause, in any other manner, an injury, illness, or other psychological
illness or condition, regardless of its duration or gravity, to a viable,
unborn human that she is carrying.



(R.C. § 2903.09)



§ 135.02  NEGLIGENT HOMICIDE.



   (A)   No person shall negligently cause the death of another or the
unlawful termination of another's pregnancy by means of a deadly weapon or
dangerous ordnance, as defined in R.C. § 2923.11.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of negligent homicide,
a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 2903.05)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Reckless homicide, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.041



§ 135.03  VEHICULAR HOMICIDE; VEHICULAR MANSLAUGHTER; VEHICULAR ASSAULT.



   (A)   No person, while operating or participating in the operation
of a motor vehicle, motorcycle, snowmobile, locomotive, watercraft, or
aircraft, shall cause the death of another or the unlawful termination of
another’s pregnancy in any of the following ways:



      (1)   (a)   As the proximate result of committing a
violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or of a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance;



         (b)   As the proximate result of committing a violation
of R.C. § 1547.11(A), or of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;



         (c)   As the proximate result of committing a violation
of R.C. § 4561.15(A)(3), or of a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.



      (2)   In one of the following ways:



         (a)   Recklessly;



         (b)   As the proximate result of committing, while
operating or participating in the operation of a motor vehicle or motorcycle
in a construction zone, a reckless operation offense, provided that this
division applies only if the person whose death is caused or whose pregnancy
is unlawfully terminated is in the construction zone at the time of the
offender’s commission of the reckless operation offense in the construction
zone and does not apply as described in division (D) of this section.



      (3)   In one of the following ways:



         (a)   Negligently;



         (b)   As the proximate result of committing, while
operating or participating in the operation of a motor vehicle or motorcycle
in a construction zone, a speeding offense, provided that this division
applies only if the person whose death is caused or whose pregnancy is
unlawfully terminated is in the construction zone at the time of the
offender’s commission of the speeding offense in the construction zone and
does not apply as described in division (D) of this section.



      (4)   As the proximate result of committing a violation of any
provision of any section contained in R.C. Title 45 that is a minor
misdemeanor or of a municipal ordinance that, regardless of the penalty set
by ordinance for the violation, is substantially equivalent to any provision
of  any section contained in R.C. Title 45 that is a minor misdemeanor.



   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) or (2) of this
section is guilty of aggravated vehicular homicide, a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.



      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates division (A)(3) of this
section is guilty of vehicular homicide. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, vehicular homicide is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Vehicular
homicide committed in violation of division (A)(3) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law if, at the time of the
offense, the offender was driving under a suspension or cancellation imposed
under R.C. Chapter 4510 or any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code or
was operating a motor vehicle or motorcycle, did not have a valid driver's
license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit,
probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege, and was not
eligible for renewal of the offender's driver's license or commercial
driver's license without examination under R.C. § 4507.10 or if the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this
section or any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault offense.



         (b)   In addition to any other sanctions imposed
pursuant to this division, the court shall impose upon the offender a class
four suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4).



      (3)   (a)   Whoever violates division (A)(4) of this
section is guilty of vehicular manslaughter. Except as otherwise provided in
this division, vehicular manslaughter is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
Vehicular manslaughter is a misdemeanor of the first degree if, at the time
of the offense, the offender was driving under a suspension or cancellation
imposed under R.C. Chapter 4510 or any other provision of the Revised Code or
was operating a motor vehicle or motorcycle, did not have a valid driver’s
license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit,
probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege, and was not
eligible for renewal of the offender’s driver’s license or commercial
driver’s license without examination under R.C. § 4507.10 or if the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of
this section or any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault
offense.



         (b)   In addition to any other sanctions imposed
pursuant to this division, the court shall impose upon the offender a class
six suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(6) or, if
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
violation of this section,  any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or
assault offense, or a traffic-related murder, felonious assault, or attempted
murder offense, a class four suspension of the offender’s driver’s
license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit,
probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4).



   (C)   The court shall impose a mandatory jail term of at least 15
days on an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor
violation of division (A)(3)(b) of this section and may impose upon the
offender a longer jail term as authorized pursuant to R.C. § 2929.24.



   (D)   Divisions (A)(2)(b) and (A)(3)(b) of this section do not apply
in a particular construction zone unless signs of the type described in R.C.
§ 2903.081 are erected in that construction zone in accordance with the
guidelines and design specifications established by the Director of
Transportation under R.C. § 5501.27. The failure to erect signs of the type
described in R.C. § 2903.081 in a particular construction zone in accordance
with those guidelines and design specifications does not limit or affect the
application of division (A)(1), (A)(2)(a), (A)(3)(a), or (A)(4) of this
section in that construction zone or the prosecution of any person who
violates any of those divisions in that construction zone.



   (E)   (1)   As used in this section:



         CONSTRUCTION ZONE has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5501.27.



         MANDATORY PRISON TERM and MANDATORY JAIL TERM have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 2929.01.



         MOTOR VEHICLE has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.



         RECKLESS OPERATION OFFENSE means a violation of R.C. §
4511.20 or a municipal ordinance substantially equivalent to R.C. § 4511.20.



         SPEEDING OFFENSE means a violation of R.C. § 4511.21 or a
municipal ordinance pertaining to speed.



         TRAFFIC-RELATED HOMICIDE, MANSLAUGHTER, OR ASSAULT OFFENSE
means a violation of R.C. § 2903.04 in circumstances in which division (D)
of that section applies, a violation of R.C. §§ 2903.06 or 2903.08, or a
violation of R.C. §§ 2903.06, 2903.07, or 2903.08 as they existed prior to
March 23, 2000.



         TRAFFIC-RELATED MURDER, FELONIOUS ASSAULT, OR ATTEMPTED
MURDER OFFENSE means a violation of R.C. § 2903.01 or R.C. § 2903.02 in
circumstances in which the offender used a motor vehicle as the means to
commit the violation, a violation of R.C. § 2903.11(A)(2) in circumstances
in which the deadly weapon used in the commission of the violation is a motor
vehicle, or an attempt to commit aggravated murder or murder in violation of
R.C. § 2923.02 in circumstances in which the offender used a motor vehicle
as the means to attempt to commit the aggravated murder or murder.



      (2)   For the purposes of this section, when a penalty or
suspension is enhanced because of a prior or current violation of a specified
law or a prior or current specified offense, the reference to the violation
of the specified law or the specified offense includes any violation of any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, former law of this state, or
current or former law of this or another state or the United States.



(R.C. § 2903.06) 



   (F)   Vehicular assault.



      (1)   No person, while operating or participating in the
operation of a motor vehicle or motorcycle, shall cause serious physical harm
to another person or another's unborn as the proximate result of committing,
while operating or participating in the operation of a motor vehicle or
motorcycle in a construction zone, a speeding offense, provided that this
division applies only if the person to whom the serious physical harm is
caused or to whose unborn the serious physical harm is caused is in the
construction zone at the time of the offender's commission of the speeding
offense in the construction zone and does not apply as described in division
(F)(4) of this section.



      (2)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this division,
vehicular assault committed in violation of division (F)(1) of this section
is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Vehicular assault committed in
violation of division (F)(1) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law if, at the time of the offense, the offender was
driving under a suspension imposed under R.C. Chapter 4510 or any other
provision of the Ohio Revised Code or if the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (F)(1) of this
section, R.C. § 2903.08, or any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or
assault offense.



         (b)   In addition to any other sanctions imposed, the
court shall impose upon the offender a class four suspension of the
offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary
instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege
from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4).



      (3)   The court shall impose a mandatory jail term of at least
seven days on an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
misdemeanor violation of division (F)(1) of this section and may impose upon
the offender a longer jail term as authorized pursuant to R.C. § 2929.24.



      (4)   Division (F)(1) of this section does not apply in a
particular construction zone unless signs of the type described in R.C. §
2903.081 are erected in that construction zone in accordance with the
guidelines and design specifications established by the Director of
Transportation under R.C. § 5501.27.



      (5)   As used in this division (F):



         CONSTRUCTION ZONE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5501.27.



         MANDATORY JAIL TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2929.01.



         SPEEDING OFFENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2903.06.



         TRAFFIC-RELATED HOMICIDE, MANSLAUGHTER, OR ASSAULT OFFENSE.
Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2903.06.



      (6)   For the purposes of this division (F), when a penalty or
suspension is enhanced because of a prior or current violation of a specified
law or a prior or current specified offense, the reference to the violation
of the specified law or the specified offense includes any violation of any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, former law of this state, or
current or former law of another state or the United States.



(R.C. 2903.08(A)(3), (C)(3), (D)(3), (E) - (G))



(R.C. § 2903.06)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Trial court to suspend driver's license, see R.C. § 4510.05



   Vehicular assault and aggravated vehicular assault, felony offenses,
see R.C. § 2903.08



§ 135.04  ASSAULT; NEGLIGENT ASSAULT.



   (A)   Assault.



      (1)   No person shall knowingly cause or attempt to cause
physical harm to another or to another's unborn.



      (2)   No person shall recklessly cause serious physical harm
to another or to another's unborn.



      (3)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this
section is guilty of assault.  Except as provided in R.C. § 2903.13(C),
assault is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (4)   If an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to
assault when it is a misdemeanor also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
specification as described in R.C. § 2941.1423 (victim of the offense was a
woman whom the defendant knew was pregnant at the time of the offense) that
was included in the indictment, count in the indictment, or information
charging the offense, the court shall sentence the offender to a mandatory
jail term as provided in R.C. § 2929.24(G).



(R.C. § 2903.13)



   (B)   Negligent assault.



      (1)   No person shall negligently, by means of a deadly weapon
or dangerous ordnance as defined in R.C. § 2923.11, cause physical harm to
another or to another's unborn.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (B)(1) of this section is
guilty of negligent assault, a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 2903.14)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Aggravated and felonious assault, see R.C. §§ 2903.11 and 2903.12



   Felony offenses: assaulting functionally impaired person, peace
officer, investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation, firefighter, person performing emergency medical service,
officer or employee of a public children services agency or private child
placing agency; assault at a correctional institution; assault on school
officials and school bus drivers; health care professional, worker or
security guard at a hospital under certain circumstances; judge, magistrate,
prosecutor or court official or employee under certain circumstances, see
R.C. § 2903.13(C)



   Permitting child abuse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.15



   Persons who may seek relief under anti-stalking protection order; ex
parte orders, see R.C. § 2903.214



   Protection order as pretrial condition of release, see R.C. § 2903.213



   Vehicular assault and aggravated vehicular assault, felony offenses,
see R.C. § 2903.08



§ 135.05  INJURY TO PERSONS BY HUNTERS.



   (A)   No person in the act of hunting, pursuing, taking, or killing
a wild animal shall act in a negligent, careless, or reckless manner so as to
injure persons.



(R.C. § 1533.171(A))



   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
of the first degree.



(R.C. § 1533.99(C))  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory Reference:



   Violation, license revocation, see R.C. § 1533.171(B) – (E)



§ 135.06  MENACING; AGGRAVATED MENACING; MENACING BY STALKING.



   (A)   Menacing.



      (1)   No person shall knowingly cause another to believe that
the offender will cause physical harm to the person or property of the other
person, the other person's unborn,  or a member of the other person's
immediate family. In addition to any other basis for the other person’s
belief that the offender will cause physical harm to the person or property
of the other person, the other person’s unborn, or a member of the other
person’s immediate family, the other person’s belief may be based on
words or conduct of the offender that are directed at or identify a
corporation, association, or other organization that employs the other person
or to which the other person belongs.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) of this section is
guilty of menacing. Except as otherwise provided in this division (A)(2),
menacing is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the victim of the offense
is an officer or employee of a public children services agency or a private
child placing agency and the offense relates to the officer’s or
employee’s performance or anticipated performance of official
responsibilities or duties, menacing is a misdemeanor of the first degree or,
if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to an
offense of violence, the victim of that prior offense was an officer or
employee of a public children services agency or private child placing
agency, and that prior offense related to the officer’s or employee’s
performance or anticipated performance of official responsibilities or
duties, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (3)   As used in this division (A), ORGANIZATION includes an
entity that is a governmental employer.



(R.C. § 2903.22)



   (B)   Aggravated menacing.



      (1)   No person shall knowingly cause another to believe that
the offender will cause serious physical harm to the person or property of
the other person, such other person's unborn, or a member of such other
person's immediate family. In addition to any other basis for the other
person’s belief that the offender will cause serious physical harm to the
person or property of the other person, the other person’s unborn, or a
member of the other person’s immediate family, the other person’s belief
may be based on words or conduct of the offender that are directed at or
identify a corporation, association, or other organization that employs the
other person or to which the other person belongs.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (B)(1) of this section is
guilty of aggravated menacing. Except as otherwise provided in this division
(B)(2), aggravated menacing is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
victim of the offense is an officer or employee of a public children services
agency or a private child placing agency and the offense relates to the
officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated performance of
official responsibilities or duties, aggravated menacing is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law or, if the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to an offense of violence, the victim of
that prior offense was an officer or employee of a public children services
agency or private child placing agency, and that prior offense related to the
officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated performance of
official responsibilities or duties, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



      (3)   As used in this division (B), ORGANIZATION includes an
entity that is a governmental employer.



(R.C. § 2903.21)



   (C)   Menacing by stalking.



      (1)   (a)   No person by engaging in a pattern of conduct
shall knowingly cause another person to believe that the offender will cause
physical harm to the other person or a family or household member of the
other person or cause mental distress to the other person or a family or
household member of the other person. In addition to any other basis for the
other person’s belief that the offender will cause physical harm to the
other person or the other person’s family or household member or mental
distress to the other person or the other person’s family or household
member, the other person’s belief or mental distress may be based on words
or conduct of the offender that are directed at or identify a corporation,
association, or other organization that employs the other person or to which
the other person belongs.



         (b)   No person, through the use of any form of written
communication or any electronic method of remotely transferring information,
including but not limited to any computer, computer network, computer
program, computer system, or telecommunication device, shall post a message
or use any intentionally written or verbal graphic gesture with purpose to do
either of the following:



            1.   Violate division (C)(1)(a) of this section;



            2.   Urge or incite another to commit a violation
of division (C)(1)(a) of this section.



         (c)   No person, with a sexual motivation, shall violate
division (C)(1)(a) or (C)(1)(b) of this section.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (C)(1) of this section is
guilty of menacing by stalking.



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(2)(b)
of this section, menacing by stalking is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



         (b)   Menacing by stalking is a felony, to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law, if any of the following applies:



            1.   The offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to a violation of R.C. § 2903.211 or a violation of R.C.
§ 2911.211, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to either of
these offenses.



            2.   In committing the offense under division
(C)(1)(a), (C)(1)(b) or (C)(1)(c) of this section, the offender made a threat
of physical harm to or against the victim, or as a result of an offense
committed under division (C)(1)(b) or (C)(1)(c) of this section, a third
person induced by the offender’s posted message made a threat of physical
harm to or against the victim.



            3.   In committing the offense under division
(C)(1)(a), (C)(1)(b) or (C)(1)(c) of this section, the offender trespassed on
the land or premises where the victim lives, is employed, or attends school,
or as a result of an offense committed under division (C)(1)(c) of this
section, a third person induced by the offender’s posted message trespassed
on the land or premises where the victim lives, is employed, or attends
school.



            4.   The victim of the offense is a minor.



            5.   The offender has a history of violence
towards the victim or any other person or a history of other violent acts
towards the victim or any other person.



            6.   While committing the offense under division
(C)(1)(a) of this section or a violation of division (C)(1)(c) of this
section based on conduct in violation of division (C)(1)(a) of this section,
the offender had a deadly weapon on or about the offender’s person or under
the offender’s control. Division (C)(2)(b)6. of this section does not apply
in determining the penalty for a violation of division (C)(1)(b) of this
section or a violation of division (C)(1)(c) of this section based on conduct
in violation of division (C)(1)(b) of this section.



            7.   At the time of the commission of the offense,
the offender was the subject of a protection order issued under R.C. §
2903.213 or R.C. § 2903.214, regardless of whether or not the person to be
protected under the order is the victim of the offense or another person.



            8.   In committing the offense under division
(C)(1)(a), (C)(1)(b) or (C)(1)(c) of this section, the offender caused
serious physical harm to the premises at which the victim resides, to the
real property on which that premises is located, or to any personal property
located on that premises, or as a result of an offense committed under
division (C)(1)(b) of this section or an offense committed under division
(C)(1)(c) of this section based on a violation of division (C)(1)(b) of this
section, a third person induced by the offender’s posted message caused
serious physical harm to that premises, that real property, or any personal
property on that premises.



            9.   Prior to committing the offense, the offender
had been determined to represent a substantial risk of physical harm to
others as manifested by evidence of then-recent homicidal or other violent
behavior, evidence of then-recent threats that placed another in reasonable
fear of violent behavior and serious harm, or other evidence of then-present
dangerousness.



            10.   The victim of the offense is an officer or
employee of a public children services agency or a private child placing
agency and the offense relates to the officer’s or employee’s performance
or anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties.



            11.   The offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to an offense of violence, the victim of that prior
offense was an officer or employee of a public children services agency or
private child placing agency, and that prior offense related to the
officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated performance of
official responsibilities or duties.



      (3)   R.C. § 2919.271 applies in relation to a defendant
charged with a violation of this section.



      (4)   As used in division (C) of this section:



         COMPUTER, COMPUTER NETWORK, COMPUTER PROGRAM, COMPUTER
SYSTEM, and TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Have the same meanings as in R.C. §
2913.01.



         EMERGENCY FACILITY PERSON. Is the singular of “emergency
facility personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2909.04.



         EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSON. Is the singular of
“emergency medical services personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2133.21.



         FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Means any of the following:



            1.   Any of the following who is residing or has
resided with the person against whom the act prohibited in division (C)(1)(a)
of this section is committed:



               a.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse,
or a former spouse of the person;



               b.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child
of the person, or another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the
person;



               c.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person
living as a spouse, or former spouse of the person, or another person related
by consanguinity or affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or
former spouse of the person.



            2.   The natural parent of any child of whom the
person against whom the act prohibited in division (C)(1)(a) of this section
is committed is the other natural parent or is the putative other natural
parent.



         MENTAL DISTRESS. Means any of the following:



            1.   Any mental illness or condition that involves
some temporary substantial incapacity;



            2.   Any mental illness or condition that would
normally require psychiatric treatment, psychological treatment, or other
mental health services, whether or not any person requested or received
psychiatric treatment, psychological treatment, or other mental health
services.



         ORGANIZATION. Includes an entity that is a governmental
employer.



         PATTERN OF CONDUCT. Two or more actions or incidents
closely related in time, whether or not there has been a prior conviction
based on any of those actions or incidents, or two or more actions or
incidents closely related in time, whether or not there has been a prior
conviction based on any of those actions or incidents, directed at one or
more persons employed by or belonging to the same corporation, association,
or other organization. Actions or incidents that prevent, obstruct, or delay
the performance by a public official, firefighter, rescuer, emergency medical
services person, or emergency facility person of any authorized act within
the public official's, firefighter's, rescuer's, emergency medical services
person's, or emergency facility person’s official capacity, or the posting
of messages, use of intentionally written or verbal graphic gestures, or
receipt of information or data through the use of any form of written
communication or  an electronic method of remotely transferring information,
including but not limited to a computer,  computer network, computer
program, computer system, or telecommunications device, may constitute a
“pattern of conduct.”



         PERSON LIVING AS A SPOUSE. Means a person who is living or
has lived with the person against whom the act prohibited in division
(C)(1)(a) of this section is committed in a common law marital relationship,
who otherwise is cohabiting with that person, or who otherwise has cohabited
with the person within five years prior to the date of the alleged commission
of the act in question.



         POST A MESSAGE. Transferring, sending, posting, publishing,
disseminating, or otherwise communicating, or attempting to transfer, send,
post, publish, disseminate, or otherwise communicate, any message or
information, whether truthful or untruthful, about an individual, and whether
done under one’s own name, under the name of another, or while
impersonating another.



         PUBLIC OFFICIAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.01.



         SEXUAL MOTIVATION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2971.01.



         THIRD PERSON. In relation to conduct as described in
division (C)(1)(b) of this section, an individual who is neither the offender
nor the victim of the conduct.



      (5)   The prosecution does not need to prove in a prosecution
under division (C) of this section that a person requested or received
psychiatric treatment, psychological treatment, or other mental heal services
in order to show that the person was caused mental distress as described in
division (2) of the definition for “mental distress” in this  section.



      (6)   (a)   Division (C) of this section does not apply to
a person solely because the person provided access or connection to or from
an electronic method of remotely transferring information not under that
person’s control, including having provided capabilities that are
incidental to providing access or connection to or from the electronic method
of remotely transferring the information, and that do not include the
creation of the content of the material that is the subject of the access or
connection. In addition, any person providing access or connection to or from
an electronic method of remotely transferring information not under that
person’s control shall not be liable for any action voluntarily taken in
good faith to block the receipt or transmission through its service of any
information that it believes is or will be sent in violation of division (C)
of this section.



         (b)   Division (C)(6)(a) of this section does not create
an affirmative duty for any person providing access or connection to or from
an electronic method of remotely transferring information not under that
person’s control to block the receipt or transmission through its service
of any information that it believes is or will be sent in violation of
division (C) of this section except as otherwise provided by law.



         (c)   Division (C)(6)(a) of this section does not apply
to a person who conspires with a person actively involved in the creation or
knowing distribution of material in violation of division (C) of this section
or who knowingly advertises the availability of material of that nature.



(R.C. § 2903.211)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Cross-reference:



   Violation of protection orders, see § 135.23



Statutory reference:



   Authority of corporations to seek protection orders in certain
circumstances, see R.C. § 2903.215



   Conditions of bail for violators, see R.C. § 2903.212



   Persons who may seek relief under anti-stalking protection order; ex
parte orders, see R.C. § 2903.214



   Protection order as pretrial condition of release, see R.C. § 2903.213



§ 135.07  UNLAWFUL RESTRAINT.



   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly
restrain another of the other person’s liberty.



   (B)   No person, without privilege to do so and with a sexual
motivation, shall knowingly restrain another of the other person’s liberty.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful restraint,
a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (D)   As used in this section, SEXUAL MOTIVATION has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 2971.01.



(R.C. § 2905.03)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 135.08  CRIMINAL CHILD ENTICEMENT.



   (A)   No person, by any means and without privilege to do so, shall
knowingly solicit, coax, entice, or lure any child under 14 years of age to
accompany the person in any manner, including entering into any vehicle  or
onto any vessel, whether or not the offender knows the age of the child, if
both of the following apply:



      (1)   The actor does not have the express or implied
permission of the parent, guardian, or other legal custodian of the child in
undertaking the activity.



      (2)   The actor is not a law enforcement officer, medic,
firefighter, or other person who regularly provides emergency services, and
is not an employee or agent of, or a volunteer acting under the direction of,
any board of education, or the actor is any such person, but at the time the
actor undertakes the activity, the actor is not acting within the scope of
the actor's lawful duties in that capacity.



   (B)   No person, with a sexual motivation, shall violate division
(A) of this section.



   (C)   No person, for any unlawful purpose other than, or in addition
to, that proscribed by division (A) of this section, shall engage in any
activity described in division (A) of this section.



   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A) of
this section that the actor undertook the activity in response to a bona fide
emergency situation or that the actor undertook the activity in a reasonable
belief that it was necessary to preserve the health, safety, or welfare of
the child.



   (E)   Whoever violates division (A), (B) or (C) of this section is
guilty of criminal child enticement, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If
the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this section, a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, R.C. § 2907.02 or
2907.03 or former R.C. § 2907.12, or R.C. § 2905.01 or 2907.05 when the
victim of that prior offense was under 17 years of age at the time of the
offense, criminal child enticement is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



   (F)   As used in this section:



      SEXUAL MOTIVATION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2971.01.



      VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.



      VESSEL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1546.01.



(R.C. § 2905.05)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 135.09  COERCION.



   (A)   No person, with purpose to coerce another into taking or
refraining from action concerning which the other person has a legal freedom
of choice, shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Threaten to commit any offense.



      (2)   Utter or threaten any slander against any person.



      (3)   Expose or threaten to expose any matter tending to
subject any person to hatred, contempt, or ridicule, or to damage any
person’s personal or business repute, or to impair any person’s credit.



      (4)   Institute or threaten criminal proceedings against any
person.



      (5)   Take or withhold, or threaten to take or withhold
official action, or cause or threaten to cause official action to be taken or
withheld.



   (B)   Divisions (A)(4) and (5) of this section shall not be
construed to prohibit a prosecutor or court from doing any of the following
in good faith and in the interests of justice:



      (1)   Offering or agreeing to grant, or granting immunity from
prosecution pursuant to R.C. § 2945.44.



      (2)   In return for a plea of guilty to one or more offenses
charged or to one or more other or lesser offenses, or in return for the
testimony of the accused in a case to which the accused is not a party,
offering or agreeing to dismiss, or dismissing one or more charges pending
against an accused, or offering or agreeing to impose, or imposing a certain
sentence or modification of sentence.



      (3)   Imposing a community control sanction on certain
conditions, including without limitation requiring the offender to make
restitution or redress to the victim of his or her offense.



   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division
(A)(3), (4), or (5) of this section that the actor's conduct was a reasonable
response to the circumstances which occasioned it, and that the actor’s
purpose was limited to any of the following:



      (1)   Compelling another to refrain from misconduct or to
desist from further misconduct.



      (2)   Preventing or redressing a wrong or injustice.



      (3)   Preventing another from taking action for which the
actor reasonably believed the other person to be disqualified.



      (4)   Compelling another to take action which the actor
reasonably believed the other person to be under a duty to take.



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of coercion, a
misdemeanor of the second degree.



   (E)   As used in this section:



      COMMUNITY CONTROL SANCTION has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2929.01.



      THREAT includes a direct threat and a threat by innuendo.



(R.C. § 2905.12)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 135.10  BIGAMY.



   (A)   No married person shall marry another or continue to cohabit
with such other person in this municipality.



   (B)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section
that the actor's spouse was continuously absent for five years immediately
preceding the purported subsequent marriage, and was not known by the actor
to be alive within that time.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of bigamy, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 2919.01)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 135.11  UNLAWFUL ABORTION; FAILURE TO PERFORM VIABILITY TESTING.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



   ABORTION.  The purposeful termination of a human pregnancy by any
person, including the pregnant woman herself, with an intention other than to
produce a live birth or to remove a dead fetus or embryo.



(R.C. § 2919.11)



   EMANCIPATED.  A minor shall be considered emancipated if the minor has
married, entered the armed services of the United States, become employed and
self-subsisting, or has otherwise become independent from the care and
control of her parent, guardian or custodian.



   UNEMANCIPATED.  A woman who is unmarried and under 18 years of age who
has not entered the armed services of the United States, has not become
employed and self-subsisting, or has not otherwise become independent from
the care and control of her parent, guardian, or custodian.



   (B)   No person shall perform or induce an abortion without the
informed consent of the pregnant woman.



   (C)   No person shall knowingly perform or induce an abortion upon a
pregnant minor unless one of the following is the case:



      (1)   The attending physician has secured the informed written
consent of the minor and one parent, guardian or custodian;



      (2)   The minor is emancipated and the attending physician has
received her informed written consent;



      (3)   The minor has been authorized to consent to the abortion
by a court order issued pursuant to R.C. § 2919.121(C) and the attending
physician has received her informed written consent; or



      (4)    The court has given its consent in accordance with R.C.
§ 2919.121(C) and the minor is having the abortion willingly.



   (D)   No person shall knowingly perform or induce an abortion upon a
woman who is pregnant, unmarried, under 18 years of age, and unemancipated
unless at least one of the circumstances enumerated in R.C. § 2919.12(B)
applies.



   (E)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under
division (D) of this section that the pregnant woman provided the person who
performed or induced the abortion with false, misleading, or incorrect
information about her age, marital status, or emancipation, about the age of
the brother or sister to whom she requested notice to be given as a specified
relative instead of one of her parents, her guardian, or her custodian, or
about the last known address of either of her parents, her guardian, her
custodian, or a specified brother, sister, stepparent, or grandparent to whom
she requested notice be given and the person who performed or induced the
abortion did not otherwise have reasonable cause to believe the pregnant
woman was under 18 years of age, unmarried, or unemancipated, to believe that
the age of the brother or sister to whom she requested notice be given as a
specified relative instead of one of her parents, her guardian, or her
custodian was not 21 years of age, or to believe that the last known address
of either of her parents, her guardian, her custodian, or a specified
brother, sister, stepparent, or grandparent to whom she requested notice be
given was incorrect.



      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this
section that compliance with the requirements of this section was not
possible because an immediate threat of serious risk to the life or physical
health of the pregnant woman or pregnant minor from the continuation of her
pregnancy created an emergency necessitating the immediate performance or
inducement of an abortion.



   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful
abortion.  A violation of division (B), (C) or (D) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree on the first offense and a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.



   (G)   Whoever violates this section is liable to the pregnant woman
or pregnant minor, and her parents, guardian, or custodian for civil,
compensatory and exemplary damages.



(R.C. §§ 2919.12, 2919.121)



   (H)   (1)   Division (C) of this section applies in lieu of
division (D) of this section whenever its operation is not enjoined.  If
division (C) of this section is enjoined, division (D) of this section
applies.



      (2)   If a person complies with the requirements of division
(D) of this section under the good faith belief that the application or
enforcement of division (C) of this section is subject to a restraining order
or injunction, good faith compliance shall constitute a complete defense to
any civil, criminal or professional disciplinary action brought under
division (C) of this section or R.C. § 2919.121.



      (3)   If a person complies with the requirements of division
(C) of this section under the good faith belief that it is not subject to a
restraining order or injunction, good faith compliance shall constitute a
complete defense to any civil, criminal or professional disciplinary action
for failure to comply with the requirements of division (D) of this section.



(R.C. § 2919.122)



   (I)   Failure to perform viability testing.



      (1)   Except in a medical emergency that prevents compliance
with this division, no physician shall perform or induce or attempt to
perform or induce an abortion on a pregnant woman after the beginning of the
twentieth week of gestation unless, prior to the performance or inducement of
the abortion or the attempt to perform or induce the abortion, the physician
determines, in the physician’s good faith medical judgment, that the unborn
child is not viable, and the physician makes that determination after
performing a medical examination of the pregnant woman and after performing
or causing to be performed those tests for assessing gestational age, weight,
lung maturity, or other tests that the physician, in that physician’s good
faith medical judgment, believes are necessary to determine whether an unborn
child is viable.



      (2)   Except in a medical emergency that prevents compliance
with this division, no physician shall perform or induce or attempt to
perform or induce an abortion on a pregnant woman after the beginning of the
twentieth week of gestation without first entering the determination made in
division (I)(1) of this section and the associated findings of the medical
examination and tests in the medical record of the pregnant woman.



      (3)   Whoever violates this division (I) is guilty of failure
to perform viability testing, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



      (4)   The State Medical Board shall suspend a physician’s
license to practice medicine in this state for a period of not less than six
months if the physician violates this section.



(R.C. § 2919.18)



Statutory reference:



   Judicial bypass, see R.C. § 2151.85



   Judicial consent and the right of a minor to consent, see R.C. §
2919.121(C)



   Notice or consent requirements for unmarried minors, see R.C. §
2919.12(B)



§ 135.12  ABORTION TRAFFICKING.



   (A)   No person shall experiment upon or sell the product of human
conception which is aborted.  Experiment does not include autopsies pursuant
to R.C. §§ 313.13 and 2108.50.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of abortion
trafficking, a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 2919.14)



§ 135.13  NONSUPPORT OF DEPENDENTS.



   (A)   No person shall abandon, or fail to provide adequate support
to:



      (1)   His or her spouse, as required by law;



      (2)   His or her legitimate or illegitimate child who is under
age 18, or mentally or physically disabled child who is under age 21;



      (3)   His or her aged or infirm parent or adoptive parent, who
from lack of ability and means is unable to provide adequately for his or her
own support.



    (B)   (1)   No person shall abandon, or fail to provide support
as established by a court order to, another person whom, by court order or
decree, the person:



         (a)   Is legally obligated to support; or



         (b)   Was legally obligated to support, and an amount
for support:



            1.   Was due and owing prior to the date the
person's duty to pay current support terminated; and



            2.   Remains unpaid.



      (2)   The period of limitation under R.C. § 2901.13
applicable to division (B)(1)(b) of this section shall begin to run on the
date the person's duty to pay current support terminates.



   (C)   No person shall aid, abet, induce, cause, encourage, or
contribute to a child or a ward of the juvenile court becoming a dependent
child, as defined in R.C. § 2151.04, or a neglected child, as defined in
R.C. § 2151.03.



   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of failure to provide
adequate support under division (A) of this section or a charge of failure to
provide support established by a court order under division (B) of this
section that the accused was unable to provide adequate support or the
established support, but did provide the support that was within his or her
ability and means.



   (E)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(3)
of this section that the parent abandoned the accused, or failed to support
the accused as required by law, while the accused was under age 18, or was
mentally or physically disabled and under age 21.



   (F)   It is not a defense to a charge under division (B) of this
section that the person whom a court has ordered the accused to support is
being adequately supported by someone other than the accused.



   (G)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division,
whoever violates division (A) or (B) of this section is guilty of nonsupport
of dependents, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division
(A)(2) or (B) of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, or if the offender has failed to provide support under
division (A)(2) or (B) of this section for a total accumulated period of 26
weeks out of 104 consecutive weeks, whether or not the 26 weeks were
consecutive, then a violation of division (A)(2) or (B) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.  If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a felony violation of
this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
a violation of division (A)(2) or (B) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. 



      (2)   If the offender is guilty of nonsupport of dependents by
reason of failing to provide support to his or her child as required by a
child support order issued on or after April 15, 1985, pursuant to R.C. §
2151.23, 2151.231, 2151.232, 2151.33, 3105.21, 3109.05, 3111.13, 3113.04,
3113.31, 3115.401, or former R.C. § 3115.31, the court, in addition to any
other sentence imposed, shall assess all court costs arising out of the
charge against the person and require the person to pay any reasonable
attorney's fees of any adverse party other than the state, as determined by
the court, that arose in relation to the charge.



      (3)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty
of contributing to the nonsupport of dependents, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.  Each day of a violation of division (C) of this section is a
separate offense.



(R.C. § 2919.21)



§ 135.14  ENDANGERING CHILDREN.



   (A)   No person, who is the parent, guardian, custodian, person
having custody or control, or person in loco parentis of a child under 18
years of age or a mentally or physically disabled child under 21 years of
age, shall create a substantial risk to the health or safety of the child by
violating a duty of care, protection, or support.  It is not a violation of
a duty of care, protection, or support under this division when the parent,
guardian, custodian, or person having custody or control of a child treats
the physical or mental illness or disability of the child by spiritual means
through prayer alone, in accordance with the tenets of a recognized religious
body.



   (B)   No person shall do any of the following to a child under 18
years of age or a mentally or physically disabled child under 21 years of age:



      (1)   Abuse the child.



      (2)   Torture or cruelly abuse the child.



      (3)   Administer corporal punishment or other physical
disciplinary measure, or physically restrain the child in a cruel manner or
for a prolonged period, which punishment, discipline or restraint is
excessive under the circumstances and creates a substantial risk of serious
physical harm to the child.



      (4)   Repeatedly administer unwarranted disciplinary measures
to a child when there is a substantial risk that such conduct, if continued,
will seriously impair or retard the child's mental health or development.



      (5)   Entice, coerce, permit, encourage, compel, hire, employ,
use, or allow the child to act, model, or in any other way participate in, or
be photographed for, the production, presentation, dissemination, or
advertisement of any material or performance that the offender knows or
reasonably should know is obscene, is sexually oriented matter, or is
nudity-oriented matter.



      (6)   Allow the child to be on the same parcel of real
property and within 100 feet of, or, in the case of more than one housing
unit on the same parcel of real property, in the same housing unit and within
100 feet of, any act in violation of R.C. § 2925.04 or 2925.041 when the
person knows that the act is occurring, whether or not any person is
prosecuted for or convicted of the violation of R.C. § 2925.04 or 2925.041
that is the basis of the violation of this division.



   (C)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle, as defined by R.C.
§ 4511.01, within the municipality and in violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A),
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, when one or more children
under 18 years of age are in the vehicle. Notwithstanding any other provision
of law, a person may be convicted at the same trial or proceeding of a
violation of this division and a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that constitutes the basis of
the charge of the violation of this division. For purposes of R.C. §§
4511.191 through 4511.197 and all related provisions of law, a person
arrested for a violation of this division shall be considered to be under
arrest for operating a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug
of abuse, or a combination of them or for operating a vehicle with a
prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite
of a controlled substance in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath,
or urine.



      (2)   As used in division (C)(1) of this section:



         CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE has the same meaning as in R.C. §
3719.01.



         VEHICLE has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.



   (D)   (1)   Division (B)(5) of this section does not apply to any
material or performance that is produced, presented, or disseminated for a
bona fide medical, scientific, educational, religious, governmental,
judicial, or other proper purpose, by or to a physician, psychologist,
sociologist, scientist, teacher, person pursuing bona fide studies for
research, librarian, member of the clergy, prosecutor, judge, or other person
having a proper interest in the material or performance.



      (2)   Mistake of age is not a defense to a charge under
division (B)(5) of this section.



      (3)   In a prosecution under division (B)(5) of this section,
the trier of fact may infer that an actor, model, or participant in the
material or performance involved is a juvenile if the material or
performance, through its title, text, visual representation, or otherwise,
represents or depicts the actor, model, or participant as a juvenile.



      (4)   As used in this division and division (B)(5) of this
section:



         MATERIAL, PERFORMANCE, OBSCENE, and SEXUAL ACTIVITY have
the same meanings as in R.C. § 2907.01.



         NUDITY-ORIENTED MATTER means any material or performance
that shows a minor in a state of nudity and that, taken as a whole by the
average person applying contemporary community standards, appeals to the
prurient interest.



         SEXUALLY ORIENTED MATTER means any material or performance
that shows a minor participating or engaging in sexual activity,
masturbation, or bestiality.



   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of endangering
children.



      (1)   If the offender violates division (A) or (B)(1) of this
section, endangering children is one of the following:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division
(E)(1)(b),(c) or (d), a misdemeanor of the first degree.



         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of
an offense under this section or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, or of any offense involving neglect, abandonment, or
contributing to the delinquency of or physical abuse of a child, except as
otherwise provided in division (E)(1)(c) or (d) of this section, endangering
children is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



         (c)   If the violation is a violation of division (A) of
this section and results in serious physical harm to the child involved,
endangering children is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



         (d)   If the violation is a violation of division (B)(1)
of this section and results in serious physical harm to the child involved,
endangering children is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (2)   If the offender violates division (B)(2), (3), (4), (5)
or (6) of this section, endangering children is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.



      (3)   If the offender violates division (C) of this section,
the offender shall be punished as follows:



         (a)   Except as provided in (E)(3)(b) or (c),
endangering children in violation of division (C) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.



         (b)   If the violation results in serious physical harm
to the child or if the offender previously has been convicted of a violation
of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, or of any offense involving neglect, abandonment, or contributing
to the delinquency of or physical abuse of a child, except as otherwise
provided in division (E)(3)(c) of this section, endangering children in
violation of division (C) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



         (c)   If the violation results in serious physical harm
to the child and if the offender previously has been convicted of a violation
of this section, R.C. §§ 2903.06, 2903.08, 2919.22(C) or former R.C. §
2903.07 as it existed prior to March 23, 2000, or R.C. § 2903.04, in a case
in which the offender was subject to the sanctions described in division (D)
of that section, endangering children in violation of division (C) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



         (d)   In addition to any term of imprisonment, fine, or
other sentence, penalty or sanction it imposes upon the offender pursuant to
divisions (E)(3)(a), (b) or (c) of this section or pursuant to any other
provision of law and in addition to any suspension of the offender's driver's
license or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating
privilege under R.C. Chapter 4506, 4509, 4510, or 4511, or any other
provision of law, the court also may impose upon the offender a class seven
suspension of the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. §
4510.02(A)(7).



         (e)   In addition to any term of imprisonment, fine, or
other sentence, penalty or sanction imposed upon the offender pursuant to
division (E)(3)(a), (b), (c) or (d) of this section or pursuant to any other
provision of law for the violation of division (C) of this section, if as a
part of the same trial or proceeding the offender also is convicted of or
pleads guilty to a separate charge charging the violation of R.C. §
4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the
basis of the charge of the violation of division (C) of this section, the
offender also shall be sentenced in accordance with R.C. § 4511.19, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, for that violation of R.C. §
4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



   (F)   (1)   If a person violates division (C) of this section and
if, at the time of the violation, there were two or more children under 18
years of age in the motor vehicle involved in the violation, the offender may
be convicted of a violation of division (C) of this section for each of the
children, but the court may sentence the offender for only one of the
violations.



      (2)   (a)   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to
a violation of division (C) of this section but the person is not also
convicted of and does not also plead guilty to a separate charge of violating
R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that
was the basis of the charge of the violation of division (C) of this section,
both the following apply:



            1.   For purposes of the provisions of R.C. §
4511.194, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that set forth
the penalties and sanctions for a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the conviction of or plea of
guilty to the violation of division (C) of this section shall not constitute
a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.



            2.   For purposes of the provisions of law that
refers to a conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of R.C. §
4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and that is
not described in division (F)(2)(a)1. of this section, the conviction of or
plea of guilty to the violation of division (C) of this section shall
constitute a conviction or plea of guilty to a violation of R.C. §
4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



         (b)   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of division (C) of this section and the person also is convicted of
or pleads guilty to a separate charge of violating R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the basis of the
charge of the violation of division (C) of this section, the conviction of or
plea of guilty to the violation of division (C) of this section shall not
constitute, for the purposes of any provision of law that refers to a
conviction of or a plea of guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, a conviction of or a plea of
guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.



(R.C. § 2919.22(A) - (E), (H))  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Community service, requirements, see R.C. § 2919.22(F)



   License suspension, requirements, see R.C. § 2919.22(G)



   Permitting child abuse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.15



§ 135.15  INTERFERENCE WITH CUSTODY; INTERFERENCE WITH SUPPORT ORDERS.



   (A)   Interference with custody.



      (1)   No person, knowing that he or she is without privilege
to do so or being reckless in that regard, shall entice, take, keep, or
harbor a person identified in division (A)(1)(a), (b) or (c) of this section
from the parent, guardian, or custodian of the person identified in division
(A)(1)(a), (b) or (c) of this section:



         (a)   A child under the age of 18, or a mentally or
physically disabled child under the age of 21;



         (b)   A person committed by law to an institution for
delinquent, unruly, neglected, abused, or dependent children;



         (c)   A person committed by law to an institution for
the mentally ill or  an institution for persons with intellectual
disabilities.



      (2)   No person shall aid, abet, induce, cause, or encourage a
child or a ward of the juvenile court who has been committed to the custody
of any person, department, or public or private institution to leave the
custody of that person, department, or institution without legal consent.



      (3)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of enticing or
taking under division (A)(1)(a) of this section that the actor reasonably
believed that his or her conduct was necessary to preserve the child's health
or safety.  It is an affirmative defense to a charge of keeping or harboring
under division (A)(1) of this section that the actor in good faith gave
notice to law enforcement or judicial authorities within a reasonable time
after the child or committed person came under his or her shelter,
protection, or influence.



      (4)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interference
with custody.



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this subdivision,
a violation of division (A)(1)(a) above is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.  If the child who is the subject of a violation of division
(A)(1)(a) is removed from the state or if the offender previously has been
convicted of an offense under this section or a substantially equivalent
state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of division (A)(1)(a) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.  If the
child who is the subject of a violation of division (A)(1)(a) suffers
physical harm as a result of the violation, a violation of division (A)(1)(a)
of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



         (b)   A violation of division (A)(1)(b) or (c) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the third degree.



         (c)   A violation of division (A)(2) of this section is
a misdemeanor of the first degree.  Each day of a violation of division
(A)(2) is a separate offense.



(R.C. § 2919.23)



   (B)   Interference with support orders.



      (1)   No person, by using physical harassment or threats of
violence against another person, shall interfere with the other person's
initiation or continuance of, or attempt to prevent the other person from
initiating or continuing, an action to issue or modify a support order under
R.C. Chapter 3115, or under R.C. § 2151.23, 2151.231, 2151.232, 2151.33,
2151.36, 2151.361, 2151.49, 3105.18, 3105.21, 3109.05, 3109.19, 3111.13,
3113.04, 3113.07, or 3113.31.



      (2)   Whoever violates this division (B) is guilty of
interfering with an action to issue or modify a support order, a misdemeanor
of the first degree.  If the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a violation of this division (B) or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or R.C. § 3111.19, interfering
with an action to issue or modify a support order is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2919.231)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 135.16  DOMESTIC VIOLENCE.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly cause or attempt to cause physical
harm to a family or household member.



   (B)   No person shall recklessly cause serious physical harm to a
family or household member.



   (C)   No person, by threat of force, shall knowingly cause a family
or household member to believe that the offender will cause imminent physical
harm to the family or household member.



   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of domestic
violence, and the court shall sentence the offender as provided in divisions
(D)(2) to (D)(5) of this section.



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3), 
(D)(4) or (D)(5) of this section, a violation of division (C) of this section
is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree and a violation of division (A) or (B)
of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(4) of this
section, if the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted
of domestic violence, a violation of an existing or former municipal
ordinance or law of this or any other state or the United States that is
substantially equivalent to domestic violence, a violation of R.C. §§
2903.14, 2909.06, 2909.07, 2911.12, 2911.211, or 2919.22 if the victim of the
violation was a family or household member at the time of the violation, a
violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of this or any
other state or the United States that is substantially equivalent to any of
those sections if the victim of the violation was a family or household
member at the time of the commission of the violation, or any offense of
violence if the victim of the offense was a family or household member at the
time of the commission of the offense, a violation of division (A) or (B) is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of
division (C) is a misdemeanor of the second degree.



      (4)   If the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been
convicted of two or more offenses of domestic violence or two or more
violations or offenses of the type described in division (D)(3) of this
section involving a person who was a family or household member at the time
of the violations or offenses, a violation of division (A) or (B) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law, and a
violation of division (C) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.



      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3) or
(D)(4) of this section, if the offender knew that the victim of the violation
was pregnant at the time of the violation, a violation of division (A) or (B)
of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law, and
a violation of division (C) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third
degree.



   (E)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no court
or unit of state or local government shall charge any fee, cost, deposit, or
money in connection with the filing of charges against a person alleging that
the person violated this section or a municipal ordinance substantially
equivalent to this section or in connection with the prosecution of any
charges so filed.



   (F)   As used in this section:



      FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Means any of the following:



         (a)   Any of the following who is residing or has
resided with the offender:



            1.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse as
defined below, or a former spouse of the offender;



            2.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the
offender, or another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the
offender;



            3.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person
living as a spouse, or former spouse of the offender, or another person
related by consanguinity or affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse,
or former spouse of the offender.



         (b)   The natural parent of any child of whom the
offender is the other natural parent or is the putative other natural parent.



      PERSON LIVING AS A SPOUSE. Means a person who is living or has
lived with the offender in a common law marital relationship, who otherwise
is cohabiting with the offender, or who otherwise has cohabited with the
offender within five years prior to the date of the alleged commission of the
act in question.



(R.C. § 2919.25)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Cross-reference:



   Violation of protection orders, see § 135.23



Statutory reference:



   Temporary protection orders, see R.C. § 2919.26



   Violation of protection order or consent agreement, factors to
consider, bail, see R.C. § 2919.251



§ 135.17  HAZING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   As used in this section, HAZING means doing any act or
coercing another, including the victim, to do any act of initiation into any
student or other organization that causes or creates a substantial risk of
causing mental or physical harm to any person.



   (B)   (1)   No person shall recklessly participate in the hazing
of another.



      (2)   No administrator, employee, or faculty member of any
primary, secondary, or post-secondary school or of any other educational
institution, public or private, shall recklessly permit the hazing of any
person.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of hazing, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 2903.31)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Civil liability for hazing, see R.C. § 2307.44



§ 135.18  CONTRIBUTING TO UNRULINESS OR DELINQUENCY OF A CHILD.



   (A)   As used in this section:



      DELINQUENT CHILD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2152.02.



      UNRULY CHILD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2151.022.



   (B)   No person, including a parent, guardian, or other custodian of
a child, shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Aid, abet, induce, cause, encourage, or contribute to a
child or a ward of the juvenile court becoming an unruly child or a
delinquent child;



      (2)   Act in a way tending to cause a child or a ward of the
juvenile court to become an unruly child or a delinquent child;



      (3)   Act in a way that contributes to an adjudication of the
child as a delinquent child based on the child’s violation of a court order
adjudicating the child an unruly child for being an habitual truant;



      (4)   If the person is the parent, guardian, or custodian of a
child who has the duties under R.C. Chapters 2152 and 2950 to register,
register a new residence address, and periodically verify a residence
address, and, if applicable, to send a notice of intent to reside, and if the
child is not emancipated, as defined in R.C. § 2919.121, fail to ensure that
the child complies with those duties under R.C. Chapters 2152 and 2950.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of contributing to the
unruliness or delinquency of a child, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each
day of violation of this section is a separate offense.



(R.C. § 2919.24)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   DNA testing of delinquent children, see R.C. § 2152.74



   Failure to send child to school, see R.C. § 3321.38



§ 135.19  FAILURE TO PROVIDE FOR FUNCTIONALLY IMPAIRED PERSON.



   (A)   No caretaker shall knowingly fail to provide a functionally
impaired person under his or her care with any treatment, care, goods, or
service that is necessary to maintain the health of safety of the
functionally impaired person when this failure results in physical harm or
serious physical harm to the functionally impaired person.



   (B)   No caretaker shall recklessly fail to provide a functionally
impaired person under his or her care with any treatment, care, goods, or
service that is necessary to maintain the health of safety of the
functionally impaired person when this failure results in serious physical
harm to the functionally impaired person.



   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is
guilty of knowingly failing to provide for a functionally impaired person, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the functionally impaired person under
the offender's care suffers serious physical harm as a result of the
violation of this section, a violation of division (A) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty
of recklessly failing to provide for a functionally impaired person, a
misdemeanor of the second degree.  If the functionally impaired person under
the offender's care suffers serious physical harm as a result of the
violation of this section, a violation of division (B) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2903.16)



   (D)   As used in this section:



      CARETAKER means a person who assumes the duty to provide for the
care and protection of a functionally impaired person on a voluntary basis,
by contract, through receipt of payment for care and protection, as a result
of a family relationship, or by order of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
CARETAKER does not include a person who owns, operates, or administers, or
who is an agent or employee of, a care facility, as defined in R.C. §
2903.33.



      FUNCTIONALLY IMPAIRED PERSON means any person who has a physical
or mental impairment that prevents the person from providing for his or her
own care or protection or whose infirmities caused by aging prevent the
person from providing for his or her own care or protection.



(R.C. § 2903.10)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 135.20  PATIENT ABUSE OR NEGLECT; PATIENT ENDANGERMENT; EXCEPTIONS; FALSE
STATEMENTS; RETALIATION.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ABUSE.  Knowingly causing physical harm or recklessly causing
serious physical harm to a person by physical contact with the person or by
the inappropriate use of a physical or chemical restraint, medication or
isolation on the person.



      CARE FACILITY.  Any of the following:



         (a)   Any “home” as defined in R.C. § 3721.10.



         (b)   Any “residential facility” as defined in R.C.
§ 5119.34 or 5123.19.



         (c)   Any institution or facility operated or provided
by the Department of Mental Health and Addiction Services or by the
Department of Mental Retardation and Developmental Disabilities pursuant to
R.C. §§ 5119.14 and 5123.03.



         (d)   Any unit of any hospital, as defined in R.C. §
3701.01, that provided the same services as a nursing home, as defined in
R.C. § 3721.01.



         (e)   Any institution, residence or facility that
provides, for a period of more than 24 hours, whether for consideration or
not, accommodations to one individual or two unrelated individuals who are
dependent upon the services of others.



      GROSS NEGLECT.  Knowingly failing to provide a person with any
treatment, care, goods or service that is necessary to maintain the health or
safety of the person when the failure results in serious physical harm to the
person.



      INAPPROPRIATE USE OF A PHYSICAL OR CHEMICAL RESTRAINT, MEDICATION
OR ISOLATION.  The use of physical or chemical restraint, medication or
isolation as punishment, for staff convenience, excessively, as a substitute
for treatment, or in quantities that preclude habilitation and treatment.



      NEGLECT.  Recklessly failing to provide a person with any
treatment, care, goods or service that is necessary to maintain the health or
safety of the person when the failure results in serious physical harm to the
person.



(R.C. § 2903.33)



   (B)   Patient abuse or neglect; spiritual treatment; defense.



      (1)   No person who owns, operates, or administers, or who is
an agent or employee of a care facility shall do any of the following:



         (a)   Commit abuse against a resident or patient of the
facility.



         (b)   Commit gross neglect against a resident or patient
of the facility.



         (c)   Commit neglect against a resident or patient of
the facility.



      (2)   (a)   A person who relies upon treatment by spiritual
means through prayer alone, in accordance with the tenets of a recognized
religious denomination, shall not be considered neglectful under division
(B)(1)(c) of this section for that reason alone.



         (b)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of gross
neglect or neglect under this section that the actor's conduct was committed
in good faith solely because the actor was ordered to commit the conduct by a
person with supervisory authority over the actor.



      (3)   (a)   Whoever violates division (B)(1)(a) is guilty
of patient abuse, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



         (b)   Whoever violates division (B)(1)(b) is guilty of
gross patient neglect, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the offender
previously has been convicted of, or pleaded guilty to, any violation of this
section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, gross
patient neglect is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



         (c)   Whoever violates division (B)(1)(c) is guilty of
patient neglect, a misdemeanor of the second degree.  If the offender
previously has been convicted of, or pleaded guilty to, any violation of this
section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, gross
patient neglect is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2903.34)



   (C)   Patient endangerment; spiritual treatment; defense.



      (1)   As used in this section:



         DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES CARETAKER. Means any
developmental disabilities employee or any person who assumes the duty to
provide for the care and protection of a person with a developmental
disability on a voluntary basis, by contract, through receipt of payment for
care and protection, as a result of a family relationship, or by order of a
court of competent jurisdiction. The phrase includes a person who is an
employee of a care facility and a person who is an employee of an entity
under contract with a provider. The phrase does not include a person who
owns, operates, or administers a care facility or who is an agent of a care
facility unless that person also personally provides care to a person with a
developmental disability.



         DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES EMPLOYEE. Has the same meaning
as in R.C. § 5123.50.



         DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 5123.01.



      (2)   No developmental disabilities caretaker shall create a
substantial risk to the health or safety of a person with a developmental
disability. A developmental disabilities caretaker does not create a
substantial risk to the health or safety of a person with a developmental
disability under this division when the developmental disabilities caretaker
treats a physical or mental illness or defect of the person with a
developmental disability by spiritual means through prayer alone, in
accordance with the tenets of a recognized religious body.



      (3)   No person who owns, operates, or administers a care
facility or who is an agent of a care facility shall condone, or knowingly
permit, any conduct by a developmental disabilities caretaker who is employed
by or under the control of the owner, operator, administrator, or agent that
is in violation of division (C)(2) of this section and that involves a person
with a developmental disability who is under the care of the owner, operator,
administrator, or agent. A person who relies upon treatment by spiritual
means through prayer alone, in accordance with the tenets of a recognized
religious denomination, shall not be considered endangered under this
division for that reason alone.



      (4)   (a)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of a
violation of division (C)(2) or (C)(3) of this section that the actor’s
conduct was committed in good faith solely because the actor was ordered to
commit the conduct by a person to whom one of the following applies:



            1.   The person has supervisory authority over the
actor.



            2.   The person has authority over the actor’s
conduct pursuant to a contract for the provision of services.



         (b)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of a
violation of division (C)(3) of this section that the person who owns,
operates, or administers a care facility or who is an agent of a care
facility and who is charged with the violation is following the individual
service plan for the involved person with a developmental disability or that
the admission, discharge, and transfer rule set forth in the Ohio
Administrative Code is being followed.



         (c)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of a
violation of division (C)(3) of this section that the actor did not have
readily available a means to prevent either the harm to the person with a
developmental disability or the death of such a person and the actor took
reasonable steps to summon aid.



      (5)   (a)   Except as provided in division (C)(5)(b) or
(C)(5)(c) of this section, whoever violates division (C)(2) or (C)(3) of this
section is guilty of patient endangerment, a misdemeanor of the first degree.



         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of,
or pleaded guilty to, a violation of this section, patient endangerment is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



         (c)   If the violation results in serious physical harm
to the person with a developmental disability, patient endangerment is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2903.341)



   (D)   False statements.



      (1)   No person shall knowingly make a false statement, or
knowingly swear or affirm the truth of a false statement previously made,
alleging a violation of division (B) of this section when the statement is
made with purpose to incriminate another.



      (2)   Whoever violates this division (D) is guilty of filing a
false patient abuse or neglect complaint, a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 2903.35)



   (E)   Retaliation against person reporting patient abuse or
neglect.  No care facility shall discharge or in any manner discriminate or
retaliate against any person solely because such person, in good faith, filed
a complaint, affidavit, or other document alleging a violation of division
(B) of this section or a violation of R.C. § 2903.34.



(R.C. § 2903.36)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   License revocation for felony violations, see R.C. § 2903.37



§ 135.21  INTERFERENCE WITH RIGHT OF PERSON TO ENGAGE IN HOUSING
TRANSACTIONS BECAUSE OF RACE, RELIGION, OR THE LIKE.



   (A)   No person, whether or not acting under color of law, shall by
force or threat of force willfully injure, intimidate, or interfere with, or
attempt to injure, intimidate, or interfere with any of the following:



      (1)   Any person because of race, color, religion, sex,
familial status, as defined in R.C. § 4112.01, national origin, military
status as defined in that section, disability as defined in that section, or
ancestry and because that person is or has been selling, purchasing, renting,
financing, occupying, contracting, or negotiating for the sale, purchase,
rental, financing, or occupation of any housing accommodations, or applying
for or participating in any service, organization, or facility relating to
the business of selling or renting housing accommodations.



      (2)   Any person because that person is or has been doing, or
in order to intimidate that person or any other person or any class of
persons from doing either of the following:



         (a)   Participating, without discrimination on account
of race, color, religion, sex, familial status, as defined in R.C. §
4112.01, national origin, military status as defined in that section,
disability as defined in that section, or ancestry, in any of the activities,
services, organizations, or facilities described in division (A)(1) of this
section;



         (b)   Affording another person or class of persons
opportunity or protection so to participate.



      (3)   Any person because that person is or has been, or in
order to discourage that person or any other person from, lawfully aiding or
encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination on account
of race, color, religion, sex, familial status as defined in R.C. § 4112.01,
national origin, military status as defined in that section, disability as
defined in that section, or ancestry, in any of the activities, services,
organizations, or facilities described in division (A)(1) of this section, or
participating lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly opposing any denial of
the opportunity to so participate.



   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 2927.03) Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 135.22  ETHNIC INTIMIDATION.



   (A)   No person shall violate R.C. § 2903.21, 2903.22, 2909.06, or
2909.07, or R.C. § 2917.21(A)(3), (4), or (5), by reason of the race, color,
religion, or national origin of another person or group of persons.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of ethnic
intimidation.  Ethnic intimidation is an offense of the next higher degree
than the offense the commission of which is a necessary element of ethnic
intimidation.  In the case of an offense that is a misdemeanor of the first
degree, ethnic intimidation is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.



(R.C. § 2927.12)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 135.23  VIOLATING A PROTECTION ORDER, CONSENT AGREEMENT, ANTI-STALKING
PROTECTION ORDER OR ORDER ISSUED BY A COURT OF ANOTHER STATE.



   (A)   No person shall recklessly violate the terms of any of the
following:



      (1)   A protection order issued or consent agreement approved
pursuant to R.C. § 2919.26 or R.C. § 3113.31;



      (2)   A protection order issued pursuant to R.C. § 2151.34,
2903.213 or 2903.214;



      (3)   A protection order issued by a court of another state.



   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of violating
a protection order.



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(3) or (4)
of this section, violating a protection order is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.



      (3)   Violating a protection order is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law if the offender previously has been
convicted of, pleaded guilty to, or been adjudicated a delinquent child for
any of the following:



         (a)   A violation of a protection order issued or
consent agreement approved pursuant to R.C. § 2151.34, 2903.213, 2903.214,
2919.26, or 3113.31, or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance;



         (b)   Two or more violations of R.C. § 2903.21,
2903.211, 2903.22, or 2911.211, or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, or any combination of those offenses, that involved the
same person who is the subject of the protection order or consent agreement;



         (c)   One or more violations of this section, or any
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance.



      (4)   If the offender violates a protection order or consent
agreement while committing a felony offense, violating a protection order is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (5)   If the protection order violated by the offender was an
order issued pursuant to R.C. § 2151.34 or 2903.214 that required electronic
monitoring of the offender pursuant to that section, the court may require in
addition to any other sentence imposed upon the offender that the offender be
electronically monitored for a period not exceeding five years by a law
enforcement agency designated by the court. If the court requires under this
division that the offender be electronically monitored, unless the court
determines that the offender is indigent, the court shall order that the
offender pay the costs of the installation of the electronic monitoring
device and the cost of monitoring the electronic monitoring device. If the
court determines that the offender is indigent and subject to the maximum
amount allowable and the rules promulgated by the Attorney General under R.C.
§ 2903.214, the costs of the installation of the electronic monitoring
device and the cost of monitoring the electronic monitoring device may be
paid out of funds from the Reparations Fund created pursuant to R.C. §
2743.191. The total amount paid from the Reparations Fund created pursuant to
R.C. § 2743.191 for electronic monitoring under R.C. §§ 2151.34, 2903.214
and 2919.27 shall not exceed $300,000 per year.



   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(3)
of this section that the protection order issued by a court of another state
does not comply with the requirements specified in 18 U.S.C. 2265(b) for a
protection order that must be accorded full faith a credit by a court of this
state or that it is not entitled to full faith and credit under 18 U.S.C.
2265(c).



   (D)   In a prosecution for a violation of this section, it is not
necessary for the prosecution to prove that the protection order or consent
agreement was served on the defendant if the prosecution proves that the
defendant was shown the protection order or consent agreement or a copy of
either or a judge, magistrate, or law enforcement officer informed the
defendant that a protection order or consent agreement had been issued, and
proves that the defendant recklessly violated the terms of the order or
agreement.



   (E)   As used in this section, PROTECTION ORDER ISSUED BY A COURT OF
ANOTHER STATE means an injunction or another order issued by a criminal court
of another state for the purpose of preventing violent or threatening acts or
harassment against, contact or communication with, or physical proximity to
another person including a temporary order, and means an injunction or order
of that nature issued by a civil court of another state, including a
temporary order and a final order issued in an independent action or as a
pendente lite order in a proceeding for other relief, if the court issued it
in response to a complaint, petition or motion filed by or on behalf of a
person seeking protection.  The term does not include an order for support
or for custody of a child issued pursuant to the divorce and child custody
laws of another state, except to the extent that the order for support or for
custody of a child is entitled to full faith and credit under the laws of the
United States.



(R.C. § 2919.27)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 135.24  ADULTERATION OF FOOD.



   (A)   No person shall do either of the following, knowing or having
reasonable cause to believe that any person may suffer physical harm or be
seriously inconvenienced or annoyed thereby:



      (1)   Place a pin, razor blade, glass, laxative, drug of
abuse, or other harmful or hazardous object or substance in any food or
confection.



      (2)   Furnish to any person any food or confection which has
been adulterated in violation of division (A)(1) of this section.



(R.C. § 3716.11)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.



(R.C. § 3716.99(C))  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Adulteration of food generally, see R.C. § 3715.59



§ 135.25  ILLEGAL DISTRIBUTION OF CIGARETTES, OTHER TOBACCO PRODUCTS, OR
ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS; TRANSACTION SCANS.



   (A)   Illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products.



      (1)   As used in this section:



         AGE VERIFICATION . A service provided by an independent
third party (other than a manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or
retailer of cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or papers used to roll cigarettes) that compares information
available from a commercially available database, or aggregate of databases,
that regularly are used by government and businesses for the purpose of age
and identity verification to personal information provided during an internet
sale or other remote method of sale to establish that the purchaser is 18
years of age or older.



         ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT.



            1.   Subject to division 2. of this definition, an
electronic cigarette or any other product or device that consists of or
contains nicotine that can be ingested into the body by any means, including,
but not limited to, chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, or inhaling.



            2.   The phrase does not include any of the
following:



               a.   Any cigarette or other tobacco product;



               b.   Any product that is a “drug” as
that term is defined in 21 U.S.C. § 321(g)(1);



               c.   Any product that is a “device” as
that term is defined in 21 U.S.C. § 321(h);



               d.   Any product that is a “combination
product” as described in 21 U.S.C. § 353(g).



         CHILD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2151.011.



         CIGARETTE. Includes clove cigarettes and hand-rolled
cigarettes.



         DISTRIBUTE.   Means to furnish, give, or provide
cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers
used to roll cigarettes to the ultimate consumer of the cigarettes, other
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes.



         ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE .



            1.   Subject to division 2. of this definition,
any electronic product or device that produces a vapor that delivers nicotine
or any other substance to the person inhaling from the device to simulate
smoking and that is likely to be offered to or purchased by consumers as an
electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, or electronic
pipe.



            2.   The phrase does not include any item,
product, or device described in division 2. of the definition for
“alternative nicotine product” in this section.



         PROOF OF AGE. Means a driver’s license, a commercial
driver’s license, a military identification card, a passport, or an
identification card issued under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to 4507.52 that shows that
a person is 18 years of age or older.



         TOBACCO PRODUCT. Means any product that is made from
tobacco, including, but not limited to, a cigarette, a cigar, pipe tobacco,
chewing tobacco, or snuff.



         VENDING MACHINE. Has the same meaning as “coin machine”
in R.C. § 2913.01.



      (2)   No manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or
retailer of cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or papers used to roll cigarettes, no agent, employee, or
representative of a manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or
retailer of cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or papers used to roll cigarettes, and no other person shall do any
of the following:



         (a)   Give, sell, or otherwise distribute cigarettes,
other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes to any child;



         (b)   Give away, sell, or distribute cigarettes, other
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes in any place that does not have posted in a conspicuous place a
sign stating that giving, selling, or otherwise distributing cigarettes,
other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes to a person under 18 years of age is prohibited by law;



         (c)   Knowingly furnish any false information regarding
the name, age, or other identification of any child with purpose to obtain
cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers
used to roll cigarettes for that child;



         (d)   Manufacture, sell, or distribute in this state any
pack or other container of cigarettes containing fewer than 20 cigarettes or
any package of roll-your-own tobacco containing less than six-tenths of one
ounce of tobacco;



         (e)   Sell cigarettes or alternative nicotine products
in a smaller quantity than that placed in the pack or other container by the
manufacturer;



         (f)   Give, sell, or otherwise distribute alternative
nicotine products, papers used to roll cigarettes, or tobacco products other
than cigarettes over the internet or through another remote method without
age verification.



      (3)   No person shall sell or offer to sell cigarettes, other
tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products by or from a vending
machine, except in the following locations:



         (a)   An area within a factory, business, office, or
other place not open to the general public;



         (b)   An area to which children are not generally
permitted access;



         (c)   Any other place not identified in division
(A)(3)(a) or (A)(3)(b) of this section, upon all of the following conditions:



            1.   The vending machine is located within the
immediate vicinity, plain view, and control of the person who owns or
operates the place, or an employee of that person, so that all cigarettes,
other tobacco product, and alternative nicotine product purchases from the
vending machine will be readily observed by the person who owns or operates
the place or an employee of that person. For the purpose of this section, a
vending machine located in any unmonitored area, including an unmonitored
coatroom, restroom, hallway, or outer waiting area, shall not be considered
located within the immediate vicinity, plain view, and control of the person
who owns or operates the place, or an employee of that person.



            2.   The vending machine is inaccessible to the
public when the place is closed.



      (4)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under
division (A)(2)(a) of this section:



         (a)   The child was accompanied by a parent, spouse who
is 18 years of age or older, or legal guardian of the child.



         (b)   The person who gave, sold, or distributed
cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers
used to roll cigarettes to a child under division (A)(2)(a) of this section
is a parent, spouse who is 18 years of age or older, or legal guardian of the
child.



      (5)   It is not a violation of division (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(b)
of this section for a person to give or otherwise distribute to a child
cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers
used to roll cigarettes while the child is participating in a research
protocol if all of the following apply:



         (a)   The parent, guardian, or legal custodian of the
child has consented in writing to the child participating in the research
protocol.



         (b)   An institutional human subjects protection review
board, or an equivalent entity, has approved the research protocol.



         (c)   The child is participating in the research
protocol at the facility or location specified in the research protocol.



      (6)   (a)   Whoever violates division (A)(2)(a), (A)(2)(b),
(A)(2)(d), (A)(2)(e), or (A)(2)(f) or (A)(3) of this section is guilty of
illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative
nicotine products. Except as otherwise provided in this division, illegal
distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the offender previously
has been convicted of a violation of division (A)(2)(a), (A)(2)(b),
(A)(2)(d), (A)(2)(e), or (A)(2)(f) or (A)(3) of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, illegal
distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products is a misdemeanor of the third degree.



         (b)   Whoever violates division (A)(2)(c) of this
section is guilty of permitting children to use cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products. Except as otherwise provided in
this division, permitting children to use cigarettes, other tobacco products,
or alternative nicotine products is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If
the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of division
(A)(2)(c) of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, permitting children to use cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products is a misdemeanor of the third
degree.



      (7)   Any cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative
nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes that are given, sold, or
otherwise distributed to a child in violation of this section and that are
used, possessed, purchased, or received by a child in violation of R.C. §
2151.87 are subject to seizure and forfeiture as contraband under R.C.
Chapter 2981.



(R.C. § 2927.02)



   (B)   Transaction scan.



      (1)   As used in this division and division (C) of this
section:



         CARD HOLDER. Means any person who presents a driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or an identification card to a seller, or an
agent or employee of a seller, to purchase or receive cigarettes, other
tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products from a seller, agent, or
employee.



         IDENTIFICATION CARD means an identification card issued
under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to 4507.52.



         SELLER. Means a seller of cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products and includes any person whose gift
of or other distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products is subject to the prohibitions of division (A)
of this section.



         TRANSACTION SCAN. Means the process by which a seller or an
agent or employee of a seller checks, by means of a transaction scan device,
the validity of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an
identification card that is presented as a condition for purchasing or
receiving cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products.



         TRANSACTION SCAN DEVICE means any commercial device or
combination of devices used at a point of sale that is capable of deciphering
in an electronically readable format the information encoded on the magnetic
strip or bar code of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an
identification card.



      (2)   (a)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller
may perform a transaction scan by means of a transaction scan device to check
the validity of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
identification card presented by a card holder as a condition for selling,
giving away, or otherwise distributing to the card holder cigarettes, other
tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products.



         (b)   If the information deciphered by the transaction
scan performed under division (B)(2)(a) of this section fails to match the
information printed on the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
identification card presented by the card holder, or if the transaction scan
indicates that the information so printed is false or fraudulent, neither the
seller nor any agent or employee of the seller shall sell, give away, or
otherwise distribute any cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative
nicotine products to the card holder.



         (c)   Division (B)(2)(a) of this section does not
preclude a seller or an agent or employee of a seller from using a
transaction scan device to check the validity of a document other than a
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card, if the
document includes a bar code or magnetic strip that may be scanned by the
device, as a condition for selling, giving away, or otherwise distributing
cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products to the
person presenting the document.



      (3)   Rules adopted by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles under
R.C. § 4301.61(C) apply to the use of transaction scan devices for purposes
of this division (B) and division (C) of this section.



      (4)   (a)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller
shall electronically or mechanically record or maintain any information
derived from a transaction scan, except for the following:



            1.   The name and date of birth of the person
listed on the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification
card presented by the card holder;



            2.   The expiration date and identification number
of the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card
presented by the card holder.



         (b)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall
use the information that is derived from a transaction scan or that is
permitted to be recorded and maintained under division (B)(4)(a) of this
section, except for purposes of division (C) of this section.



         (c)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall
use a transaction scan device for a purpose other than the purpose specified
in division (C)(2)(a) of this section.



         (d)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall
sell or otherwise disseminate the information derived from a transaction scan
to any third party, including but not limited to selling or otherwise
disseminating that information for any marketing, advertising, or promotional
activities, but a seller or agent or employee of a seller may release that
information pursuant to a court order or as specifically authorized by
division (C) of this section or another section of this code or the Ohio
Revised Code.



      (5)   Nothing in this division (B) or division (C) of this
section relieves a seller or an agent or employee of a seller of any
responsibility to comply with any other applicable local, state or federal
laws or rules governing the sale, giving away, or other distribution of
cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products.



      (6)   Whoever violates division (B)(2)(b) or (B)(4) of this
section is guilty of engaging in an illegal tobacco product or alternative
nicotine product transaction scan, and the court may impose upon the offender
a civil penalty of up to $1,000 for each violation. The Clerk of the Court
shall pay each collected civil penalty to the County Treasurer for deposit
into the County Treasury.



(R.C. § 2927.021)



   (C)   Affirmative defenses.



      (1)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may not be
found guilty of a charge of a violation of division (A) of this section in
which the age of the purchaser or other recipient of cigarettes, other
tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is an element of the
alleged violation, if the seller, agent, or employee raises and proves as an
affirmative defense that all of the following occurred:



         (a)   A card holder attempting to purchase or receive
cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products
presented a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification
card.



         (b)   A transaction scan of the driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or identification card that the card holder presented
indicated that the license or card was valid.



         (c)   The cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products were sold, given away, or otherwise distributed
to the card holder in reasonable reliance upon the identification presented
and the completed transaction scan.



      (2)   In determining whether a seller or an agent or employee
of a seller has proven the affirmative defense provided by division (C)(1) of
this section, the trier of fact in the action for the alleged violation of
division (A) of this section shall consider any written policy that the
seller has adopted and implemented and that is intended to prevent violations
of division (A) of this section.  For purposes of division (C)(1)(c) of this
section, the trier of fact shall consider that reasonable reliance upon the
identification presented and the completed transaction scan may require a
seller or an agent or employee of a seller to exercise reasonable diligence
to determine, and that the use of a  transaction scan device does not excuse
a seller or an agent or employee of a seller from exercising reasonable
diligence to determine, the following:



         (a)   Whether a person to whom the seller or agent or
employee of a seller sells, gives away, or otherwise distributes cigarettes,
other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is 18 years of age
or older;



         (b)   Whether the description and picture appearing on
the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card
presented by a card holder is that of the card holder.



      (3)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense
provided by division (C)(1) of this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles or a deputy registrar who issued an identification card under R.C.
§§ 4507.50 to 4507.52 shall be permitted to submit certified copies of the
records of that issuance in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of or
contractors with the Bureau of Motor Vehicles in the action.



(R.C. § 2927.022)



   (D)   Shipment of tobacco products.



      (1)   As used in this division (D):



         AUTHORIZED RECIPIENT OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS means a person who
is:



            1.   Licensed as a cigarette wholesale dealer
under R.C. § 5743.15;



            2.   Licensed as a retail dealer as long as the
person purchases cigarettes with the appropriate tax stamp affixed;



            3.   An export warehouse proprietor as defined in
Section 5702 of the Internal Revenue Code;



            4.   An operator of a customs bonded warehouse
under 19 U.S.C. § 1311 or 19 U.S.C. § 1555;



            5.   An officer, employee, or agent of the federal
government or of this state acting in the person’s official capacity;



            6.   A department, agency, instrumentality, or
political subdivision of the federal government or of this state;



            7.   A person having a consent for consumer
shipment issued by the Tax Commissioner under R.C. § 5743.71.



         MOTOR CARRIER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4923.01.



      (2)   The purpose of this division (D) is to prevent the sale
of cigarettes to minors and to ensure compliance with the Master Settlement
Agreement, as defined in R.C. § 1346.01.



      (3)   (a)   No person shall cause to be shipped any
cigarettes to any person in this municipality other than an authorized
recipient of tobacco products.



         (b)   No motor carrier or other person shall knowingly
transport cigarettes to any person in this municipality that the carrier or
other person reasonably believes is not an authorized recipient of tobacco
products. If cigarettes are transported to a home or residence, it shall be
presumed that the motor carrier or other person knew that the person to whom
the cigarettes were delivered was not an authorized recipient of tobacco
products.



      (4)   No person engaged in the business of selling cigarettes
who ships or causes to be shipped cigarettes to any person in this
municipality in any container or wrapping other than the original container
or wrapping of the cigarettes shall fail to plainly and visibly mark the
exterior of the container or wrapping in which the cigarettes are shipped
with the words “cigarettes”.



      (5)   A court shall impose a fine of up to $1,000 for each
violation of division (D)(3)(a), (D)(3)(b) or (D)(4) of this section.



(R.C. § 2927.023)



§ 135.26  NONSMOKING AREAS IN PLACES OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY.



   (A)   As used in this section, PLACE OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY means:



      (1)   Enclosed theaters, except the lobby; opera houses;
auditoriums; classrooms; elevators; rooms in which persons are confined as a
matter of health care, including but not limited to a hospital room and a
room in a residential care facility serving as the residence of a person
living in such residential care facility.



      (2)   All buildings and other enclosed structures owned by the
state, its agencies, or political subdivisions, including but not limited to
hospitals and state institutions for the mentally ill and persons with
intellectual disabilities; university and college buildings, except rooms
within those buildings used primarily as the residences of students or other
persons affiliated with the university or college; office buildings;
libraries; museums; and vehicles used in public transportation.  That
portion of a building or other enclosed structure that is owned by the state,
a state agency, or a political subdivision, and that is used primarily as a
food service establishment, is not a place of public assembly.



      (3)   Each portion of a building or enclosed structure that is
not included in division (A)(1) or (2) of this section is a place of public
assembly if it has a seating capacity of 50 or more persons and is available
to the public.  Restaurants, food service establishments, dining rooms,
cafes, cafeterias, or other rooms used primarily for the service of food, as
well as bowling alleys and places licensed by the Ohio Division of Liquor
Control to sell intoxicating beverages for consumption on the premises, are
not places of public assembly.



   (B)   For the purpose of separating persons who smoke from persons
who do not smoke for the comfort and health of persons not smoking, in every
place of public assembly there shall be an area where smoking is not
permitted, which shall be designated a no smoking area, provided that not
more than one-half of the rooms in any health care facility in which persons
are confined as a matter of health care may be designated as smoking areas in
their entirety.  The designation shall be made before the place of public
assembly is made available to the public. In places included in division
(A)(1) of this section, the local fire authority having jurisdiction shall
designate the no smoking area.  In places included in division (A)(2) of
this section that are owned by the state or its agencies, the Ohio Director
of Administrative Services shall designate the area, and if the place is
owned by a political subdivision, its legislative authority shall designate
an officer who shall designate the area.  In places included in division
(A)(3) of this section, the person having control of the operations of the
place of public assembly shall designate the no smoking area.  In places
included in division (A)(2) of this section which are also included in
division (A)(1) of this section, the officer who has authority to designate
the area in places in division (A)(2) of this section shall designate the no
smoking area.  A no smoking area may include the entire place of public
assembly.  Designations shall be made by the placement of signs that are
clearly visible and that state “no smoking.”  No person shall remove
signs from areas designated as no smoking areas.



   (C)   This section does not affect or modify the prohibition
contained in R.C. § 3313.751(B).



   (D)   No person shall smoke in any area designated as a no smoking
area in accordance with division (B) of this section.



   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 3791.031)



§ 135.27  SPREADING CONTAGION.



   (A)   No person, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that
he or she is suffering from a dangerous, contagious disease, shall knowingly
fail to take reasonable measures to prevent exposing himself or herself to
other persons, except when seeking medical aid.



   (B)   No person, having charge or care of a person whom he or she
knows or has reasonable cause to believe is suffering from a dangerous,
contagious disease, shall recklessly fail to take reasonable measures to
protect others from exposure to the contagion, and to inform health
authorities of the existence of the contagion.



   (C)   No person, having charge of a public conveyance or place of
public accommodation, amusement, resort, or trade, and knowing or having
reasonable cause to believe that persons using such conveyance or place have
been or are being exposed to a dangerous, contagious disease, shall
negligently fail to take reasonable measures to protect the public from
exposure to the contagion, and to inform health authorities of the existence
of the contagion.



(R.C. § 3701.81)



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the second degree.



(R.C. § 3701.99(C))  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Contagion and quarantine, see R.C. §§ 3707.04 et seq.



   Power to prevent contagious diseases, see R.C. § 715.37



§ 135.28  ABUSE OF A CORPSE.



   (A)   No person, except as authorized by law, shall treat a human
corpse in a way that he or she knows would outrage reasonable family
sensibilities.



   (B)   No person, except as authorized by law, shall treat a human
corpse in a way that would outrage reasonable community sensibilities.



   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
abuse of a corpse, a misdemeanor of the second degree.  Whoever violates
division (B) of this section is guilty of gross abuse of a corpse, a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2927.01) Penalty, see § 130.99 



§ 135.29  UNLAWFUL COLLECTION OF BODILY SUBSTANCES.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly collect any blood, urine, tissue, or
other bodily substance of another person without privilege or consent to do
so.



   (B)   (1)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any of
the following:



         (a)   The collection of any bodily substance of a person
by a law enforcement officer, or by another person pursuant to the direction
or advice of a law enforcement officer, for purposes of a chemical test or
tests of the substance under R.C. § 1547.111(A)(1) or R.C. § 4511.191(A)(2)
to determine the alcohol, drug, controlled substance, metabolite of a
controlled substance, or combination content of the bodily substance;



         (b)   The collection of any bodily substance of a person
by a peace officer, or by another person pursuant to the direction or advice
of a peace officer, for purposes of a test or tests of the substance as
provided in R.C. § 4506.17(A) to determine the person's alcohol
concentration or the presence of any controlled substance or metabolite of a
controlled substance.



      (2)   Division (B)(1) of this section shall not be construed
as implying that the persons identified in divisions (B)(1)(a) and (B)(1)(b)
of this section do not have privilege to collect the bodily substance of
another person as described in those divisions or as limiting the definition
of "privilege" set forth in R.C. § 2901.01.



   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
unlawful collection of a bodily substance. Except as otherwise provided in
this division, unlawful collection of a bodily substance is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (A) of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, unlawful collection of a bodily
substance is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2927.15) Penalty, see § 130.99



CHAPTER 136:  OFFENSES AGAINST JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION



Section



   136.01   Definitions



   136.02   Falsification



   136.03   Compounding a crime



   136.04   Failure to report a crime



   136.05   Failure to aid a law enforcement officer



   136.06   Obstructing official business



   136.07   Obstructing justice



   136.08   Resisting arrest



   136.09   Having an unlawful interest in a public contract



   136.10   Soliciting or receiving improper compensation



   136.11   Dereliction of duty



   136.12   Interfering with civil rights



   136.13   Illegal conveyance of prohibited items onto grounds of a
detention facility or other specified governmental facility



   136.14   False report of child abuse or neglect



   136.15   Assaulting police dog, horse, or assistance dog



   136.16   Disclosure of confidential peace officer information



   136.17   Intimidation of crime victim or witness



   136.18   Using sham legal process



   136.19   Making false allegation of peace officer misconduct



   136.20   Misuse of 9-1-1 system



   136.21   Failure to disclose personal information



Cross-reference:



   Failure to comply with order or signal of a police officer, see § 70.02



Statutory reference:



   Escape from detention, see R.C. § 2921.34



   Harassment by inmates by causing or attempting to cause contact with
blood, semen, urine, feces or other bodily substance; knowledge of AIDS,
hepatitis or tuberculosis infection; felony offenses, see R.C. § 2921.38



§ 136.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CAMPAIGN COMMITTEE, CONTRIBUTION, LEGISLATIVE CAMPAIGN FUND, POLITICAL
ACTION COMMITTEE, POLITICAL CONTRIBUTING ENTITY, and POLITICAL PARTY.  Have
the same meanings as in R.C. § 3517.01.



   DETENTION.  Arrest; confinement in any vehicle subsequent to an
arrest; confinement in any public or private facility for custody of persons
charged with or convicted of crime in this state or another state or under
the laws of the United States or alleged or found to be a delinquent child or
unruly child in this state or another state or under the laws of the United
States; hospitalization, institutionalization, or confinement in any public
or private facility that is ordered pursuant to or under the authority of
R.C. § 2945.37, 2945.371, 2945.38, 2945.39, 2945.40, 2945.401 or 2945.402;
confinement in any vehicle for transportation to or from any facility of any
of those natures; detention for extradition or deportation; except as
provided in this division, supervision by any employee of any facility of any
of those natures that is incidental to hospitalization, institutionalization,
or confinement in the facility but that occurs outside the facility;
supervision by an employee of the Department of Rehabilitation and Correction
of a person on any type of release from a state correctional institution; or
confinement in any vehicle, airplane, or place while being returned from
outside of this state into this state by a private person or entity pursuant
to a contract entered into under R.C. § 311.29(E) or R.C. § 5149.03(B). 
For a person confined in a county jail who participates in a county jail
industry program pursuant to R.C. § 5147.30, DETENTION includes time spent
at an assigned work site and going to and from the work site.



   DETENTION FACILITY.  Any public or private place used for the
confinement of a person charged with or convicted of any crime in this state
or another state or under the laws of the United States or alleged or found
to be a delinquent child or an unruly child in this state or another state or
under the laws of the United States.



   OFFICIAL PROCEEDING.  Any proceeding before a legislative, judicial,
administrative, or other governmental agency or official authorized to take
evidence under oath, and includes any proceeding before a referee, hearing
examiner, commissioner, notary, or other person taking testimony or a
deposition in connection with an official proceeding.



   PARTY OFFICIAL.  Any person who holds an elective or appointive post
in a political party in the United States or this state, by virtue of which
he or she directs, conducts, or participates in directing or conducting party
affairs at any level of responsibility.



   PROVIDER AGREEMENT.   Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5164.01.



   PUBLIC OFFICIAL.  Any elected or appointed officer, employee, or agent
of the state or any political subdivision thereof, whether in a temporary or
permanent capacity, and includes but is not limited to legislators, judges,
and law enforcement officers.



   PUBLIC SERVANT.  Any of the following:



      (1)   Any public official.



      (2)   Any person performing ad hoc a governmental function,
including but not limited to a juror, member of a temporary commission,
master, arbitrator, advisor, or consultant.



      (3)   A person who is a candidate for public office, whether
or not he or she is elected or appointed to the office for which he or she is
a candidate.  A person is a candidate for purposes of this division if he or
she has been nominated according to law for election or appointment to public
office, or if he or she has filed a petition or petitions as required by law
to have his or her name placed on the ballot in a primary, general, or
special election, or if he or she campaigns as a write-in candidate in any
primary, general, or special election.



   VALUABLE THING or VALUABLE BENEFIT.  Includes, but is not limited to,
a contribution.  This inclusion does not indicate or imply that a
contribution was not included in those terms before September 17, 1986.



(R.C. § 2921.01) 



§ 136.02  FALSIFICATION.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly make a false statement, or knowingly
swear or affirm the truth of a false statement previously made, when any of
the following applies:



      (1)   The statement is made in any official proceeding.



      (2)   The statement is made with purpose to incriminate
another.



      (3)   The statement is made with purpose to mislead a public
official in performing his or her official function.



      (4)   The statement is made with purpose to secure the payment
of unemployment compensation; Ohio Works First; prevention, retention and
contingency benefits and services; disability financial assistance;
retirement benefits or health care coverage from a state retirement system;
economic development assistance as defined in R.C. § 9.66; or other benefits
administered by a governmental agency or paid out of a public treasury.



      (5)   The statement is made with purpose to secure the
issuance by a governmental agency of a license, permit, authorization,
certificate, registration, release, or provider agreement.



      (6)   The statement is sworn or affirmed before a notary
public or another person empowered to administer oaths.



      (7)   The statement is in writing on or in connection with a
report or return that is required or authorized by law.



      (8)   The statement is in writing, and is made with purpose to
induce another to extend credit to or employ the offender, or to confer any
degree, diploma, certificate of attainment, award of excellence, or honor on
the offender, or to extend to or bestow upon the offender any other valuable
benefit or distinction, when the person to whom the statement is directed
relies upon it to his or her detriment.



      (9)   The statement is made with purpose to commit or
facilitate the commission of a theft offense.



      (10)   The statement is knowingly made to a probate court in
connection with any action, proceeding, or other matter within its
jurisdiction, either orally or in a written document, including, but not
limited to, an application, petition, complaint, or other pleading, or an
inventory, account, or report.



      (11)   The statement is made on an account, form, record,
stamp, label or other writing that is required by law.



      (12)   The statement is made in connection with the purchase
of a firearm, as defined in R.C. § 2923.11, and in conjunction with the
furnishing to the seller of the firearm of a fictitious or altered driver's
or commercial driver's license or permit, a fictitious or altered
identification card, or any other document that contains false information
about the purchaser's identity.



      (13)   The statement is made in a document or instrument of
writing that purports to be a judgment, lien, or claim of indebtedness and is
filed or recorded with the Secretary of State, a county recorder, or the
clerk of a court of record.



      (14)   The statement is made in an application filed with a
county sheriff pursuant to R.C. § 2923.125 in order to obtain or renew a
concealed handgun license or is made in an affidavit submitted to a county
sheriff to obtain a concealed handgun license on a temporary emergency basis
under R.C. § 2923.1213.



      (15)   The statement is required under R.C. § 5743.71 in
connection with the person’s purchase of cigarettes or tobacco products in
a delivery sale.



   (B)   No person, in connection with the purchase of a firearm as
defined in R.C. § 2923.11, shall knowingly furnish to the seller of the
firearm a fictitious or altered driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit, a fictitious or altered identification card, or any other document
that contains false information about the purchaser's identity.



   (C)   No person, in an attempt to obtain a concealed handgun license
under R.C. § 2923.125, shall knowingly present to a sheriff a fictitious or
altered document that purports to be certification of the person’s
competence in handling a handgun as described in division (B)(3) of that
section.



   (D)   It is no defense to a charge under division (A)(6) of this
section that the oath or affirmation was administered or taken in an
irregular manner.



   (E)   If contradictory statements relating to the same fact are made
by the offender within the period of the statute of limitations for
falsification, it is not necessary for the prosecution to prove which
statement was false, but only that one or the other was false.



   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3),
(A)(4), (A)(5), (A)(6), (A)(7), (A)(8), (A)(10), (A)(11), (A)(13) or (A)(15)
of this section is guilty of falsification. Except as otherwise provided in
this division, falsification is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(9) of this section is
guilty of falsification in a theft offense.  Except as otherwise provided in
this division, falsification in a theft offense is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.  If the value of the property or services stolen is $1,000 or more,
falsification in a theft offense is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



      (3)   Whoever violates division (A)(12) or (B) of this section
is guilty of falsification to purchase a firearm, a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.



      (4)   Whoever violates division (A)(14) or (C) of this section
is guilty of falsification to obtain a concealed handgun license, a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (5)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section in removal
proceedings under R.C. § 319.26, 321.37, 507.13 or 733.78 is guilty of
falsification regarding a removal proceeding, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2921.13)



   (G)   (1)   No person who has knowingly failed to maintain proof
of financial responsibility in accordance with R.C. § 4509.101 shall produce
any document or present to a peace officer an electronic wireless
communications device that is displaying any text or images with the purpose
to mislead a peace officer upon the request of a peace officer for proof of
financial responsibility made in accordance with R.C. § 4509.101(D)(2).



      (2)   Whoever violates this division (G) is guilty of
falsification, a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 4509.102)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



       Civil liability for violations of this section, see R.C. §
2921.13(G)



§ 136.03  COMPOUNDING A CRIME.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly demand, accept, or agree to accept
anything of value in consideration of abandoning or agreeing to abandon a
pending criminal prosecution.



   (B)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section
when both of the following apply:



      (1)   The pending prosecution involved is for a violation of
R.C. § 2913.02, 2913.11, 2913.21(B)(2), or 2913.47, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, of which the actor under this section was the
victim.



      (2)   The thing of value demanded, accepted, or agreed to be
accepted, in consideration of abandoning or agreeing to abandon the
prosecution, did not exceed an amount that the actor reasonably believed due
him or her as restitution for the loss caused him or her by the offense.



   (C)   When a prosecuting witness abandons or agrees to abandon a
prosecution under division (B) of this section, the abandonment or agreement
in no way binds the state to abandoning the prosecution.



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of compounding a
crime, a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 2921.21)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 136.04  FAILURE TO REPORT A CRIME.



   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in division (A)(2) of this
section, no person, knowing that a felony has been or is being committed,
shall knowingly fail to report the information to law enforcement authorities.



      (2)   No person, knowing that a violation of R.C. §
2913.04(B) has been or is being committed or that the person has received
information derived from such a violation, shall knowingly fail to report the
violation to law enforcement authorities.



   (B)   Except for conditions that are within the scope of division
(E) of this section, no person giving aid to a sick or injured person shall
negligently fail to report to law enforcement authorities any gunshot or stab
wound treated or observed by the person, or any serious physical harm to
persons that the person knows or has reasonable cause to believe resulted
from an offense of violence.



   (C)   No person who discovers the body or acquires the first
knowledge of the death of a person shall fail to report the death immediately
to a physician or advanced practice registered nurse whom the person knows to
be treating the deceased for a condition from which death at such time would
not be unexpected, or to a law enforcement officer, an ambulance service, an
emergency squad, or the coroner in a political subdivision in which the body
is discovered, the death is believed to have occurred, or knowledge
concerning the death is obtained. For purposes of this division, “advanced
practice registered nurse” does not include a certified registered nurse
anesthetist.



   (D)   No person shall fail to provide upon request of the person to
whom a report required by division (C) of this section was made, or to any
law enforcement officer who has reasonable cause to assert the authority to
investigate the circumstances surrounding the death, any facts within his or
her knowledge that may have a bearing on the investigation of the death.



   (E)   (1)   As used in this section, BURN INJURY means any of the
following:



         (a)   Second or third degree burns;



         (b)   Any burns to the upper respiratory tract or
laryngeal edema due to the inhalation of super-heated air;



         (c)    Any burn injury or wound that may result in death;



         (d)   Any physical harm to persons caused by or as the
result of the use of fireworks, novelties and trick noisemakers, and wire
sparklers, as each is defined by R.C. § 3743.01.



      (2)   No physician, nurse, physician assistant, or limited
practitioner who, outside a hospital, sanitarium, or other medical facility,
attends or treats a person who has sustained a burn injury inflicted by an
explosion or other incendiary device, or that shows evidence of having been
inflicted in a violent, malicious, or criminal manner, shall fail to report
the burn injury immediately to the local arson bureau, if there is such a
bureau in the jurisdiction in which the person is attended or treated, or
otherwise to local law enforcement authorities.



      (3)   No manager, superintendent, or other person in charge of
a hospital, sanitarium, or other medical facility in which a person is
attended or treated for any burn injury inflicted by an explosion or other
incendiary device, or that shows evidence of having been inflicted in a
violent, malicious, or criminal manner, shall fail to report the burn injury
immediately to the local arson bureau, if there is such a bureau in the
jurisdiction in which the person is attended or treated, or otherwise to
local law enforcement authorities.



      (4)   No person who is required to report any burn injury
under division (E)(2) or (3) of this section shall fail to file, within three
working days after attending or treating the victim, a written report of the
burn injury with the office of the State Fire Marshal.  The report shall be
made on a form provided by the State Fire Marshal.



      (5)   Anyone participating in the making of reports under
division (E) of this section or anyone participating in a judicial proceeding
resulting from the reports is immune from any civil or criminal liability
that otherwise might be incurred or imposed as a result of such actions.
Notwithstanding R.C. § 4731.22, the physician-patient relationship or
advanced practice registered nurse-patient relationship is not a ground for
excluding evidence regarding a person’s burn injury or the cause of the
burn injury in any judicial proceeding resulting from a report submitted
under division (E) of this section.



   (F)   (1)   Any doctor of medicine or osteopathic medicine,
hospital intern or resident, nurse, psychologist, social worker, independent
social worker, social work assistant, licensed professional clinical
counselor, licensed professional counselor, independent marriage and family
therapist, or marriage and family therapist who knows or has reasonable cause
to believe that a patient or client has been the victim of domestic violence,
as defined in R.C. § 3113.31, shall note that knowledge or belief and the
basis for it in the patient’s or client’s records.



      (2)   Notwithstanding R.C. § 4731.22, the physician-patient
privilege or advanced practice registered nurse-patient privilege shall not
be a ground for excluding any information regarding the report containing the
knowledge or belief noted under division (F)(1) of this section, and the
information may be admitted as evidence in accordance with the Rules of
Evidence.



   (G)   Division (A) or (D) of this section does not require
disclosure of information, when any of the following applies:



      (1)   The information is privileged by reason of the
relationship between attorney and client; physician and patient; advanced
practice registered nurse and patient; licensed psychologist or licensed
school psychologist and client; licensed professional clinical counselor,
licensed professional counselor, independent social worker, social worker,
independent marriage and family therapist, or marriage and family therapist
and client; member of the clergy, rabbi, minister, or priest and any person
communicating information confidentially to the member of the clergy, rabbi,
minister, or priest for a religious counseling purpose of a professional
character; husband and wife; or a communications assistant and those who are
a party to a telecommunications relay service call.



      (2)   The information would tend to incriminate a member of
the actor's immediate family.



      (3)   Disclosure of the information would amount to revealing
a news source, privileged under R.C. § 2739.04 or 2739.12.



      (4)   Disclosure of the information would amount to disclosure
by a member of the ordained clergy of an organized religious body of a
confidential communication made to him or her in his or her capacity as such
by a person seeking his or her aid or counsel.



      (5)   Disclosure would amount to revealing information
acquired by the actor in the course of his or her duties in connection with a
bona fide program of treatment or services for drug dependent persons or
persons in danger of drug dependence, which program is maintained or
conducted by a hospital, clinic, person, agency, or community addiction
services provider whose alcohol and drug addiction services are certified
pursuant to R.C. § 5119.36.



      (6)   Disclosure would amount to revealing information
acquired by the actor in the course of his or her duties in connection with a
bona fide program for providing counseling services to victims of crimes that
are violations of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.05, or to victims of felonious
sexual penetration in violation of former R.C. § 2907.12.  As used in this
division, COUNSELING SERVICES include services provided in an informal
setting by a person who, by education or experience, is competent to provide
such services.



   (H)   No disclosure of information pursuant to this section gives
rise to any liability or recrimination for a breach of privilege or
confidence.



   (I)    Whoever violates division (A) or (B) of this section is
guilty of failure to report a crime.  Violation of division (A)(1) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  Violation of division (A)(2)
or (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second degree.



   (J)   Whoever violates division (C) or (D) of this section is guilty
of failure to report knowledge of a death, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



   (K)   (1)   Whoever negligently violates division (E) of this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



      (2)   Whoever knowingly violates division (E) of this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.



   (L)   As used in this section, NURSE includes an advanced practice
registered nurse, registered nurse, and licensed practical nurse.



(R.C. § 2921.22)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 136.05  FAILURE TO AID A LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.



   (A)   No person shall negligently fail or refuse to aid a law
enforcement officer, when called upon for assistance in preventing or halting
the commission of an offense, or in apprehending or detaining an offender,
when the aid can be given without a substantial risk of physical harm to the
person giving it.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to aid a
law enforcement officer, a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 2921.23)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 136.06  OBSTRUCTING OFFICIAL BUSINESS.



   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so and with purpose to
prevent, obstruct, or delay the performance by a public official of any
authorized act within the public official's official capacity, shall do any
act that hampers or impedes a public official in the performance of the
public official's lawful duties.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of obstructing
official business.  Except as otherwise provided in this division,
obstructing official business is a misdemeanor of the second degree.  If a
violation of this section creates a risk of physical harm to any person,
obstructing official business is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.



(R.C. § 2921.31)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 136.07  OBSTRUCTING JUSTICE.



   (A)   No person, with purpose to hinder the discovery, apprehension,
prosecution, conviction, or punishment of another for crime, or to assist
another to benefit from the commission of a crime, and no person, with
purpose to hinder the discovery, apprehension, prosecution, adjudication as a
delinquent child, or disposition of a child for an act that if committed by
an adult would be a crime or to assist a child to benefit from the commission
of an act that if committed by an adult would be a crime, shall do any of the
following:



      (1)   Harbor or conceal the other person or child.



      (2)   Provide the other person or child with money,
transportation, a weapon, a disguise, or other means of avoiding discovery or
apprehension.



      (3)   Warn the other person or child of impending discovery or
apprehension.



      (4)   Destroy or conceal physical evidence of the crime or
act, or induce any person to withhold testimony or information or to elude
legal process summoning him or her to testify or supply evidence.



      (5)   Communicate false information to any person.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of obstructing justice.



      (1)   If the crime committed by the person aided is a
misdemeanor or if the act committed by the child aided would be a misdemeanor
if committed by an adult, obstructing justice is a misdemeanor of the same
degree as the crime committed by the person aided or a misdemeanor of the
same degree that the act committed by the child aided would be if committed
by an adult.



      (2)   If the crime committed by the person aided is a felony
or if the act committed by the child aided would be a felony if committed by
an adult, obstructing justice is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.



   (C)   As used in this section:



   ADULT and CHILD have the same meaning as in R.C. § 2151.011.



   DELINQUENT CHILD has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2152.02.



(R.C. § 2921.32)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 136.08  RESISTING ARREST.



   (A)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere
with a lawful arrest of himself, herself or another.



   (B)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere
with a lawful arrest of the person or another person and, during the course
of or as a result of the resistance or interference, cause physical harm to a
law enforcement officer.



   (C)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere
with a lawful arrest of the person or another person if either of the
following applies:



      (1)   The offender, during the course of or as a result of the
resistance or interference, recklessly causes physical harm to a law
enforcement officer by means of a deadly weapon; or



      (2)   The offender, during the course of the resistance or
interference, brandishes a deadly weapon.



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of resisting arrest. 
A violation of division (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree.  A violation of division (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.  A violation of division (C) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.



   (E)   As used in this section, DEADLY WEAPON has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 2923.11.



(R.C. § 2921.33)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Unlawful taking of deadly weapon from a law enforcement officer, felony
offense, see R.C. § 2911.01



§ 136.09  HAVING AN UNLAWFUL INTEREST IN A PUBLIC CONTRACT.



   (A)   No public official shall knowingly do any of the following:



      (1)   Authorize or employ the authority of the public
official’s office to secure authorization of any public contract in which
the public official, a member of the public official’s family, or any of
the public official’s business associates has an interest.



      (2)   Authorize or employ the authority or influence of the
public official’s office to secure the investment of public funds in any
share, bond, mortgage, or other security with respect to which the public
official, a member of the public official’s family, or any of the public
official’s business associates either has an interest, is an underwriter,
or receives any brokerage, origination, or servicing fees.



      (3)   During the public official’s term of office or within
one year thereafter, occupy any position of profit in the prosecution of a
public contract authorized by the public official or by a legislative body,
commission, or board of which the public official was a member at the time of
authorization, unless the contract was let by competitive bidding to the
lowest and best bidder.



      (4)   Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public
contract entered into by or for the use of the political subdivision or
governmental agency or instrumentality with which the public official is
connected.



      (5)   Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public
contract that is not let by competitive bidding when required by law, and
that involves more than $150.



   (B)   In the absence of bribery or a purpose to defraud, a public
official, member of a public official’s family, or any of a public
official’s business associates shall not be considered as having an
interest in a public contract or the investment of public funds, if all of
the following apply:



      (1)   The interest of that person is limited to owning or
controlling shares of the corporation, or being a creditor of the corporation
or other organization, that is the contractor on the public contract
involved, or that is the issuer of the security in which public funds are
invested.



      (2)   The shares owned or controlled by that person do not
exceed 5% of the outstanding shares of the corporation, and the amount due
that person as creditor does not exceed 5% of the total indebtedness of the
corporation or other organization.



      (3)   That person, prior to the time the public contract is
entered into, files with the political subdivision or governmental agency or
instrumentality involved, an affidavit giving that person’s exact status in
connection with the corporation or other organization.



   (C)   This section does not apply to a public contract in which a
public official, member of a public official’s family, or one of a public
official’s business associates has an interest, when all of the following
apply:



      (1)   The subject of the public contract is necessary supplies
or services for the political subdivision or governmental agency or
instrumentality involved.



      (2)   The supplies or services are unobtainable elsewhere for
the same or lower cost, or are being furnished to the political subdivision
or governmental agency or instrumentality as part of a continuing course of
dealing established prior to the public official's becoming associated with
the political subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality involved.



      (3)   The treatment accorded the political subdivision or
governmental agency or instrumentality is either preferential to or the same
as that accorded other customers or clients in similar transactions.



      (4)   The entire transaction is conducted at arm's length,
with full knowledge by the political subdivision or governmental agency or
instrumentality involved, of the interest of the public official, member of
the public official’s family, or business associate, and the public
official takes no part in the deliberations or decision of the political
subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality with respect to the
public contract.



   (D)   Division (A)(4) of this section does not prohibit
participation by a public employee in any housing program funded by public
monies if the public employee otherwise qualifies for the program and does
not use the authority or influence of the public employee’s office or
employment to secure benefits from the program and if the monies are to be
used on the primary residence of the public employee.  Such participation
does not constitute an unlawful interest in a public contract in violation of
this section.



   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of having an unlawful
interest in a public contract.  Violation of division (A)(1) or (2) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.  Violation
of division (A)(3), (4), or (5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.



   (F)   It is not a violation of this section for a prosecuting
attorney to appoint assistants and employees in accordance with R.C. §§
309.06 and 2921.421, or for a chief legal officer of a municipality or an
official designated as prosecutor in a municipality to appoint assistants and
employees in accordance with R.C. §§ 733.621 and 2921.421, or for a
township law director appointed under R.C. § 504.15 to appoint assistants
and employees in accordance with R.C. §§ 504.151 and 2921.421.



   (G)   Any public contract in which a public official, a member of
the public official’s family, or any of the public official’s business
associates has an interest in violation of this section is void and
unenforceable. Any contract securing the investment of public funds in which
a public official, a member of the public official’s family, or any of the
public official’s business associates has an interest, is an underwriter,
or receives any brokerage, origination or servicing fees and that was entered
into in violation of this section is void and unenforceable.



   (H)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      CHIEF LEGAL OFFICER.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 733.621.



      PUBLIC CONTRACT.  Any of the following:



         (a)   The purchase or acquisition, or a contract for the
purchase or acquisition, of property or services by or for the use of the
state or any of its political subdivisions, or any agency or instrumentality
of either, including the employment of an individual by the state, any of its
political subdivisions, or any agency or instrumentality of either.



         (b)   A contract for the design, construction,
alteration, repair, or maintenance of any public property.



(R.C. § 2921.42)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Assistants and employees of Prosecutors, Law Directors, and Solicitors,
see R.C. § 2921.421



§ 136.10  SOLICITING OR RECEIVING IMPROPER COMPENSATION.



   (A)   No public servant shall knowingly solicit or accept and no
person shall knowingly promise or give to a public servant either of the
following:



      (1)   Any compensation, other than as allowed by R.C. §
102.03(G), (H), (I), or other provisions of law, to perform the public
servant's official duties, to perform any other act or service in the public
servant's public capacity, for the general performance of the duties of the
public servant's public office or public employment, or as a supplement to
the public servant's public compensation.



      (2)   Additional or greater fees or costs than are allowed by
law to perform the public servant's official duties.



   (B)   No public servant for the public servant's own personal or
business use and no person for the person's own personal or business use or
for the personal or business use of a public servant or party official, shall
solicit or accept anything of value in consideration of either of the
following:



      (1)   Appointing or securing, maintaining, or renewing the
appointment of any person to any public office, employment, or agency.



      (2)   Preferring, or maintaining the status of, any public
employee with respect to compensation, duties, placement, location,
promotion, or other material aspects of employment.



   (C)   No person for the benefit of a political party, campaign
committee, legislative campaign fund, political action committee or political
contributing entity shall coerce any contribution in consideration of either
of the following:



      (1)   Appointing or securing, maintaining, or renewing the
appointment of any person to any public office, employment, or agency.



      (2)   Preferring, or maintaining the status of, any public
employee with respect to compensation, duties, placement, location,
promotion, or other material aspects of employment.



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of soliciting improper
compensation, a misdemeanor of the first degree.



   (E)   A public servant who is convicted of a violation of this
section is disqualified from holding any public office, employment, or
position of trust in this state for a period of seven years from the date of
conviction.



   (F)   Divisions (A), (B), and (C) of this section do not prohibit
any person from making voluntary contributions to a political party, campaign
committee, legislative campaign fund, political action committee or political
contributing entity or prohibit a political party, campaign committee,
legislative campaign fund, political action committee or political
contributing entity from accepting voluntary contributions.



(R.C. § 2921.43)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 136.11  DERELICTION OF DUTY.



   (A)   No law enforcement officer shall negligently do any of the
following:



      (1)   Fail to serve a lawful warrant without delay.



      (2)   Fail to prevent or halt the commission of an offense or
to apprehend an offender, when it is in the law enforcement officer’s power
to do so alone or with available assistance.



   (B)   No law enforcement, ministerial, or judicial officer shall
negligently fail to perform a lawful duty in a criminal case or proceeding.



   (C)   No officer, having charge of a detention facility, shall
negligently do any of the following:



      (1)   Allow the detention facility to become littered or
unsanitary.



      (2)   Fail to provide persons confined in the detention
facility with adequate food, clothing, bedding, shelter, and medical
attention.



      (3)   Fail to control an unruly prisoner, or to prevent
intimidation of or physical harm to a prisoner by another.



      (4)   Allow a prisoner to escape.



      (5)   Fail to observe any lawful and reasonable regulation for
the management of the detention facility.



   (D)   No public official shall recklessly create a deficiency, incur
a liability, or expend a greater sum than is appropriated by the Legislative
Authority for the use in any one year of the department, agency, or
institution with which the public official is connected.



   (E)   No public servant shall recklessly fail to perform a duty
expressly imposed by law with respect to the public servant’s office, or
recklessly do any act expressly forbidden by law with respect to the public
servant’s office.



   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of dereliction of
duty, a misdemeanor of the second degree.



   (G)   Except as otherwise provided by law, a public servant who is a
county treasurer; county auditor; township fiscal officer; city auditor; city
treasurer; village fiscal officer; village clerk-treasurer; village clerk; in
the case of a municipal corporation having a charter that designates an
officer who, by virtue of the charter, has duties and functions similar to
those of the city or village officers referred to in this section, the
officer so designated by the charter; school district treasurer; fiscal
officer of a community school established under R.C. Chapter 3314; treasurer
of a science, technology, engineering, and mathematics school established
under R.C. Chapter 3326; or fiscal officer of a college-preparatory boarding
school established under R.C. Chapter 3328 and is convicted of or pleads
guilty to dereliction of duty is disqualified from holding any public office,
employment, or position of trust in this state for four years following the
date of conviction or of entry of the plea, and is not entitled to hold any
public office until any repayment or restitution required by the court is
satisfied.



   (H)   As used in this section, PUBLIC SERVANT includes the following:



      (1)   An officer or employee of a contractor as defined in
R.C. § 9.08;



      (2)   A fiscal officer employed by the operator of a community
school established under R.C. Chapter 3314 or by the operator of a
college-preparatory boarding school established under R.C. Chapter 3328.



(R.C. § 2921.44)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 136.12  INTERFERING WITH CIVIL RIGHTS.



   (A)   No public servant, under color of his or her office,
employment, or authority, shall knowingly deprive, conspire or attempt to
deprive any person of a constitutional or statutory right.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interfering with
civil rights, a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 2921.45)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 136.13  ILLEGAL CONVEYANCE OF PROHIBITED ITEMS ONTO GROUNDS OF A
DETENTION FACILITY OR OTHER SPECIFIED GOVERNMENTAL FACILITY.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly convey, or attempt to convey, onto
the grounds of a detention facility or of an institution, office building, or
other place that is under the control of the Department of Mental Health and
Addiction Services, the Department of Developmental Disabilities, the
Department of Youth Services, or the Department of Rehabilitation and
Correction, any of the following items:



      (1)   Any deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance, as defined in
R.C. § 2923.11, or any part of or ammunition for use in such deadly weapon
or dangerous ordnance.



      (2)   Any drug of abuse, as defined in R.C. § 3719.011.



      (3)   Any intoxicating liquor, as defined in R.C. § 4301.01.



   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any person who
conveys or attempts to convey an item onto the grounds of a detention
facility or of an institution, office building, or other place under the
control of the Department of Mental Health and Addiction Services, the
Department of Developmental Disabilities, the Department of Youth Services,
or the Department of Rehabilitation and Correction, with written
authorization of the person in charge of the detention facility or the
institution, office building, or other place and in accordance with the
written rules of the detention facility or the institution, office building,
or other place.



   (C)   No person shall knowingly deliver, or attempt to deliver, to
any person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in a
youth services facility, to a prisoner who is temporarily released from
confinement for a work assignment, or to any patient in an institution under
the control of the Department of Mental Health and Addiction Services or the
Department of Developmental Disabilities, any item listed in division (A).



   (D)   No person shall knowingly deliver or attempt to deliver cash
to any person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in
a youth services facility, or to a prisoner who is temporarily released from
confinement for a work assignment.



   (E)   No person shall knowingly deliver, or attempt to deliver, to
any person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in a
youth services facility, or to a prisoner who is temporarily released from
confinement for a work assignment a cellular telephone, two-way radio, or
other electronic communications device.



   (F)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under
division (A)(1) of this section that the weapon or dangerous ordnance in
question was being transported in a motor vehicle for any lawful purpose,
that it was not on the actor's person, and if the weapon or dangerous
ordnance was a firearm, that it was unloaded and was being carried in a
closed package, box or case or in a compartment that can be reached only by
leaving the vehicle.



      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division
(C) of this section that the actor was not otherwise prohibited by law from
delivering the item to the confined person, the child, the prisoner, or the
patient and that either of the following applies:



         (a)   The actor was permitted by the written rules of
the detention facility or the institution, office building, or other place to
deliver the item to the confined person or the patient.



         (b)   The actor was given written authorization by the
person in charge of the detention facility or the institution, office
building, or other place to deliver the item to the confined person or the
patient.



   (G)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) of this section or
commits a violation of division (C) of this section involving any item listed
in division (A)(1) of this section is guilty of illegal conveyance of weapons
onto the grounds of a  specified governmental facility, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(2) of this section or
commits a violation of division (C) of this section involving any drug of
abuse is guilty of illegal conveyance of drugs of abuse onto the grounds of
a  specified governmental facility, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



      (3)   Whoever violates division (A)(3) of this section or
commits a violation of division (C) of this section involving any
intoxicating liquor is guilty of illegal conveyance of intoxicating liquor
onto the grounds of a  specified governmental facility, a misdemeanor of the
second degree.



      (4)   Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty
of illegal conveyance of cash onto the grounds of a detention facility, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (D) of this section
or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, illegal
conveyance of cash onto the grounds of a detention facility is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (5)   Whoever violates division (E) of this section is guilty
of illegal conveyance of a communications device onto the grounds of a
specified governmental facility, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted or pleaded guilty to a violation of
division (E) of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, illegal conveyance of a communications device onto the
grounds of a detention facility is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2921.36)



   (H)   The person in charge of a detention facility shall, on the
grounds of the detention facility, have the same power as a peace officer, as
defined in R.C. § 2935.01, to arrest a person who violates this section.



(R.C. § 2921.37)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Cross-reference:



   Possession of an object indistinguishable from a firearm in a school
safety zone, see § 137.11



   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention, see § 137.12



Statutory reference:



   Conveyance or possession of deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance on
school premises, felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.122



   Conveyance, possession, or control of deadly weapon or dangerous
ordinance in a courthouse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.123



   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention, felony offense, see
R.C. § 2923.131



§ 136.14  FALSE REPORT OF CHILD ABUSE OR NEGLECT.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly make or cause another person to make
a false report under R.C. § 2151.421(B) alleging that any person has
committed an act or omission that resulted in a child being an abused child
as defined in R.C. § 2151.031 or a neglected child as defined in R.C. §
2151.03.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making or causing a
false report of child abuse or child neglect, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.



(R.C. § 2921.14)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 136.15  ASSAULTING POLICE DOG OR HORSE, OR ASSISTANCE DOG.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly cause, or attempt to cause, physical
harm to a police dog or horse in either of the following circumstances:



      (1)   The police dog or horse is assisting a law enforcement
officer in the performance of the officer's official duties at the time the
physical harm is caused or attempted.



      (2)   The police dog or horse is not assisting a law
enforcement officer in the performance of the officer's official duties at
the time the physical harm is caused or attempted, but the offender has
actual knowledge that the dog or horse is a police dog or horse.



   (B)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following:



      (1)   Taunt, torment, or strike a police dog or horse;



      (2)   Throw an object or substance at a police dog or horse;



      (3)   Interfere with or obstruct a police dog or horse, or
interfere with or obstruct a law enforcement officer who is being assisted by
a police dog or horse, in a manner that does any of the following:



         (a)   Inhibits or restricts the law enforcement
officer’s control of the police dog or horse;



         (b)   Deprives the law enforcement officer of control of
the police dog or horse;



         (c)   Releases the police dog or horse from its area of
control;



         (d)   Enters the area of control of the police dog or
horse without the consent of the law enforcement officer, including placing
food or any other object or substance into that area;



         (e)   Inhibits or restricts the ability of the police
dog or horse to assist a law enforcement officer;



      (4)   Engage in any conduct that is likely to cause serious
physical injury or death to a police dog or horse;



      (5)   If the person is the owner, keeper, or harborer of a
dog, fail to reasonably restrain the dog from taunting, tormenting, chasing,
approaching in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or
attempting to bite or otherwise endanger a police dog or horse that at the
time of the conduct is assisting a law enforcement officer in the performance
of the officer’s duties or that the person knows is a police dog or horse.



   (C)   No person shall knowingly cause, or attempt to cause, physical
harm to an assistance dog in either of the following circumstances:



      (1)   The dog is assisting or serving a blind, deaf or hearing
impaired, or mobility impaired person at the time the physical harm is caused
or attempted.



      (2)   The dog is not assisting or serving a blind, deaf or
hearing impaired, or mobility impaired person at the time the physical harm
is caused or attempted, but the offender has actual knowledge that the dog is
an assistance dog.



   (D)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following:



      (1)   Taunt, torment, or strike an assistance dog;



      (2)   Throw an object or substance at an assistance dog;



      (3)   Interfere with or obstruct an assistance dog, or
interfere with or obstruct a blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility
impaired person who is being assisted or served by an assistance dog, in a
manner that does any of the following:



         (a)   Inhibits or restricts the assisted or served
person’s control of the dog;



         (b)   Deprives the assisted or served person of control
of the dog;



         (c)   Releases the dog from its area of control;



         (d)   Enters the area of control of the dog without the
consent of the assisted or served person, including placing food or any other
object or substance into that area;



         (e)   Inhibits or restricts the ability of the dog to
assist the assisted or served person;



      (4)   Engage in any conduct that is likely to cause serious
physical injury or death to an assistance dog;



      (5)   If the person is the owner, keeper, or harborer of a
dog, fail to reasonably restrain the dog from taunting, tormenting, chasing,
approaching in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or
attempting to bite or otherwise endanger an assistance dog that at the time
of the conduct is assisting or serving a blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or
mobility impaired person or that the person knows is an assistance dog.



   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is
guilty of assaulting a police dog or horse. Except as otherwise provided in
this division, assaulting a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the
second degree. If the violation results in physical harm to the police dog or
horse other than death or serious physical harm, assaulting a police dog or
horse is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation results in
serious physical harm to the police dog or horse or results in its death,
assaulting a police dog or horse is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty
of harassing a police dog or horse. Except as otherwise provided this
division, harassing a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. If the violation results in physical harm to the police dog or horse
but does not result in its death or in serious physical harm to it, harassing
a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation
results in serous physical harm to the police dog or horse or results in its
death, harassing a police dog or horse is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



      (3)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty
of assaulting an assistance dog. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, assaulting an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
If the violation results in physical harm to the assistance dog other than
death or serious physical harm, assaulting an assistance dog is a misdemeanor
of the first degree. If the violation results in serious physical harm to the
assistance dog or results in its death, assaulting an assistance dog is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (4)   Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty
of harassing an assistance dog. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, harassing an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
If the violation results in physical harm to the assistance dog but does not
result in the death or in serious physical harm to it, harassing an
assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation results
in serious physical harm to the assistance dog or results in its death,
harassing an assistance dog is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.



      (5)   In addition to any other sanctions or penalty imposed
for the offense under this section, R.C. Chapter 2929 or any other provision
of the Revised Code or this code, whoever violates division (A), (B), (C), or
(D) of this section is responsible for the payment of all of the following:



         (a)   Any veterinary bill or bill for medication
incurred as a result of the violation by the Police Department regarding a
violation of division (A) or (B) of this section or by the blind, deaf or
hearing impaired, or mobility impaired person assisted or served by the
assistance dog regarding a violation of division (C) or (D) of this section;



         (b)   The cost of any damaged equipment that results
from the violation;



         (c)   If the violation did not result in the death of
the police dog or horse or the assistance dog that was the subject of the
violation and if, as a result of that dog or horse being the subject of the
violation, the dog or horse needs further training or retraining to be able
to continue in the capacity of a police dog or horse or an assistance dog,
the cost of any further training or retraining of that dog or horse by a law
enforcement officer or by the blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility
impaired person assisted or served by the assistance dog;



         (d)   If the violation resulted in the death of the
assistance dog that was the subject of the violation or resulted in serious
physical harm to the police dog or horse or the assistance dog that was the
subject of the violation to the extent that the dog or horse needs to be
replaced on either a temporary or a permanent basis, the cost of replacing
that dog or horse and of any further training of a new police dog or horse or
a new assistance dog by a law enforcement officer or by the blind, deaf or
hearing impaired, or mobility impaired person assisted or served by the
assistance dog, which replacement or training is required because of the
death of or the serious physical harm to the dog or horse that was the
subject of the violation.



   (F)   This section does not apply to a licensed veterinarian whose
conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 4741.



   (G)   This section only applies to an offender who knows or should
know at the time of the violation that the police dog or horse or assistance
dog that is the subject of a violation under this section is a police dog or
horse or an assistance dog.



   (H)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      ASSISTANCE DOG, BLIND and MOBILITY IMPAIRED PERSON. Have the same
meaning as in R.C. § 955.011.



      PHYSICAL HARM. Any injury, illness, or other psychological
impairment, regardless of its gravity or duration.



      POLICE DOG OR HORSE. A dog or horse that has been trained and may
be used to assist law enforcement officers in the performance of their
official duties.



      SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM. Any of the following:



         (a)   Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk
of death.



         (b)   Any physical harm that causes permanent maiming or
that involves some temporary, substantial maiming.



         (c)   Any physical harm that causes acute pain of a
duration that results in substantial suffering.



(R.C. § 2921.321)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 136.16  DISCLOSURE OF CONFIDENTIAL PEACE OFFICER INFORMATION.



   (A)   No officer or employee of a law enforcement agency or court,
or of the clerk’s office of any court, shall disclose during the pendency
of any criminal case the home address of any peace officer, parole officer,
prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, correctional employee,
or youth services employee who is a witness or arresting officer in the case.



   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not prohibit a peace
officer, parole officer, prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting
attorney, correctional employee, or youth services employee from disclosing
the peace officer’s, parole officer’s, prosecuting attorney’s,
assistant prosecuting attorney’s, correctional employee’s, or youth
services employee’s own home address, and does not apply to any person who
discloses the home address of a peace officer, parole officer, prosecuting
attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, correctional employee, or youth
services employee pursuant to a court-ordered disclosure under division (C)
of this section.



   (C)   The court in which any criminal case is pending may order the
disclosure of the home address of any peace officer, parole officer,
prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, correctional employee,
or youth services employee who is a witness or arresting officer in the case,
if the court determines after a written request for the disclosure that good
cause exists for disclosing the home address of the peace officer, parole
officer, prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, correctional
employee, or youth services employee.



   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
disclosure of confidential information, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 2921.24)



   (E)   No judge of a court of record, or Mayor presiding over a
Mayor’s Court, shall order a peace officer, parole officer, prosecuting
attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, correctional employee, or youth
services employee who is a witness in a criminal case, to disclose the peace
officer’s, parole officer’s, prosecuting attorney’s, assistant
prosecuting attorney’s, correctional employee’s, or youth services
employee’s home address during the peace officer’s, parole officer’s,
prosecuting attorney’s, assistant prosecuting attorney’s, correctional
employee’s, or youth services employee’s examination in the case unless
the judge or Mayor determines that the defendant has a right to the
disclosure.



   (F)   As used in this section:



      PEACE OFFICER has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01.



      CORRECTIONAL EMPLOYEE and YOUTH SERVICES EMPLOYEE have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 149.43.



(R.C. § 2921.25)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 136.17  INTIMIDATION OF CRIME VICTIM OR WITNESS.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly attempt to intimidate or hinder the
victim of a crime or delinquent act in the filing or prosecution of criminal
charges or a delinquent child action or proceeding, and no person shall
knowingly attempt to intimidate a witness to a criminal or delinquent act by
reason of the person being a witness to that act.



   (B)   No person, knowingly and by force or by unlawful threat of
harm to any person or property or by unlawful threat to commit any offense or
calumny against any person, shall attempt to influence, intimidate, or hinder
any of the following persons:



      (1)   The victim of a crime or delinquent act in the filing or
prosecution of criminal charges or a delinquent child action or proceeding;



      (2)   A witness to a criminal or delinquent act by reason of
the person being a witness to that act;



      (3)   An attorney by reason of the attorney’s involvement in
any criminal or delinquent child action or proceeding.



   (C)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any person who
is attempting to resolve a dispute pertaining to the alleged commission of a
criminal offense, either prior to or subsequent to the filing of a complaint,
indictment, or information by participating in the arbitration, mediation,
compromise, settlement or conciliation of that dispute pursuant to an
authorization for arbitration, mediation, compromise, settlement, or
conciliation of a dispute of that nature that is conferred by any of the
following:



      (1)   A section of the Revised Code.



      (2)   The Rules of Criminal Procedure, the Rules of
Superintendence for Municipal Courts and County Courts, the Rules of
Superintendence for Courts of Common Pleas, or another rule adopted by the
Ohio Supreme Court in accordance with Ohio Constitution, Article IV, Section
5.



      (3)   A local rule of court, including but not limited to a
local rule of court that relates to alternative dispute resolution or other
case management programs and that authorizes the referral of



disputes pertaining to the alleged commission of certain types of criminal
offenses to appropriate and available arbitration, mediation, compromise,
settlement or other conciliation programs.



      (4)   The order of a judge of a municipal court, county court,
or court of common pleas.



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of intimidation of an
attorney, victim or witness in a criminal case.  A violation of division (A)
of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  A violation of
division (B) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.



   (E)   As used in this section, WITNESS means any person who has or
claims to have knowledge concerning a fact or facts concerning a criminal or
delinquent act, whether or not criminal or delinquent child charges are
actually filed.



(R.C. § 2921.04)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Retaliation, felony offense, see R.C. § 2921.05



§ 136.18  USING SHAM LEGAL PROCESS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply:



      LAWFULLY ISSUED.  Adopted, issued, or rendered in accordance
with the United States Constitution, the Constitution of a state, and the
applicable statutes, rules, regulations and ordinances of the United States,
a state, and the political subdivisions of a state.



      POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS.  Municipal corporations, townships,
counties, school districts, and all other bodies corporate and politic that
are organized under state law and are responsible for governmental activities
only in geographical areas smaller than that of a state.



      SHAM LEGAL PROCESS.  An instrument that meets all of the
following conditions:



         (a)   It is not lawfully issued.



         (b)   It purports to do any of the following:



            1.   To be a summons, subpoena, judgment, or order
of a court, a law enforcement officer, or a legislative, executive or
administrative body.



            2.   To assert jurisdiction over or determine the
legal or equitable status, rights, duties, powers, or privileges of any
person or property.



            3.   To require or authorize the search, seizure,
indictment, arrest, trial, or sentencing of any person or property.



         (c)   It is designed to make another person believe that
it is lawfully issued.



      STATE.  A state of the United States, including without
limitation the state legislature, the highest court of the state that has
statewide jurisdiction, the offices of all elected state officers, and all
departments, boards, offices, commissions, agencies, institutions, and other
instrumentalities of the state.  STATE does not include the political
subdivisions of the state.



   (B)   No person shall, knowing the sham legal process to be a sham
legal process, do any of the following:



      (1)   Knowingly issue, display, deliver, distribute, or
otherwise use sham legal process.



      (2)   Knowingly use sham legal process to arrest, detain,
search or seize any person or the property of another person.



      (3)   Knowingly commit or facilitate the commission of an
offense using sham legal process.



      (4)   Knowingly commit a felony by using sham legal process.



   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (B)(1)
or (2) of this section that the use of sham legal process was for a lawful
purpose.



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of using sham legal
process.  A violation of division (B)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.  A violation of division (B)(2) or (B)(3) of this section
is a misdemeanor of the first degree, except that if the purpose of a
violation of division (B)(3) of this section is to commit or facilitate the
commission of a felony, a violation of division (B)(3) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.  A violation of
division (B)(4) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2921.52(A) - (D))  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Civil liability, see R.C. § 2921.52(E)



§ 136.19  MAKING FALSE ALLEGATION OF PEACE OFFICER MISCONDUCT.



   (A)   As used in this section, PEACE OFFICER has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 2935.01.



   (B)   No person shall knowingly file a complaint against a peace
officer that alleges that the peace officer engaged in misconduct in the
performance of the officer’s duties if the person knows that the allegation
is false.



   (C)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
making a false allegation of peace officer misconduct, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.



(R.C. § 2921.15)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 136.20  MISUSE OF 9-1-1 SYSTEM.



   (A)   As used in this section, 9-1-1 SYSTEM means a system through
which individuals can request emergency service using the telephone number
9-1-1.



(R.C. § 128.01(A))



   (B)   No person shall knowingly use the telephone number of a 9-1-1
system established under R.C. Chapter 128 to report an emergency if the
person knows that no emergency exists.



   (C)   No person shall knowingly use a 9-1-1 system for a purpose
other than obtaining emergency service.



   (D)   No person shall disclose or use any information concerning
telephone numbers, addresses, or names obtained from the database that serves
the public safety answering point of a 9-1-1 system established under R.C.
Chapter 128, except for any of the following purposes or under any of the
following circumstances:



      (1)   For the purpose of the 9-1-1 system;



      (2)   For the purpose of responding to an emergency call to an
emergency service provider;



      (3)   In the circumstance of the inadvertent disclosure of
such information due solely to technology of the wireless telephone network
portion of the 9-1-1 system not allowing access to the database to be
restricted to 9-1-1 specific answering lines at a public safety answering
point;



      (4)   In the circumstance of access to a database being given
by a telephone company that is a wireless service provider to a public
utility or municipal utility in handling customer calls in times of public
emergency or service outages. The charge, terms, and conditions for the
disclosure or use of such information for the purpose of such access to a
database shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the Steering Committee;



      (5)   In the circumstance of access to a database given by a
telephone company that is a wireline service provider to a state and local
government in warning of a public emergency, as determined by the Steering
Committee. The charge, terms and conditions for the disclosure or use of that
information for the purpose of access to a database is subject to the
jurisdiction of the Steering Committee.



(R.C. § 128.32(E) - (G))



   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (C) or (D) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.



(R.C. § 128.99(A), (B))



§ 136.21  FAILURE TO DISCLOSE PERSONAL INFORMATION.



   (A)   No person who is in a public place shall refuse to disclose
the person’s name, address, or date of birth, when requested by a law
enforcement officer who reasonably suspects either of the following:



      (1)   The person is committing, has committed, or is about to
commit a criminal offense.



      (2)   The person witnessed any of the following:



         (a)   An offense of violence that would constitute a
felony under the laws of this state;



         (b)   A felony offense that causes or results in, or
creates a substantial risk of, serious physical harm to another person or
property;



         (c)   Any attempt or conspiracy to commit, or complicity
in committing, any offenses identified in division (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(b) of
this section;



         (d)   Any conduct reasonably indicating that any offense
identified in division (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(b) of this section or any attempt,
conspiracy, or complicity described in division (A)(2)(c) of this section has
been, is being, or is about to be committed.



   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
failure to disclose one’s personal information, a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.



   (C)   Nothing in division (A) of this section requires a person to
answer any questions beyond that person’s name, address, or date of birth.
Nothing in division (A) of this section authorizes a law enforcement officer
to arrest a person for not providing any information beyond the person’s
name, address, or date of birth or for refusing to describe the offense
observed.



   (D)   It is not a violation of division (A) of this section to
refuse to answer a question that would reveal a person’s age or date of
birth if age is an element of the crime that the person is suspected of
committing.



(R.C. § 2921.29)



   (E)   No person entering an airport, train station, port, or other
similar critical transportation infrastructure site shall refuse to show
identification when requested by a law enforcement officer when there is a
threat to security and the law enforcement officer is requiring
identification of all persons entering the site.



   (F)   A law enforcement officer may prevent any person who refuses
to show identification when asked under the circumstances described in
division (E) of this section from entering the critical transportation
infrastructure site.



(R.C. § 2909.31)



CHAPTER 137:  WEAPONS CONTROL



Section



   137.01   Definitions



   137.02   Carrying concealed weapons



   137.03   Using weapons while intoxicated



   137.04   Improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle



   137.05   Possessing criminal tools



   137.06   Failure to secure dangerous ordnance



   137.07   Unlawful transactions in weapons



   137.08   Underage purchase of firearm or handgun



   137.09   Discharging firearms



   137.10   License or permit to possess dangerous ordnance



   137.11   Possession of an object indistinguishable from a firearm in
a school safety zone



   137.12   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention



   137.13   Concealed handgun licenses; possession of a revoked or
suspended license; additional restrictions; posting of signs prohibiting
possession



   137.14   Defaced firearms



Cross-reference:



   Conveyance into certain facilities, see § 136.13



   Injury to persons by hunters, see § 135.05



   Injury to property by hunters, see § 131.24



   Using weapons to endanger or damage aircraft or airport operations, see
§ 131.05



§ 137.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACTIVE DUTY. Has the same meaning as defined in 10 U.S.C. § 101.



   ALIEN REGISTRATION NUMBER. The number issued by the United States
Citizenship and Immigration Services Agency that is located on the alien’s
permanent resident card and may also be commonly referred to as the “USCIS
number” or the “alien number”.



   AUTOMATIC FIREARM. Any firearm designed or specially adapted to fire a
succession of cartridges with a single function of the trigger.



   BALLISTIC KNIFE.  A knife with a detachable blade that is propelled by
a spring-operated mechanism.



   CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSE or LICENSE TO CARRY A CONCEALED HANDGUN .



      (1)   Means, subject to division (2) of this definition, a
license or temporary emergency license to carry a concealed handgun issued
under R.C. § 2923.125 or R.C. § 2923.1213 or a license to carry a concealed
handgun issued by another state with which the Attorney General has entered
into a reciprocity agreement under R.C. § 109.69.



      (2)   A reference in any provision of this code to a concealed
handgun license issued under R.C. § 2923.125 or a license to carry a
concealed handgun issued under R.C. § 2923.125 means only a license of the
type that is specified in that section. A reference in any provision of this
Code to a concealed handgun license issued under R.C. § 2923.1213, a license
to carry a concealed handgun issued under R.C. § 2923.1213, or a license to
carry a concealed handgun on a temporary emergency basis means only a license
of the type that is specified in R.C. § 2923.1213. A reference in any
provision of this code to a concealed handgun license issued by another state
or a license to carry a concealed handgun issued by another state means only
a license issued by another state with which the Attorney General has entered
into a reciprocity agreement under R.C. § 109.69.



   DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.



      (1)   Any of the following, except as provided in division (2)
of this definition:



         (a)   Any automatic or sawed-off firearm, zip-gun, or
ballistic knife.



         (b)   Any explosive device or incendiary device.



         (c)   Nitroglycerin, nitrocellulose, nitrostarch, PETN,
cyclonite, TNT, picric acid, and other high explosives; amatol, tritonal,
tetrytol, pentolite, pecretol, cyclotol, and other high explosive
compositions; plastic explosives; dynamite, blasting gelatin, gelatin
dynamite, sensitized ammonium nitrate, liquid-oxygen blasting explosives,
blasting powder, and other blasting agents; and any other explosive substance
having sufficient brisance or power to be particularly suitable for use as a
military explosive, or for use in mining, quarrying, excavating, or
demolitions.



         (d)   Any firearm, rocket launcher, mortar, artillery
piece, grenade, mine, bomb, torpedo, or similar weapon, designed and
manufactured for military purposes, and the ammunition for that weapon.



         (e)   Any firearm muffler or suppressor.



         (f)    Any combination of parts that is intended by the
owner for use in converting any firearm or other device into a dangerous
ordnance.



         (g)   Any firearm with an overall length of at least 26
inches that is approved for sale by the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco,
Firearms, and Explosives under the "Gun Control Act of 1968", 82 Stat. 1213,
18 U.S.C. § 921(a)(3), but that is found by the Bureau not to be regulated
under the "National Firearms Act", 68A Stat. 725 (1934), 26 U.S.C. § 5845(a).



      (2)   DANGEROUS ORDNANCE does not include any of the following:



         (a)   Any firearm, including a military weapon and the
ammunition for that weapon, and regardless of its actual age, that employs a
percussion cap or other obsolete ignition system, or that is designed and
safe for use only with black powder.



         (b)   Any pistol, rifle, or shotgun, designed or
suitable for sporting purposes, including a military weapon as issued or as
modified, and the ammunition for that weapon, unless the firearm is an
automatic or sawed-off firearm.



         (c)   Any cannon or other artillery piece that,
regardless of its actual age, is of a type in accepted use prior to 1887, has
no mechanical, hydraulic, pneumatic, or other system for absorbing recoil and
returning the tube into battery without displacing the carriage, and is
designed and safe for use only with black powder.



         (d)   Black powder, priming quills, and percussion caps
possessed and lawfully used to fire a cannon of a type defined in division
(2)(c) of this definition during displays, celebrations, organized matches or
shoots, and target practice, and smokeless and black powder, primers, and
percussion caps possessed and lawfully used as a propellant or ignition
device in small-arms or small-arms ammunition.



         (e)   Dangerous ordnance that is inoperable or inert and
cannot readily be rendered operable or activated, and that is kept as a
trophy, souvenir, curio, or museum piece.



         (f)   Any device that is expressly excepted from the
definition of a destructive device pursuant to the Gun Control Act of 1968,
18 U.S.C. 921(a)(4), as amended, and regulations issued under that act.



   DEADLY WEAPON.  Any instrument, device, or thing capable of inflicting
death, and designed or specially adapted for use as a weapon, or possessed,
carried, or used as a weapon.



   EXPLOSIVE.  Any chemical compound, mixture, or device, the primary or
common purpose of which is to function by explosion.  EXPLOSIVE includes all
materials that have been classified as division 1.1, division 1.2, division
1.3, or division 1.4 explosives by the United States Department of
Transportation in its regulations and includes, but is not limited to,
dynamite, black powder, pellet powders, initiating explosives, blasting caps,
electric blasting caps, safety fuses, fuse igniters, squibs, cordeau detonant
fuses, instantaneous fuses, and igniter cords and igniters.  EXPLOSIVES does
not include “fireworks,” as defined in R.C. § 3743.01, or any substance
or material otherwise meeting the definitions of explosive set forth in this
section that is manufactured, sold, possessed, transported, stored, or used
in any activity described in R.C. § 3743.80, provided the activity is
conducted in accordance with all applicable laws, rules, and regulations,
including, but not limited to, the provisions of R.C. § 3743.80 and the
rules of the Fire Marshal adopted pursuant to R.C. § 3737.82.



   EXPLOSIVE DEVICE.  Any device designed or specially adapted to cause
physical harm to persons or property by means of an explosion, and consisting
of an explosive substance or agency and a means to detonate it.  EXPLOSIVE
DEVICE includes without limitation any bomb, any explosive demolition device,
any blasting cap or detonator containing an explosive charge, and any
pressure vessel that has been knowingly tampered with or arranged so as to
explode.



   FIREARM.



      (1)   Any deadly weapon capable of expelling or propelling one
or more projectiles by the action of an explosive or combustible
propellant.  FIREARM includes an unloaded firearm, and any firearm that is
inoperable but that can readily be rendered operable.



      (2)   When determining whether a firearm is capable of
expelling or propelling one or more projectiles by the action of an explosive
or combustible propellant, the trier of fact may rely upon circumstantial
evidence, including, but not limited to, the representations and actions of
the individual exercising control over the firearm.



   HANDGUN.  Means any of the following:



      (1)   Any firearm that has a short stock and is designed to be
held and fired by the use of a single hand;



      (2)   Any combination of parts from which a firearm of a type
described in division (1) of this definition can be assembled.



   INCENDIARY DEVICE.  Any firebomb, and any device designed or specially
adapted to cause physical harm to persons or property by means of fire, and
consisting of an incendiary substance or agent and a means to ignite it.



   MISDEMEANOR PUNISHABLE BY IMPRISONMENT FOR A TERM EXCEEDING ONE YEAR.
The phrase does not include any of the following:



      (1)   Any federal or state offense pertaining to antitrust
violations, unfair trade practices, restraints of trade, or other similar
offenses relating to the regulation of business practices;



      (2)   Any misdemeanor offense punishable by a term of
imprisonment of two years or less.



   SAWED-OFF FIREARM.  A shotgun with a barrel less than 18 inches long,
or a rifle with a barrel less than 16 inches long, or a shotgun or rifle less
than 26 inches long overall.



   SEMI-AUTOMATIC FIREARM.  A shotgun with a barrel less than 18 inches
long, or a rifle with a barrel less than 16 inches long, or a shotgun or
rifle less than 26 inches long overall. “Sawed-off firearm” does not
include any firearm with an overall length of at least 26 inches that is
approved for sale by the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and
Explosives under the "Gun Control Act of 1968", 82 Stat. 1213, 18 U.S.C. §
921(a)(3), but that is found by the Bureau not to be regulated under the
"National Firearms Act", 68A Stat. 725 (1934), 26 U.S.C. § 5845(a).



   VALID CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSE or VALID LICENSE TO CARRY A CONCEALED
HANDGUN. A concealed handgun license that is currently valid, that is not
under a suspension under R.C. § 2923.128(A)(1), under R.C. § 2923.1213, or
under a suspension provision of the state other than this state in which the
license was issued, and that has not been revoked under R.C. §
2923.128(B)(1), under R.C. § 2923.1213, or under a revocation provision of
the state other than this state in which the license was issued.



   ZIP-GUN.  Any of the following:



      (1)   Any firearm of crude and extemporized manufacture.



      (2)   Any device, including without limitation a starter's
pistol, not designed as a firearm, but that is specially adapted for use as a
firearm.



      (3)   Any industrial tool, signalling device, or safety
device, not designed as a firearm, but that as designed is capable of use as
such, when possessed, carried, or used as a firearm.



(R.C. § 2923.11)



§ 137.02  CARRYING CONCEALED WEAPONS.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly carry or have, concealed on the
person's person or concealed ready at hand, any of the following:



      (1)   A deadly weapon other than a handgun;



      (2)   A handgun other than a dangerous ordnance;



      (3)   A dangerous ordnance.



   (B)   No person who has been issued a concealed handgun license
shall do any of the following:



      (1)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose,
and who is carrying a concealed handgun, shall fail to promptly inform any
law enforcement officer approaches the person after the person has been
stopped that the person has been issued a concealed handgun license and that
the person then is carrying a concealed handgun;



      (2)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose
and is carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to keep the person’s
hands in plain sight at any time after any law enforcement officer begins
approaching the person while stopped and before the law enforcement officer
leaves, unless the failure is pursuant to and in accordance with directions
given by a law enforcement officer;



      (3)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose,
if the person is carrying a concealed handgun, and if the person is
approached by any law enforcement officer while stopped, knowingly remove or
attempt to remove the loaded handgun from the holster, pocket, or other place
in which the person is carrying it, knowingly grasp or hold the loaded
handgun, or knowingly have contact with the loaded handgun by touching it
with the person’s hands or fingers at any time after the law enforcement
officer begins approaching and before the law enforcement officer leaves,
unless the person removes, attempts to remove, grasps, holds, or has contact
with the loaded handgun pursuant to and in accordance with directions given
by the law enforcement officer;



      (4)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose
and is carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly disregard or fail to comply
with any lawful order of any law enforcement officer given while the person
is stopped, including, but not limited to, a specific order to the person to
keep the person’s hands in plain sight.



   (C)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:



         (a)   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any
other state or the United States, or to a law enforcement officer, who is
authorized to carry concealed weapons or dangerous ordnance or is authorized
to carry handguns and is acting within the scope of the officer’s,
agent’s, or employee’s duties;



         (b)   Any person who is employed in this state, who is
authorized to carry concealed weapons or dangerous ordnance or is authorized
to carry handguns, and who is subject to and in compliance with the
requirements of R.C. § 109.801, unless the appointing authority of the
person has expressly specified that the exemption provided in this division
(C)(1)(b) does not apply to the person.



         (c)   A person’s transportation or storage of a
firearm, other than a firearm described in R.C. § 2923.11(G) to (M), in a
motor vehicle for any lawful purpose if the firearm is not on the actor’s
person;



         (d)   A person’s storage or possession of a firearm,
other than a firearm described in R.C. § 2923.11(G) to (M), in the actor’s
own home for any lawful purpose.



      (2)   Division (A)(2) of this section does not apply to any
person who, at the time of the alleged carrying or possession of a handgun,
either is carrying a valid concealed handgun license or is an active duty
member of the armed forces of the United States and is carrying a valid
military identification card and documentation of successful completion of
firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements described
in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), unless the person knowingly is in a place
described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).



   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(1)
of this section of carrying or having control of a weapon other than a
handgun and other than a dangerous ordnance, that the actor was not otherwise
prohibited by law from having the weapon, and that any of the following
applies:



      (1)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the
actor for defensive purposes, while the actor was engaged in or was going to
or from the actor's lawful business or occupation, which business or
occupation was of a character or was necessarily carried on in a manner or at
a time or place as to render the actor particularly susceptible to criminal
attack, such as would justify a prudent person in going armed.



      (2)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the
actor for defensive purposes, while the actor was engaged in a lawful
activity and had reasonable cause to fear a criminal attack upon the actor, a
member of the actor's family, or the actor's home, such as would justify a
prudent person in going armed.



      (3)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the
actor for any lawful purpose and while in the actor's own home.



   (E)   No person who is charged with a violation of this section
shall be required to obtain a concealed handgun license as a condition for
the dismissal of the charge.



   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of carrying
concealed weapons. Except as otherwise provided in this division or divisions
(F)(2), (F)(6), and (F)(7) of this section, carrying concealed weapons in
violation of division (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. Except as otherwise provided in this division or divisions (F)(2),
(F)(6), and (F)(7) of this section, if the offender previously has been
convicted of a violation of this section or any substantially equivalent
state law or municipal ordinance or of any offense of violence, if the weapon
involved is a firearm that is either loaded or for which the offender has
ammunition ready at hand, or if the weapon involved is dangerous ordnance,
carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (A) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. Except as otherwise
provided in divisions (F)(2), (F)(6), and (F)(7) of this section if the
offense is committed aboard an aircraft, or with purpose to carry a concealed
weapon aboard an aircraft, regardless of the weapon involved, carrying
concealed weapons in violation of division (A) of this section is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (2)   Except as provided in division (F)(6) of this section,
if a person being arrested for a violation of division (A)(2) of this section
promptly produces a valid concealed handgun license, and if at the time of
the violation the person was not knowingly in a place described in R.C. §
2923.126(B), the officer shall not arrest the person for a violation of that
division. If the person is not able to promptly produce any concealed handgun
license and if the person is not in a place described in that section, the
officer may arrest the person for a violation of that division, and the
offender shall be punished as follows:



         (a)   The offender shall be guilty of a minor
misdemeanor if both of the following apply:



            1.   Within 10 days after the arrest, the offender
presents a concealed handgun license, which license was valid at the time of
the arrest to the law enforcement agency that employs the arresting officer.



            2.   At the time of the arrest, the offender was
not knowingly in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).



         (b)   The offender shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be fined $500 if all of the following apply:



            1.   The offender previously had been issued a
license to carry a concealed handgun license, and that license expired within
the two years immediately preceding the arrest.



            2.   Within 45 days after the arrest, the offender
presents a concealed handgun license to the law enforcement agency that
employed the arresting officer, and the offender waives in writing the
offender's right to a speedy trial on the charge of the violation that is
provided in R.C. § 2945.71.



            3.   At the time of the commission of the offense,
the offender was not knowingly in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).



         (c)   If divisions (F)(2)(a) and (F)(2)(b) and (F)(6) of
this section do not apply, the offender shall be punished under division
(F)(1) or (F)(7) of this section.



      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, carrying
concealed weapons in violation of division (B)(1) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree, and, in addition to any other penalty or
sanction imposed for a violation of division (B)(1) of this section, the
offender’s concealed handgun license shall be suspended pursuant to R.C. §
2923.128(A)(2).  If, at the time of the stop of the offender for a law
enforcement purpose that was the basis of the violation, any law enforcement
officer involved with the stop had actual knowledge that the offender has
been issued a concealed handgun license, carrying concealed weapons in
violation of division (B)(1) of this section is a minor misdemeanor, and the
offender’s concealed handgun license shall not be suspended pursuant to
R.C. § 2923.128(A)(2).



      (4)   Carrying concealed weapons in violation of division
(B)(2) or (B)(4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
violation of division (B)(2) or (B)(4) of this section or any substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. In addition to any other penalty or sanction imposed
for a misdemeanor violation of division (B)(2) or (B)(4) of this section, the
offender’s concealed handgun license shall be suspended pursuant to R.C. §
2923.128(A)(2).



      (5)   Carrying concealed weapons in violation of division
(B)(3) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.



      (6)   If a person being arrested for a violation of division
(A)(2) of this section is an active duty m ember of the armed forces of the
United States and is carrying a valid military identification card and
documentation of successful completion of firearms training that meets or
exceeds the training requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), and if
at the time of the violation the person was not knowingly in a place
described in R.C. 2923.126(B), the officer shall not arrest the person for a
violation of that division. If the person is not able to promptly produce a
valid military identification card and documentation of successful completion
of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1) and if the person is not in a place
described in R.C. § 2923.126(B), the officer shall issue a citation and the
offender shall be assessed a civil penalty of not more than $500. The
citation shall be automatically dismissed and the civil penalty shall not be
assessed if both of the following apply:



         (a)   Within ten days after the issuance of the
citation, the offender presents a valid military identification card and
documentation of successful completion of firearms training that meets or
exceeds the training requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), which
were both valid at the time of the issuance of the citation to the law
enforcement agency that employs the citing officer.



         (b)   At the time of the citation, the offender was not
knowingly in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).



      (7)   If a person being arrested for a violation of division
(A)(2) of this section is knowingly in a place described in R.C. §
2923.126(B)(5) and is not authorized to carry a handgun or have a handgun
concealed on the person’s person or concealed ready at hand under that
division, the penalty shall be as follows:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if
the person produces a valid concealed handgun license within ten days after
the arrest and has not previously been convicted or pleaded guilty to a
violation of division (A)(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent
state law or municipal ordinance, the person is guilty of a minor misdemeanor;



         (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if
the person has previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation
of division (A)(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law
or municipal ordinance, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree;



         (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if
the person has previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two
violations of division (A)(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent
state law or municipal ordinance, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the third degree;



         (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if
the person has previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or
more violations of division (A)(2) of this section or any substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or convicted of or pleaded
guilty to any offense of violence, if the weapon involved is a firearm that
is either loaded or for which the offender has ammunition ready at hand, or
if the weapon involved is a dangerous ordnance, the person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree.



   (G)   If a law enforcement officer stops a person to question the
person regarding a possible violation of this section, for a traffic stop, or
for any other law enforcement purpose, if the person surrenders a firearm to
the officer, either voluntarily or pursuant to a request or demand of the
officer, and if the officer does not charge the person with a violation of
this section or arrest the person for any offense, the person is not
otherwise prohibited by law from possessing the firearm, and the firearm is
not contraband, the officer shall return the firearm to the person at the
termination of the stop.  If a court orders a law enforcement officer to
return a firearm to a person pursuant to the requirement set forth in this
division, R.C. § 2923.163(B) applies.



(R.C. § 2923.12)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Conveyance or possession of deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance on
school premises, felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.122



   Conveyance, possession, or control of deadly weapon or dangerous
ordinance in a courthouse,  felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.123



   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention, felony offense, see
R.C. § 2923.131



   Possession of firearm in liquor permit premises, felony offense, see
R.C. § 2923.121



§ 137.03  USING WEAPONS WHILE INTOXICATED.



   (A)   No person, while under the influence of alcohol or any drug of
abuse, shall carry or use any firearm or dangerous ordnance.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of using weapons while
intoxicated, a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 2923.15)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 137.04  IMPROPERLY HANDLING FIREARMS IN A MOTOR VEHICLE.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly discharge a firearm while in or on a
motor vehicle.



   (B)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a loaded firearm
in a motor vehicle in such a manner that the firearm is accessible to the
operator or any passenger without leaving the vehicle.



   (C)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a firearm in a
motor vehicle, unless the person may lawfully possess that firearm under
applicable law of this state or the United States, the firearm is unloaded,
and the firearm is carried in one of the following ways:



      (1)   In a closed package, box, or case.



      (2)   In a compartment that can be reached only by leaving the
vehicle.



      (3)   In plain sight and secured in a rack or holder made for
the purpose.



      (4)   If the firearm is at least 24 inches in overall length
as measured from the muzzle to the part of the stock furthest from the muzzle
and if the barrel is at least 18 inches in length, either in plain sight with
the action open or the weapon stripped, or, if the firearm is of a type on
which the action will not stay open or which cannot easily be stripped, in
plain sight.



   (D)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a loaded handgun
in a motor vehicle if, at the time of that transportation or possession, any
of the following applies:



      (1)   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of
abuse, or a combination of them.



      (2)   The person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath,
or urine contains a concentration of alcohol, a listed controlled substance,
or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance prohibited for persons
operating a vehicle, as specified in R.C. § 4511.19(A), regardless of
whether the person at the time of the transportation or possession as
described in this division is the operator of or a passenger in the motor
vehicle.



   (E)   No person who has been issued a concealed handgun license or
who is an active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is
carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training
requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), who is the driver or an
occupant of a motor vehicle that is stopped as a result of a traffic stop or
a stop for another law enforcement purpose or is the driver or an occupant of
a commercial motor vehicle that is stopped by an employee of the motor
carrier enforcement unit for the purposes defined in R.C. § 5503.34, and who
is transporting or has a loaded handgun in the motor vehicle or commercial
motor vehicle in any manner, shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Fail to promptly inform any law enforcement officer who
approaches the vehicle while stopped that the person has been issued a
concealed handgun license or is authorized to carry a concealed handgun as an
active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and that the
person then possesses or has a loaded handgun in the motor vehicle;



      (2)   Fail to promptly inform the employee of the unit who
approaches the vehicle while stopped that the person has been issued a
concealed handgun license or is authorized to carry a concealed handgun as an
active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and that the
person then possesses or has a loaded handgun in the commercial motor vehicle;



      (3)   Knowingly fail to remain in the motor vehicle while
stopped, or knowingly fail to keep the person’s hands in plain sight at any
time after any law enforcement officer begins approaching the person while
stopped and before the law enforcement officer leaves, unless the failure is
pursuant to and in accordance with directions given by a law enforcement
officer;



      (4)   Knowingly have contact with the loaded handgun by
touching it with the person’s hands or fingers in the motor vehicle at any
time after the law enforcement officer begins approaching and before the law
enforcement officer leaves, unless the person has contact with the loaded
handgun pursuant to and in accordance with directions given by the law
enforcement officer.



      (5)   Knowingly disregard or fail to comply with any lawful
order of any law enforcement officer given while the motor vehicle is
stopped, including but not limited to a specific order to the person to keep
the person’s hands in plain sight.



   (F)   (1)   Divisions (A), (B), (C), and (E) of this section do
not apply to any of the following:



         (a)   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any
other state or the United States, or a law enforcement officer, when
authorized to carry or have loaded or accessible firearms in motor vehicles
and acting within the scope of the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s
duties;



         (b)   Any person who is employed in this state, who is
authorized to carry or have loaded or accessible firearms in motor vehicles,
and who is subject to and in compliance with the requirements of R.C. §
109.801, unless the appointing authority of the person has expressly
specified that the exemption provided in this division (F)(1)(b) does not
apply to the person.



      (2)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to a person
if all of the following circumstances apply:



         (a)   The person discharges a firearm from a motor
vehicle at a coyote or groundhog, the discharge is not during the deer gun
hunting season as set by the Chief of the Division of Wildlife of the
Department of Natural Resources, and the discharge at the coyote or
groundhog, but for the operation of this section, is lawful.



         (b)   The motor vehicle from which the person discharges
the firearm is on real property that is located in an unincorporated area of
a township and that is either zoned for agriculture or is used for
agriculture.



         (c)   The person owns the real property described in
division (F)(2)(b) of this section, is the spouse or a child of another
person who owns that real property, is a tenant of another person who owns
that real property, or is the spouse or a child of a tenant of another person
who owns that real property.



         (d)   The person does not discharge the firearm in any
of the following manners:



            1.   While under the influence of alcohol, a drug
of abuse, or alcohol and a drug of abuse;



            2.   In the direction of a street, highway or
other public or private property used by the public for vehicular traffic or
parking;



            3.   At or into an occupied structure that is a
permanent or temporary habitation;



            4.   In the commission of any violation of law,
including but not limited to a felony that includes, as an essential element,
purposely or knowingly causing or attempting to cause the death of or
physical harm to another and that was committed by discharging a firearm from
a motor vehicle.



      (3)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to a person
if all of the following apply:



         (a)   The person possesses a valid all-purpose vehicle
permit issued under R.C. § 1533.103 by the Chief of the Division of Wildlife.



         (b)   The person discharges a firearm at a wild
quadruped or game bird as defined in R.C. § 1531.01 during the open hunting
season for the applicable wild quadruped or game bird.



         (c)   The person discharges a firearm from a stationary
all-purpose vehicle as defined in R.C. § 1531.01 from private or publicly
owned lands or from a motor vehicle that is parked on a road that is owned or
administered by the Division of Wildlife.



         (d)   The person does not discharge the firearm in any
of the following manners:



            1.   While under the influence of alcohol, a drug
of abuse, or alcohol and a drug of abuse;



            2.   In the direction of a street, a highway, or
other public or private property that is used by the public for vehicular
traffic or parking;



            3.   At or into an occupied structure that is a
permanent or temporary habitation;



            4.   In the commission of any violation of law,
including, but not limited to, a felony that includes, as an essential
element, purposely or knowingly causing or attempting to cause the death of
or physical harm to another  and that was committed by discharging a firearm
from a motor vehicle.



      (4)   Divisions (B) and (C) of this section do not apply to a
person if all of the following circumstances apply:



         (a)   At the time of the alleged violation of either of
those divisions, the person is the operator of or a passenger in a motor
vehicle.



         (b)   The motor vehicle is on real property that is
located in an unincorporated area of a township and that is either zoned for
agriculture or is used for agriculture.



         (c)   The person owns the real property described in
division (F)(4)(b) of this section, is the spouse or a child of another
person who owns that real property, is a tenant of another person who owns
that real property, or is the spouse or a child of a tenant of another person
who owns that real property.



         (d)   The person, prior to arriving at the real property
described in division (F)(4)(b) of this section, did not transport or possess
a firearm in the motor vehicle in a manner prohibited by division (B) or (C)
of this section while the motor vehicle was being operated on a street,
highway or other public or private property used by the public for vehicular
traffic or parking.



      (5)   Divisions (B) and (C) of this section do not apply to a
person who transports or possesses a handgun in a motor vehicle if, at the
time of that transportation or possession, both of the following apply:



         (a)   The person transporting or possessing the handgun
is either carrying a valid concealed handgun license or is an active duty
member of the armed forces of the United States and is carrying a valid
military identification card and documentation of successful completion of
firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements described
in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1).



         (b)   The person transporting or possessing the handgun
is not knowingly in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).



      (6)   Divisions (B) and (C) of this section do not apply to a
person if all of the following apply:



         (a)   The person possesses a valid all-purpose vehicle
permit issued under R.C. § 1533.103 by the Chief of the Division of Wildlife.



         (b)   The person is on or in an all-purpose vehicle as
defined in R.C. § 1531.01 or a motor vehicle during the open hunting season
for a wild quadruped or game bird.



         (c)   The person is on or in an all-purpose vehicle as
defined in R.C. § 1531.01 on private or publicly owned lands or on or in a
motor vehicle that is parked on a road that is owned or administered by the
Division of Wildlife.



   (G)   (1)   The affirmative defenses authorized in R.C. §
2923.12(D)(1) and (D)(2) are affirmative defenses to a charge under division
(B) or (C) of this section that involves a firearm other than a handgun.



      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division
(B) or (C) of this section of improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle
that the actor transported or had the firearm in the motor vehicle for any
lawful purpose and while the motor vehicle was on the actor's own property,
provided that this affirmative defense is not available unless the person,
immediately prior to arriving at the actor's own property, did not transport
or possess the firearm in a motor vehicle in a manner prohibited by division
(B) or (C) of this section while the motor vehicle was being operated on a
street, highway, or other public or private property used by the public for
vehicular traffic.



   (H)   (1)   No person who is charged with a violation of division
(B), (C), or (D) of this section shall be required to obtain a concealed
handgun license as a condition for the dismissal of the charge.



      (2)   (a)   If a person is convicted of, was convicted of,
pleads guilty to, or has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (E) of
this section as it existed prior to September 30, 2011 and if the conduct
that was the basis of the violation no longer would be a violation of
division (E) of this section on or after September 30, 2011, the person may
file an application under R.C. § 2953.37 requesting the expungement of the
record of conviction.



         (b)   If a person is convicted of, was convicted of,
pleads guilty to, or has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (B) or (C)
of this section as the division existed prior to September 30, 2011 and if
the conduct that was the basis of the violation no longer would be a
violation of division (B) or (C) of this section on or after September 30,
2011 due to the application of division (F)(5) of this section as it exists
on and after September 30, 2011, the person may file an application under
R.C. § 2953.37 requesting the expungement of the record of conviction.



   (I)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of improperly handling
firearms in a motor vehicle. Violation of division (A) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. Violation of division
(C) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. A violation of
division (D) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law and, if the loaded handgun is concealed on the person’s person,
it is also a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, a violation of division (E)(1) or (E)(2)
of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree, and, in addition to any
other penalty or sanction imposed for the violation, the offender’s
concealed handgun license shall be suspended pursuant to R.C. §
2923.128(A)(2). If at the time of the stop of the offender for a traffic
stop, for another law enforcement purpose, or for a purpose defined in R.C.
§ 5503.34 that was the basis of the violation any law enforcement officer
involved with the stop or the employee of the motor carrier enforcement unit
who made the stop had actual knowledge of the offender’s status as a
licensee, a violation of division (E)(1) or (E)(2) of this section is a minor
misdemeanor, and the offender’s concealed handgun license shall not be
suspended pursuant to R.C. § 2923.128(A)(2). A violation of division (E)(4)
of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. A
violation of division (E)(3) or (E)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree or, if the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a violation of division (E)(3) or (E)(5) of this section or
any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. In addition to any other penalty or
sanction imposed for a misdemeanor violation of division (E)(3) or (E)(5) of
this section, the offender’s concealed handgun license shall be suspended
pursuant to R.C. § 2923.128(A)(2). A violation of division (B) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



   (J)   If a law enforcement officer stops a motor vehicle for a
traffic stop or any other purpose, if any person in the motor vehicle
surrenders a firearm to the officer, either voluntarily or pursuant to a
request or demand of the officer, and if the officer does not charge the
person with a violation of this section or arrest the person for any offense,
the person is not otherwise prohibited by law from possessing the firearm,
and the firearm is not contraband, the officer shall return the firearm to
the person at the termination of the stop.  If a court orders a law
enforcement officer to return a firearm to a person pursuant to the
requirement set forth in this division, R.C. § 2923.163(B) applies.



   (K)   As used in this section:



      AGRICULTURE has the same meaning as in R.C. § 519.01.



      COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE has the same meaning as in R.C. §
4506.25(A).



      MOTOR CARRIER ENFORCEMENT UNIT means the Motor Carrier
Enforcement Unit in the Department of Public Safety, Division of State
Highway Patrol, that is created by R.C. § 5503.34.



      MOTOR VEHICLE, STREET and HIGHWAY have the same meaning as in
R.C. § 4511.01.



      OCCUPIED STRUCTURE has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.01.



      TENANT has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1531.01.



      UNLOADED.



         (a)   With respect to a firearm other than a firearm
described in division (d) of this definition, means that no ammunition is in
the firearm in question, no magazine or speed loader containing ammunition is
inserted into the firearm, and one of the following applies:



            1.   There is no ammunition in a magazine or speed
loader that is in the vehicle in question and that may be used with the
firearm in question.



            2.   Any magazine or speed loader that contains
ammunition and that may be used with the firearm in question is stored in a
compartment within the vehicle in question that cannot be accessed without
leaving the vehicle or is stored in a container that provides complete and
separate enclosure.



         (b)   For the purposes of division (a)2. of this
definition, a “container that provides complete and separate enclosure”
includes, but is not limited to, any of the following:



            1.   A package, box, or case with multiple
compartments, as long as the loaded magazine or speed loader and the firearm
in question either are in separate compartments within the package, box, or
case, or, if they are in the same compartment, the magazine or speed loader
is contained within a separate enclosure in that compartment that does not
contain the firearm and that closes using a snap, button, buckle, zipper,
hook and loop closing mechanism, or other fastener that must be opened to
access the contents or the firearm is contained within a separate enclosure
of that nature in that compartment that does not contain the magazine or
speed loader;



            2.   A pocket or other enclosure on the person of
the person in question that closes using a snap, button, buckle, zipper, hook
and loop closing mechanism, or other fastener that must be opened to access
the contents.



         (c)   For the purposes of divisions (a) and (b) of this
definition, ammunition held in stripper-clips or in en-bloc clips is not
considered ammunition that is loaded into a magazine or speed loader.



         (d)   “Unloaded” means, with respect to a firearm
employing a percussion cap, flintlock, or other obsolete ignition system,
when the weapon is uncapped or when the priming charge is removed from the
pan.



   (L)   Divisions (a) and (b) of the definition of “unloaded” in
division (K) of this section do not affect the authority of a person who is
carrying a valid concealed handgun license to have one or more magazines or
speed loaders containing ammunition anywhere in a vehicle, without being
transported as described in those divisions, as long as no ammunition is in a
firearm, other than a handgun, in the vehicle other than as permitted under
any other provision of this chapter. A person who is carrying a valid
concealed handgun license may have one or more magazines or speed loaders
containing ammunition anywhere in a vehicle without further restriction, as
long as no ammunition is in a firearm, other than a handgun, in the vehicle
other than as permitted under any provision of this chapter.



Statutory reference:



   Return of surrendered firearms by law enforcement, see R.C. § 2923.163



§ 137.05  POSSESSING CRIMINAL TOOLS.



   (A)   No person shall possess or have under his or her control any
substance, device, instrument, or article, with purpose to use it criminally.



   (B)   Each of the following constitutes prima facie evidence of
criminal purpose:



      (1)   Possession or control of any dangerous ordnance, or the
materials or parts for making a dangerous ordnance, in the absence of
circumstances indicating the dangerous ordnance, materials or parts are
intended for a legitimate use.



      (2)   Possession or control of any substance, device,
instrument, or article designed or specially adapted for criminal use.



      (3)   Possession or control of any substance, device,
instrument, or article commonly used for criminal purposes, under
circumstances indicating the item is intended for criminal use.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing criminal
tools.  Except as otherwise provided in this division, possessing criminal
tools is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the circumstances indicate
that the substance, device, instrument, or article involved in the offense
was intended for use in the commission of a felony, possessing criminal tools
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2923.24)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 137.06  FAILURE TO SECURE DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.



   (A)   No person, in acquiring, possessing, carrying, or using any
dangerous ordnance, shall negligently fail to take proper precautions:



      (1)   To secure the dangerous ordnance against theft, or
against its acquisition or use by any unauthorized or incompetent person.



      (2)   To insure the safety of persons and property.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to a secure
dangerous ordnance, a misdemeanor of the second degree.



(R.C. § 2923.19)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 137.07  UNLAWFUL TRANSACTIONS IN WEAPONS.



   (A)    No person shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Recklessly sell, lend, give or furnish any firearm to
any person prohibited by R.C. § 2923.13 or 2923.15, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, from acquiring or using any firearm, or
recklessly sell, lend, give or furnish any dangerous ordnance to any person
prohibited by R.C. § 2923.13, 2923.15 or 2923.17, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, from acquiring or using any dangerous
ordnance;



      (2)   Possess any firearm or dangerous ordnance with purpose
to dispose of it in violation of division (A)(1) of this section;



      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B) of this
section, knowingly solicit, persuade, encourage, or entice a federally
licensed firearms dealer or private seller to transfer a firearm or
ammunition to any person in a manner prohibited by state or federal law;



      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B) of this
section, with an intent to deceive, knowingly provide materially false
information to a federally licensed firearms dealer or private seller;



      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B) of this
section, knowingly procure, solicit, persuade, encourage, or entice a person
to act in violation of division (A)(3) or (A)(4) of this section;



      (6)   Manufacture, possess for sale, sell, or furnish to any
person other than a law enforcement agency for authorized use in police work,
any brass knuckles, cestus, billy, blackjack, sandbag, switchblade knife,
springblade knife, gravity knife, or similar weapon;



      (7)   When transferring any dangerous ordnance to another,
negligently fail to require the transferee to exhibit such identification,
license, or permit showing the transferee to be authorized to acquire
dangerous ordnance pursuant to R.C. § 2923.17, or negligently fail to take a
complete record of the transaction and forthwith forward a copy of the record
to the sheriff of the county or Safety Director or Police Chief of the
municipality where the transaction takes place;



      (8)   Knowingly fail to report to law enforcement authorities
forthwith the loss or theft of any firearm or dangerous ordnance in the
person's possession and under his or her control.



   (B)   Divisions (A)(3), (A)(4), and (A)(5) of this section do not
apply to any of the following:



      (1)   A law enforcement officer who is acting within the scope
of the officer's duties;



      (2)   A person who is acting in accordance with directions
given by a law enforcement officer described in division (B)(1) of this
section.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful
transactions in weapons. A violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3),
(A)(4), or (A)(5) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. A violation of division (A)(6) or (A)(7) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the second degree. A violation of division (A)(8)
of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



   (D)   As used in this section:



      AMMUNITION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2305.401.



      FEDERALLY LICENSED FIREARMS DEALER. Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 5502.63.



      MATERIALLY FALSE INFORMATION. Means information regarding the
transfer of a firearm or ammunition that portrays an illegal transaction as
legal or a legal transaction as illegal.



      PRIVATE SELLER. Means a person who sells, offers for sale, or
transfers a firearm or ammunition and who is not a federally licensed
firearms dealer.



(R.C. § 2923.20)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 137.08  UNDERAGE PURCHASE OF FIREARM OR HANDGUN.



   (A)   No person under 18 years of age shall purchase or attempt to
purchase a firearm.



   (B)   No person under 21 years of age shall purchase or attempt to
purchase a handgun; provided, that this division does not apply to the
purchase or attempted purchase of a handgun by a person 18 years of age or
older and under 21 years of age if either of the following applies:



      (1)   The person is a law enforcement officer and has received
firearms training approved by the Ohio Peace Officer Training Council or
equivalent firearms training.



      (2)   The person is an active or reserve member of the armed
services of the United States or the Ohio National Guard, or was honorably
discharged from military service in the active or reserve armed services of
the United States or the Ohio National Guard, and the person has received
firearms training from the armed services or the national guard or equivalent
firearms training.



   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
underage purchase of a firearm, a delinquent act that would be a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law if it could be committed by an
adult.  Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of underage
purchase of a handgun, a misdemeanor of the second degree.



(R.C. § 2923.211)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Improperly furnishing firearms to a minor, felony, see R.C. § 2923.21



§ 137.09  DISCHARGING FIREARMS.



   (A)   Discharging firearms; prohibited when. No person shall, within
the limits of the village, discharge or fire any firearms, except as provided
in § 137.09(B) of this chapter.



   (B)   Discharging firearms; authorized when. The provisions of §
137.09(A) of this chapter as to the use of any firearm shall not apply to any
of the following cases:



      (1)   To police officers, sheriffs, constables, marshals, or
other police officers, or any person summoned by any such officers to assist
in making arrests or preserving the peace, or persons who are members of the
armed services of the United States, or the National Guard, while such
persons are acting in the lawful discharge of their duties;



      (2)   To persons using firearms in the lawful defense of self,
third persons or the user’s property; and



      (3)   To the firing of a military salute.



   (C)   Violation; penalty. Any person who violates division (A) of
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation
created a substantial risk or physical harm to any person, caused serious
physical harm to property, caused physical harm to any person, or caused
serious physical harm to any person, the violation is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(Ord. 18-10-01, passed 11-6-18)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Improperly discharging firearm at or into habitation or school, felony
offense, see R.C. § 2923.161



§ 137.10  LICENSE OR PERMIT TO POSSESS DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.



   (A)    Upon application to the sheriff of the county or Safety
Director or Police Chief of the municipality where the applicant resides or
has the applicant’s principal place of business, and upon payment of the
fee specified in division (B) of this section, a license or temporary permit
shall be issued to qualified applicants to acquire, possess, carry or use a
dangerous ordnance for the following purposes:



      (1)    Contractors, wreckers, quarriers, mine operators and
other persons regularly employing explosives in the course of a legitimate
business, with respect to explosives and explosive devices acquired,
possessed, carried or used in the course of such business.



      (2)   Farmers, with respect to explosives and explosive
devices acquired, possessed, carried or used for agricultural purposes on
lands farmed by them.



      (3)   Scientists, engineers, and instructors, with respect to
a dangerous ordnance acquired, possessed, carried or used in the course of
bona fide research or instruction.



      (4)   Financial institutions and armored car company guards,
with respect to automatic firearms lawfully acquired, possessed, carried or
used by any such person while acting within the scope of the person’s
duties.



      (5)   In the discretion of the issuing authority, any
responsible person, with respect to a dangerous ordnance lawfully acquired,
possessed, carried or used for a legitimate research, scientific,
educational, industrial or other proper purpose.



   (B)   Application for a license or temporary permit under this
section shall be in writing under oath to the sheriff of the county or Safety
Director or Police Chief of the municipality where the applicant resides or
has the applicant’s principal place of business.  The application shall be
accompanied by an application fee of $50 when the application is for a
license, and an application fee of $5 when the application is for a temporary
permit.  The fees shall be paid into the general revenue fund of the county
or municipality.  The application shall contain the following information:



      (1)   The name, age, address, occupation and business address
of the applicant, if the applicant is a natural person, or the name, address,
and principal place of business of the applicant if the applicant is a
corporation.



      (2)   A description of the dangerous ordnance for which a
permit is requested.



      (3)   A description of the places where and the manner in
which the dangerous ordnance is to be kept, carried, and used.



      (4)   A statement of the purposes for which the dangerous
ordnance is to be acquired, possessed, carried or used.



      (5)   Such other information as the issuing authority may
require in giving effect to this section.



   (C)   Upon investigation, the issuing authority shall issue a
license or temporary permit only if all of the following apply:



      (1)   The applicant is not otherwise prohibited by law from
acquiring, having, carrying or using a dangerous ordnance.



      (2)   The applicant is 21 years of age or over, if the
applicant is a natural person.



      (3)   It appears that the applicant has sufficient competence
to safely acquire, possess, carry or use the dangerous ordnance, and that
proper precautions will be taken to protect the security of the dangerous
ordnance and ensure the safety of persons and property.



      (4)   It appears that the dangerous ordnance will be lawfully
acquired, possessed, carried and used by the applicant for a legitimate
purpose.



   (D)   The license or temporary permit shall identify the person to
whom it is issued, identify the dangerous ordnance involved and state the
purposes for which the license or temporary permit is issued, state the
expiration date, if any, and list such restrictions on the acquisition,
possession, carriage, or use of the dangerous ordnance as the issuing
authority considers advisable to protect the security of the dangerous
ordnance and ensure the safety of persons and property.



   (E)   A temporary permit shall be issued for the casual use of
explosives and explosive devices, and other consumable dangerous ordnance,
and shall expire within 30 days of its issuance. A license shall be issued
for the regular use of consumable dangerous ordnance, or for any
non-consumable dangerous ordnance, which license need not specify an
expiration date, but the issuing authority may specify such expiration date,
not earlier than one year from the date of issuance, as it considers
advisable in view of the nature of the dangerous ordnance and the purposes
for which the license is issued.



   (F)   The dangerous ordnance specified in a license or temporary
permit may be obtained by the holder anywhere in the state.  Pursuant to
R.C. § 2923.18(F), the holder of a license may use such dangerous ordnance
anywhere in the state.  The holder of a temporary permit may use such
dangerous ordnance only within the territorial jurisdiction of the issuing
authority.



   (G)   The issuing authority shall forward to the State Fire Marshal
a copy of each license or temporary permit issued pursuant to this section,
and a copy of each record of a transaction in a dangerous ordnance and of
each report of a lost or stolen dangerous ordnance, given to the local law
enforcement authority as required by R.C. § 2923.20(A)(7) and (8) or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.  The State Fire Marshal will
keep a permanent file of all licenses and temporary permits issued pursuant
to this section, and of all records of transactions in, and losses or thefts
of a dangerous ordnance forwarded by local law enforcement authorities
pursuant to this section.



(R.C. § 2923.18)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 137.11  POSSESSION OF AN OBJECT INDISTINGUISHABLE FROM A FIREARM IN A
SCHOOL SAFETY ZONE.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly possess an object in a school safety
zone if both of the following apply:



      (1)   The object is indistinguishable from a firearm, whether
or not the object is capable of being fired.



      (2)   The person indicates that the person possesses the
object and that it is a firearm, or the person knowingly displays or
brandishes the object and indicates that it is a firearm.



   (B)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:



         (a)   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any
other state or the United States who is authorized to carry deadly weapons or
dangerous ordnance and is acting within the scope of the officer’s,
agent’s, or employee’s duties, a law enforcement officer who is
authorized to carry deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance, a security officer
employed by a board of education or governing body of a school during the
time that the security officer is on duty pursuant to that contract of
employment, or any other person who has written authorization from the board
of education or governing body of a school to convey deadly weapons or
dangerous ordnance into a school safety zone or to possess a deadly weapon or
dangerous ordnance in a school safety zone and who conveys or possesses the
deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance in accordance with that authorization;



         (b)   Any person who is employed in this state, who is
authorized to carry deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance, and who is subject
to and in compliance with the requirements of R.C. § 109.801, unless the
appointing authority of the person has expressly specified that the exemption
provided in this division (B)(1)(b) does not apply to the person.



      (2)   This section does not apply to premises upon which home
schooling is conducted.  This section also does not apply to a school
administrator, teacher or employee who possesses an object that is
indistinguishable from a firearm for legitimate school purposes during the
course of employment, a student who uses an object that is indistinguishable
from a firearm under the direction of a school administrator, teacher or
employee, or any other person who, with the express prior approval of a
school administrator, possesses an object that is indistinguishable from a
firearm for a legitimate purpose, including the use of the object in a
ceremonial activity, a play, re-enactment or other dramatic presentation,
school safety training, or a ROTC activity or another similar use of the
object.



      (3)   This section does not apply to a person who conveys or
attempts to convey a handgun into, or possesses a handgun in, a school safety
zone if, at the time of that conveyance, attempted conveyance, or possession
of the handgun, all of the following apply:



         (a)   The person does not enter into a school building
or onto school premises and is not at a school activity.



         (b)   The person is carrying a valid concealed handgun
license or the person is an active duty member of the armed forces of the
United States and is carrying a valid military identification card and
documentation of successful completion of firearms training that meets or
exceeds the training requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1).



         (c)   The person is in the school safety zone in
accordance with 18 U.S.C. § 922(q)(2)(B).



         (d)   The person is not knowingly in a place described
in R.C. § 2923.126(B)(1) or (B)(3) through (B)(8).



      (4)   This section does not apply to a person who conveys or
attempts to convey a handgun into, or possesses a handgun in, a school safety
zone if at the time of that conveyance, attempted conveyance, or possession
of the handgun all of the following apply:



         (a)   The person is carrying a valid concealed handgun
license or the person is an active duty member of the armed forces of the
United States and is carrying a valid military identification card and
documentation of successful completion of firearms training that meets or
exceeds the training requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1).



         (b)   The person leaves the handgun in a motor vehicle.



         (c)   The handgun does not leave the motor vehicle.



         (d)   If the person exits the motor vehicle, the person
locks the motor vehicle.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal possession
of an object indistinguishable from a firearm in a school safety zone. 
Except as otherwise provided in this division, illegal possession of an
object indistinguishable from a firearm in a school safety zone is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been
convicted of a violation of this section, illegal possession of an object
indistinguishable from a firearm in a school safety zone is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.



   (D)   (1)   In addition to any other penalty imposed upon a
person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this section,
and subject to division (D)(2) of this section, if the offender has not
attained 19 years of age, regardless of whether the offender is attending or
is enrolled in a school operated by a board of education or for which the
State Board of Education prescribes minimum standards under R.C. § 3301.07,
the court shall impose upon the offender a class four suspension of the
offender’s probationary driver’s license, restricted license, driver’s
license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, or
probationary commercial driver’s license that then is in effect from the
range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4) and shall deny the offender the
issuance of any permit or license of that type during the period of the
suspension. If the offender is not a resident of this state, the court shall
impose a class four suspension of the nonresident operating privilege of the
offender from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4).



      (2)   If the offender shows good cause why the court should
not suspend one of the types of licenses, permits or privileges specified in
division (D)(1) of this section or deny the issuance of one of the temporary
instruction permits specified in division (D)(1) of this section, the court
in its discretion may choose not to impose the suspension, revocation or
denial required in division (D)(1) of this section, but the court, in its
discretion, instead may require the offender to perform community service for
a number of hours determined by the court.



   (E)   As used in this section, OBJECT THAT IS INDISTINGUISHABLE FROM
A FIREARM means an object made, constructed or altered so that, to a
reasonable person without specialized training in firearms, the object
appears to be a firearm.



(R.C. § 2923.122(C) - (G))  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Conveyance or possession of deadly weapons or dangerous  ordnance in a
school safety zone, felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.122(A), (B)



§ 137.12  POSSESSION OF DEADLY WEAPON WHILE UNDER DETENTION.



   (A)   DETENTION and DETENTION FACILITY have the same meanings as in
R.C. § 2921.01.



   (B)   No person under detention at a detention facility shall
possess a deadly weapon.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possession of a
deadly weapon while under detention.



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(2) of this
section, possession of a deadly weapon while under detention is a felony to
be prosecuted under state law.



      (2)   If the offender, at the time of the commission of the
offense, was under detention as an alleged or adjudicated delinquent child or
unruly child and if at the time the offender commits the act for which the
offender was under detention it would not be a felony if committed by an
adult, possession of a deadly weapon while under detention is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.



(R.C. § 2923.131)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention, felony offenses, see
R.C. § 2923.131



§ 137.13  CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSES: POSSESSION OF A REVOKED OR SUSPENDED
LICENSE; ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS; POSTING OF SIGNS PROHIBITING POSSESSION.



   (A)   Possession of a revoked or suspended concealed handgun license.



      (1)   No person, except in the performance of official duties,
shall possess a concealed handgun license that was issued and that has been
revoked or suspended.



      (2)   Whoever violates this division (A) is guilty of
possessing a revoked or suspended concealed handgun license, a misdemeanor of
the third degree.



(R.C. § 2923.1211(B), (C))



   (B)   Additional restrictions. Pursuant to R.C. § 2923.126:



      (1)   (a)   A concealed handgun license that is issued
under R.C. § 2923.125 shall expire five years after the date of issuance. A
licensee who has been issued a license under that section shall be granted a
grace period of 30 days after the licensee's license expires during which the
licensee's license remains valid. Except as provided in divisions (B)(2) and
(B)(3) of this section, a licensee who has been issued a concealed handgun
license under R.C. § 2923.125 or 2923.1213 may carry a concealed handgun
anywhere in this state if the licensee also carries a valid license when the
licensee is in actual possession of a concealed handgun. The licensee shall
give notice of any change in the licensee's residence address to the sheriff
who issued the license within 45 days after that change.



         (b)   If a licensee is the driver or an occupant of a
motor vehicle that is stopped as the result of a traffic stop or a stop for
another law enforcement purpose and if the licensee is transporting or has a
loaded handgun in the motor vehicle at that time, the licensee shall promptly
inform any law enforcement officer who approaches the vehicle while stopped
that the licensee has been issued a concealed handgun license and that the
licensee currently possesses or has a loaded handgun; the licensee shall not
knowingly disregard or fail to comply with lawful orders of a law enforcement
officer given while the motor vehicle is stopped, knowingly fail to remain in
the motor vehicle while stopped, or knowingly fail to keep the licensee's
hands in plain sight after any law enforcement officer begins approaching the
licensee while stopped and before the officer leaves, unless directed
otherwise by a law enforcement officer; and the licensee shall not knowingly
have contact with the loaded handgun by touching it with the licensee's hands
or fingers, in any manner in violation of R.C. § 2923.16(E), after any law
enforcement officer begins approaching the licensee while stopped and before
the officer leaves. Additionally, if a licensee is the driver or an occupant
of a commercial motor vehicle that is stopped by an employee of the motor
carrier enforcement unit for the purposes defined in R.C. § 5503.34 and if
the licensee is transporting or has a loaded handgun in the commercial motor
vehicle at that time, the licensee shall promptly inform the employee of the
unit who approaches the vehicle while stopped that the licensee has been
issued a concealed handgun license and that the licensee currently possesses
or has a loaded handgun.



         (c)   If a licensee is stopped for a law enforcement
purpose and if the licensee is carrying a concealed handgun at the time the
officer approaches, the licensee shall promptly inform any law enforcement
officer who approaches the licensee while stopped that the licensee has been
issued a concealed handgun license and that the licensee currently is
carrying a concealed handgun; the licensee shall not knowingly disregard or
fail to comply with lawful orders of a law enforcement officer given while
the licensee is stopped or knowingly fail to keep the licensee’s hands in
plain sight after any law enforcement officer begins approaching the licensee
while stopped and before the officer leaves, unless directed otherwise by a
law enforcement officer; and the licensee shall not knowingly remove, attempt
to remove, grasp, or hold the loaded handgun or knowingly have contact with
the loaded handgun by touching it with the licensee’s hands or fingers, in
any manner in violation of R.C. § 2923.12(B), after any law enforcement
officer begins approaching the licensee while stopped and before the officer
leaves.



      (2)   A valid concealed handgun license does not authorize the
licensee to carry a concealed handgun in any manner prohibited under R.C. §
2923.12(B) or in any manner prohibited under R.C. § 2923.16. A valid license
does not authorize the licensee to carry a concealed handgun into any of the
following places:



         (a)   A police station, sheriff’s office, or state
highway patrol station, premises controlled by the bureau of criminal
identification and investigation; a state correctional institution, jail,
workhouse, or other detention facility; any area of an airport passenger
terminal that is beyond a passenger or property screening checkpoint or to
which access is restricted through security measures by the airport authority
or a public agency; or an institution that is maintained, operated, managed,
and governed pursuant to R.C. § 5119.14(A) or R.C. § 5123.03(A)(1);



         (b)   A school safety zone if the licensee's carrying
the concealed handgun is in violation of R.C. § 2923.122;



         (c)   A courthouse or another building or structure in
which a courtroom is located if the licensee's carrying the concealed handgun
is in violation of R.C. § 2923.123;



         (d)   Any premises or open air arena for which a D
permit has been issued under R.C. Chapter 4303 if the licensee's carrying the
concealed handgun is in violation of R.C. § 2923.121;



         (e)   Any premises owned or leased by any public or
private college, university, or other institution of higher education, unless
the handgun is in a locked motor vehicle or the licensee is in the immediate
process of placing the handgun in a locked motor vehicle or unless the
licensee is carrying the concealed handgun pursuant to a written policy,
rule, or other authorization that is adopted by the institution’s board of
trustees or other governing body and that authorizes specific individuals or
classes of individuals to carry a concealed handgun on the premises;



         (f)   Any church, synagogue, mosque, or other place of
worship, unless the church, synagogue, mosque, or other place of worship
posts or permits otherwise;



         (g)   Any building that is a government facility of this
state or a political subdivision of this state and that is not a building
that is used primarily as a shelter, restroom, parking facility for motor
vehicles, or rest facility and is not a courthouse or other building or
structure in which a courtroom is located that is subject to division
(B)(2)(c) of this section, unless the governing body with authority over the
building has enacted a statute, ordinance, or policy that permits a licensee
to carry a concealed handgun into the building;



         (h)   A place in which federal law prohibits the
carrying of handguns.



      (3)   (a)   Nothing in this division (B) shall negate or
restrict a rule, policy, or practice of a private employer that is not a
private college, university, or other institution of higher education
concerning or prohibiting the presence of firearms on the private employer's
premises or property, including motor vehicles owned by the private employer.
Nothing in this division (B) shall require a private employer of that nature
to adopt a rule, policy, or practice concerning or prohibiting the presence
of firearms on the private employer's premises or property, including motor
vehicles owned by the private employer.



         (b)   1.   A private employer shall be immune from
liability in a civil action for any injury, death, or loss to person or
property that allegedly was caused by or related to a licensee bringing a
handgun onto the premises or property of the private employer, including
motor vehicles owned by the private employer, unless the private employer
acted with malicious purpose. A private employer is immune from liability in
a civil action for any injury, death, or loss to person or property that
allegedly was caused by or related to the private employer's decision to
permit a licensee to bring, or prohibit a licensee from bringing, a handgun
onto the premises or property of the private employer.



            2.   A political subdivision shall be immune from
liability in a civil action, to the extent and in the manner provided in R.C.
Chapter 2744, for any injury, death, or loss to person or property that
allegedly was caused by or related to a licensee bringing a handgun onto any
premises or property owned, leased, or otherwise under the control of the
political subdivision. As used in this division, POLITICAL SUBDIVISION has
the same meaning as in R.C. § 2744.01.



            3.    An institution of higher education shall be
immune from liability in a civil action for any injury, death, or loss to
person or property that allegedly was caused by or related to a licensee
bringing a handgun onto the premises of the institution, including motor
vehicles owned by the institution, unless the institution acted with
malicious purpose. An institution of higher education is immune from
liability in a civil action for any injury, death, or loss to person or
property that allegedly was caused by or related to the institution’s
decision to permit a licensee or class of licensees to bring a handgun onto
the premises of the institution.



         (c)   1.   a.   Except as provided in division
(B)(3)(c)2. of this section and R.C. § 2923.1214, the owner or person in
control of private land or premises, and a private person or entity leasing
land or premises owned by the state, the United States, or a political
subdivision of the state or the United States, may post a sign in a
conspicuous location on that land or on those premises prohibiting persons
from carrying firearms or concealed firearms on or onto that land or those
premises. Except as otherwise provided in this division, a person who
knowingly violates a posted prohibition of that nature is guilty of criminal
trespass in violation of R.C. § 2911.21(A)(4) and is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the fourth degree. If a person knowingly violates a posted prohibition of
that nature and the posted land or premises primarily was a parking lot or
other parking facility, the person is not guilty of criminal trespass under
R.C. § 2911.21 or under any other criminal law of this state or criminal
law, ordinance, or resolution of a political subdivision of this state, and
instead is subject only to a civil cause of action for trespass based on the
violation.



               b.   If a person knowingly violates a posted
prohibition of the nature described in this division and the posted land or
premises is a child day-care center, type A family day-care home, or type B
family day-care home, unless the person is a licensee who resides in a type A
family day-care home or type B family day-care home, the person is guilty of
aggravated trespass in violation of R.C. § 2911.211. Except as otherwise
provided in this division, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the person previously has been convicted of a violation of
this division or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, or of any offense of violence, if the weapon involved is a firearm
that is either loaded or for which the offender has ammunition ready at hand,
or if the weapon involved is dangerous ordnance, the offender is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



            2.   A landlord may not prohibit or restrict a
tenant who is a licensee and who on or after September 9, 2008 enters into a
rental agreement with the landlord for the use of residential premises, and
the tenant’s guest while the tenant is present, from lawfully carrying or
possessing a handgun on those residential premises.



            3.   As used in division (B)(3)(c) of this section:



               RESIDENTIAL PREMISES.  Has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 5321.01, except RESIDENTIAL PREMISES does not include a dwelling
unit that is owned or operated by a college or university.



               LANDLORD, TENANT, and RENTAL AGREEMENT.  Have
the same meanings as in R.C. § 5321.01.



      (4)   A person who holds a valid concealed handgun license
issued by another state that is recognized by the Attorney General pursuant
to a reciprocity agreement entered into pursuant to R.C. § 109.69 or a
person who holds a valid concealed handgun license under the circumstances
described in R.C. § 109.69(B)  has the same right to carry a concealed
handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license
under R.C. § 2923.125 and is subject to the same restrictions that apply to
a person who carries a license issued under that section.



      (5)   (a)   A peace officer has the same right to carry a
concealed handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed
handgun license under R.C. § 2923.125, provided that the officer when
carrying a concealed handgun under authority of this division is carrying
validating identification. For purposes of reciprocity with other states, a
peace officer shall be considered to be a licensee in this state.



         (b)   An active duty member of the armed forces of the
United States who is carrying a valid military identification card and
documentation of successful completion of firearms training that meets or
exceeds the training requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1) has the
same right to carry a concealed handgun in this state as a person who was
issued a concealed handgun license under R.C. § 2923.125 and is subject to
the same restrictions as specified in this division (B).



         (c)   A tactical medical professional who is qualified
to carry firearms while on duty under R.C. § 109.771 has the same right to
carry a concealed handgun in this state as a person who was issued a
concealed handgun license under R.C. § 2923.125.



      (6)   (a)   A qualified retired peace officer who possesses
a retired peace officer identification card issued pursuant to division
(B)(6)(b) of this section and a valid firearms requalification certification
issued pursuant to division (B)(6)(c) of this section has the same right to
carry a concealed handgun in this state as a person who was issued a
concealed handgun license under R.C. § 2923.125 and is subject to the same
restrictions that apply to a person who carries a license issued under that
section. For purposes of reciprocity with other states, a qualified retired
peace officer who possesses a retired peace officer identification card
issued pursuant to division (B)(6)(b) of this section and a valid firearms
requalification certification issued pursuant to division (B)(6)(c) of this
section shall be considered to be a licensee in this state.



         (b)   1.   Each public agency of this state or of a
political subdivision of this state that is served by one or more peace
officers shall issue a retired peace officer identification card to any
person who retired from service as a peace officer with that agency, if the
issuance is in accordance with the agency’s policies and procedures and if
the person, with respect to the person’s service with that agency,
satisfies all of the following:



               a.   The person retired in good standing
from service as a peace officer with the public agency, and the retirement
was not for reasons of mental instability.



               b.   Before retiring from service as a peace
officer with that agency, the person was authorized to engage in or supervise
the prevention, detection, investigation, or prosecution of, or the
incarceration of any person for, any violation of law and the person had
statutory powers of arrest.



               c.   At the time of the person’s
retirement as a peace officer with that agency, the person was trained and
qualified to carry firearms in the performance of the peace officer’s
duties.



               d.   Before retiring from service as a peace
officer with that agency, the person was regularly employed as a peace
officer for an aggregate of 15 years or more, or, in the alternative, the
person retired from service as a peace officer with that agency, after
completing any applicable probationary period of that service, due to a
service-connected disability, as determined by the agency.



            2.   A retired peace officer identification card
issued to a person under division (B)(6)(b)1. of this section shall identify
the person by name, contain a photograph of the person, identify the public
agency of this state or of the political subdivision of this state from which
the person retired as a peace officer and that is issuing the identification
card, and specify that the person retired in good standing from service as a
peace officer with the issuing public agency and satisfies the criteria set
forth in divisions (B)(6)(b)1.a. to (B)(6)(B)1.d. of this section. In
addition to the required content specified in this division, a retired peace
officer identification card issued to a person under division (B)(6)(b)1. of
this section may include the firearms requalification certification described
in division (B)(6)(c) of this section, and if the identification card
includes that certification, the identification card shall serve as the
firearms requalification certification for the retired peace officer. If the
issuing public agency issues credentials to active law enforcement officers
who serve the agency, the agency may comply with division (B)(6)(b)1. of this
section by issuing the same credentials to persons who retired from service
as a peace officer with the agency and who satisfy the criteria set forth in
divisions (B)(6)(b)1.a. to (B)(6)(b)1.d. of this section, provided that the
credentials so issued to retired peace officers are stamped with the word
“RETIRED”.



            3.   A public agency of this state or of a
political subdivision of this state may charge persons who retired from
service as a peace officer with the agency a reasonable fee for issuing to
the person a retired peace officer identification card pursuant to division
(B)(6)(b)1. of this section.



         (c)   1.   If a person retired from service as a
peace officer with a public agency of this state or of a political
subdivision of this state and the person satisfies the criteria set forth in
divisions (B)(6)(b)1.a. to (B)(6)(b)1.d. of this section, the public agency
may provide the retired peace officer with the opportunity to attend a
firearms requalification program that is approved for purposes of firearms
requalification required under R.C. § 109.801. The retired peace officer may
be required to pay the cost of the course.



            2.   If a retired peace officer who satisfies the
criteria set forth in divisions (B)(6)(b)1.a. to (B)(6)(b)1.d. of this
section attends a firearms requalification program that is approved for
purposes of firearms requalification required under R.C. § 109.801, the
retired peace officer’s successful completion of the firearms
requalification program requalifies the retired peace officer for purposes of
division (B)(6) of this section for five years from the date on which the
program was successfully completed, and the requalification is valid during
that five-year period. If a retired peace officer who satisfies the criteria
set forth in divisions (B)(6)(b)1.a. to (B)(6)(b)1.d. of this section
satisfactorily completes such a firearms requalification program, the retired
peace officer shall be issued a firearms requalification certification that
identifies the retired peace officer by name, identifies the entity that
taught the program, specifies that the retired peace officer successfully
completed the program, specifies the date on which the course was
successfully completed, and specifies that the requalification is valid for
five years from that date of successful completion. The firearms
requalification certification for a retired peace officer may be included in
the retired peace officer identification card issued to the retired peace
officer under division (B)(6)(b) of this section.



            3.   A retired peace officer who attends a
firearms requalification program that is approved for purposes of firearms
requalification required under R.C. § 109.801 may be required to pay the
cost of the program.



      (7)   For the purpose of division (B) of this section, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



         GOVERNING BODY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 154.01.



         GOVERNMENT FACILITY OF THIS STATE OR A POLITICAL
SUBDIVISION OF THIS STATE.  Any of the following:



            1.   A building or part of a building that is
owned or leased by the government of this state or a political subdivision of
this state and where employees of the government of this state or the
political subdivision regularly are present for the purpose of performing
their official duties as employees of the state or political subdivision;



            2.   The office of a Deputy Registrar serving
pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4503 that is used to perform deputy registrar
functions.



         QUALIFIED RETIRED PEACE OFFICER.  A person who satisfies
all of the following:



            1.   The person satisfies the criteria set forth
in divisions (B)(6)(b)1.a. to (B)(6)(b)1.d. of this section.



            2.   The person is not under the influence of
alcohol or another intoxicating or hallucinatory drug or substance.



            3.   The person is not prohibited by federal law
from receiving firearms.



         RETIRED PEACE OFFICER IDENTIFICATION CARD. An
identification card that is issued pursuant to division (B)(6)(b) of this
section to a person who is a retired peace officer.



         TACTICAL MEDICAL PROFESSIONAL. Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 109.71.



         VALIDATING IDENTIFICATION. Means photographic
identification issued by the agency for which an individual serves as a peace
officer that identifies the individual as a peace officer of the agency.



(R.C. § 2923.126)



   (C)   Posting of signs prohibiting possession. Each person, board,
or entity that owns or controls any place or premises identified in R.C. §
2923.126(B) as a place into which a valid license does not authorize the
licensee to carry a concealed handgun, or a designee of such a person, board,
or entity, shall post in the following one or more conspicuous locations in
the premises a sign that contains a statement in substantially the following
form: "Unless otherwise authorized by law, pursuant to the Ohio Revised Code,
no person shall knowingly possess, have under the person's control, convey,
or attempt to convey a deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance onto these
premises."



(R.C. § 2923.1212)



§ 137.14  DEFACED FIREARMS.



   (A)   No person shall do either of the following:



      (1)   Change, alter, remove, or obliterate the name of the
manufacturer, model, manufacturer’s serial number, or other mark of
identification on a firearm.



      (2)   Possess a firearm knowing or having reasonable cause to
believe that the name of the manufacturer, model, manufacturer’s serial
number, or other mark of identification on the firearm has been changed,
altered, removed, or obliterated.



   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) of this section is
guilty of defacing identification marks of a firearm. Except as otherwise
provided in this division, defacing identification marks of a firearm is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (A)(1) of this
section, defacing identification marks of a firearm is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(2) of this section is
guilty of possessing a defaced firearm. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, possessing a defaced firearm is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
violation of division (A)(2) of this section, possessing a defaced firearm is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



   (C)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any firearm on
which no manufacturer's serial number was inscribed at the time of its
manufacture.



(R.C. § 2923.201)



CHAPTER 138:  DRUG OFFENSES



Section



   138.01   Definitions



   138.02   Trafficking in controlled substances; gift of marihuana



   138.03   Drug possession offenses



   138.04   Possessing drug abuse instruments



   138.05   Permitting drug abuse



   138.06   Illegal cultivation of marihuana



   138.07   Abusing harmful intoxicants



   138.08   Illegal dispensing of drug samples



   138.09   Federal prosecution bar to municipal prosecution



   138.10   Nitrous oxide: improper dispensing or distribution;
possession in a motor vehicle



   138.11   Laboratory report required



   138.12   Counterfeit controlled substances



   138.13   Use, possession, or sale of drug paraphernalia



   138.14   Controlled substance or prescription labels



   138.15   Possession, sale and disposal of hypodermics



   138.16   Controlled substance schedules



   138.17   Unlawful furnishing of prescription to enable persons to be
issued handicapped parking placards or license plates



   138.18   Pseudoephedrine sales



   138.19   Sale of pure caffeine product



Statutory reference:



   Administration of epinephrine, exemption from prosecution, see R.C. §
2925.64



   Controlled substances, regulation of pharmacists and  other
professionals, see R.C. Chapters 3719 and 4729



   Conviction of professionally licensed persons to be reported to
licensing board, see R.C. § 2925.38



   Criminal and civil forfeiture of property for felony drug abuse
offenses, see R.C. Chapter 2925.41



   Destruction of chemicals used to produce methamphetamine; preservation
of samples, see R.C. § 2925.52



   Tampering with drugs, felony offense, see R.C. § 2925.24



§ 138.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Words,
terms and phrases and their derivatives used in this chapter which are not
defined in this section shall have the meanings given to them in the Ohio
Revised Code.



   ADMINISTER.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.



   ADULTERATE.  To cause a drug to be adulterated as described in R.C. §
3715.63.



   BULK AMOUNT.  Of a controlled substance means any of the following:



      (1)   For any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance
included in Schedule I, Schedule II, or Schedule III, with the exception of
any controlled substance analog, marihuana, cocaine, L.S.D., heroin, any
fentanyl-related compound, and hashish and except as provided in division
(2), (5), or (6) of this definition, whichever of the following is applicable:



         (a)   An amount equal to or exceeding 10 grams or 25
unit doses of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule I opiate or opium derivative;



         (b)   An amount equal to or exceeding 10 grams of a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount
of raw or gum opium;



         (c)   An amount equal to or exceeding 30 grams or 10
unit doses of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule I hallucinogen other than
tetrahydrocannabinol or lysergic acid amide, or a Schedule I stimulant or
depressant;



         (d)   An amount equal to or exceeding 20 grams or 5
times the maximum daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard
pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II opiate or opium
derivative;



         (e)   An amount equal to or exceeding 5 grams or 10 unit
doses of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains
any amount of phencyclidine;



         (f)   An amount equal to or exceeding 120 grams or 30
times the maximum daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard
pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II stimulant that is
in a final dosage form manufactured by a person authorized by the Federal
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 301 et seq., as amended) and the
federal drug abuse control laws, as defined in this section, that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule II depressant substance or a Schedule II
hallucinogenic substance;



         (g)   An amount equal to or exceeding 3 grams of a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount
of a Schedule II stimulant, or any of its salts or isomers, that is not in a
final dosage form manufactured by a person authorized by the Federal Food,
Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 301 et seq., as amended) and the federal
drug abuse control laws;



      (2)   An amount equal to or exceeding 120 grams or 30 times
the maximum daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard
pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule III or IV substance
other than an anabolic steroid or a Schedule III opiate or opium derivative;



      (3)   An amount equal to or exceeding 20 grams or 5 times the
maximum daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard
pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule III opiate or opium
derivative;



      (4)   An amount equal to or exceeding 250 milliliters or 250
grams of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains
any amount of a Schedule V substance;



      (5)   An amount equal to or exceeding 200 solid dosage units,
16 grams, or 16 milliliters of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance
that is or contains any amount of a Schedule III anabolic steroid;



      (6)   For any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance
that is a combination of a fentanyl-related compound and any other compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance included in Schedule III, Schedule IV, or
Schedule V, if the defendant is charged with a violation of R.C. § 2925.11
and the sentencing provisions set forth in R.C. § 2925.11(C)(10)(b) and
(C)(11) will not apply regarding the defendant and the violation, the bulk
amount of the controlled substance for purposes of the violation is the
amount specified in division (1), (2), (3), (4), or (5) of this definition
for the other Schedule III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V controlled substance
that is combined with the fentanyl-related compound.



   CERTIFIED GRIEVANCE COMMITTEE.  A duly constituted and organized
committee of the Ohio State Bar Association or of one or more local bar
associations of the state that complies with the criteria set forth in Rule
V, Section 6 of the Rules for the Government of the Bar of Ohio.



   COCAINE.  Any of the following:



      (1)   A cocaine salt, isomer, or derivative, a salt of a
cocaine isomer or derivative, or the base form of cocaine.



      (2)   Coca leaves or a salt, compound, derivative, or
preparation of coca leaves, including ecgonine, a salt, isomer, or derivative
of ecgonine, or a salt of an isomer or derivative of ecgonine.



      (3)   A salt, compound, derivative, or preparation of a
substance identified in division (1) or (2) of this definition that is
chemically equivalent to or identical with any of those substances, except
that the substances shall not include decocainized coca leaves or extraction
of coca leaves if the extractions do not contain cocaine or ecgonine.



   COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A JUVENILE.  An offense is COMMITTED IN
THE VICINITY OF A JUVENILE if the offender commits the offense within 100
feet of a juvenile or within the view of a juvenile, regardless of whether
the offender knows the age of the juvenile, whether the offender knows the
offense is being committed within 100 feet of or within view of the juvenile,
or whether the juvenile actually views the commission of the offense.



   COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A SCHOOL.  An offense is COMMITTED IN THE
VICINITY OF A SCHOOL if the offender commits the offense on school premises,
in a school building, or within 1,000 feet of the boundaries of any school
premises, regardless of whether the offender knows the offense is being
committed on school premises, in a school building, or within 1,000 feet of
the boundaries of any school premises.



   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.



   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE ANALOG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.



   COUNTERFEIT CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE.  Any of the following:



      (1)   Any drug that bears, or whose container or label bears,
a trademark, trade name, or other identifying mark used without authorization
of the owner of rights to the trademark, trade name, or identifying mark.



      (2)   Any unmarked or unlabeled substance that is represented
to be a controlled substance manufactured, processed, packed, or distributed
by a person other than the person that manufactured, processed, packed, or
distributed it.



      (3)   Any substance that is represented to be a controlled
substance but is not a controlled substance or is a different controlled
substance.



      (4)   Any substance other than a controlled substance that a
reasonable person would believe to be a controlled substance because of its
similarity in shape, size, and color, or its markings, labeling, packaging,
distribution, or the price for which it is sold or offered for sale.



   CRACK COCAINE.  A compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is
or contains any amount of cocaine that is analytically identified as the base
form of cocaine or that is in a form that resembles rocks or pebbles
generally intended for individual use.



   CULTIVATE.  Includes planting, watering, fertilizing or tilling.



   DANGEROUS DRUG.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.



   DECEPTION.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.



   DISCIPLINARY COUNSEL.  The disciplinary counsel appointed by the Board
of Commissioners on Grievances and Discipline of the Ohio Supreme Court under
the Rules for the Government of the Bar of Ohio.



   DISPENSE.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.



   DISTRIBUTE.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.



   DRUG.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.



   DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE.  Any of the following:



      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2913.02(A) that constitutes theft
of drugs, or any violation of R.C. § 2925.02, 2925.03, 2925.04, 2925.041,
2925.05, 2925.06, 2925.11, 2925.12, 2925.13, 2925.22, 2925.23, 2925.24,
2925.31, 2925.32, 2925.36, or 2925.37.



      (2)   A violation of an existing or former law of a
municipality, state or any other state or of the United States, that is
substantially equivalent to any section listed in division (1) of this
definition.



      (3)   An offense under an existing or former law of a
municipality, state or any other state, or of the United States, of which
planting, cultivating, harvesting, processing, making, manufacturing,
producing, shipping, transporting, delivering, acquiring, possessing,
storing, distributing, dispensing, selling, inducing another to use,
administering to another, using, or otherwise dealing with a controlled
substance is an element.



      (4)   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity
in committing or attempting to commit, any offense under division (1), (2),
or (3) of this definition.



   DRUG DEPENDENT PERSON.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.011.



   DRUG OF ABUSE.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.011.



   FELONY DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE.  Any drug abuse offense that would
constitute a felony under the laws of this state, any other state, or the
United States.



   FENTANYL-RELATED COMPOUND. Any of the following:



      (1)   Fentanyl;



      (2)   Alpha-methylfentanyl
(N-[1-(alpha-methyl-beta-phenyl)ethyl-4-piperidyl] propionanilide;
1-(1-methyl-2-phenylethyl)-4-(N-propanilido) piperidine);



      (3)   Alpha-methylthiofentanyl
(N-[1-methyl-2-(2-thienyl)ethyl-4-piperidinyl]-N- phenylpropanamide);



      (4)   Beta-hydroxyfentanyl
(N-[1-(2-hydroxy-2-phenethyl-4-piperidinyl]-N-phenylpropanamide);



      (5)   Beta-hydroxy-3-methylfentanyl (other name:
N-[1-(2-hydroxy-2-phenethyl)-3- methyl-4-piperidinyl]-N-phenylpropanamide);



      (6)   3-methylfentanyl
(N-[3-methyl-1-(2-phenylethyl)-4-piperidyl]-N-phenylpropanamide);



      (7)   3-methylthiofentanyl
(N-[3-methyl-1-[2-(thienyl)ethyl]-4-piperidinyl]- phenylpropanamide);



      (8)   Para-fluorofentanyl
(N-(4-fluorophenyl)-N-[1-(2-phenethyl)-4-piperidinyl]propanamide;



      (9)   Thiofentanyl
(N-phenyl-N-[1-(2-thienyl)ethyl-4-piperidinyl]-propanamide;



      (10)   Alfentanil;



      (11)   Carfentanil;



      (12)   Remifentanil;



      (13)   Sufentanil;



      (14)   Acetyl-alpha-methylfentanyl
(N-[1-(1-methyl-2-phenethyl)-4-piperidinyl]-N- phenylacetamide); and



      (15)   Any compound that meets all of the following fentanyl
pharmacophore requirements to bind at the mu receptor, as identified by a
report from an established forensic laboratory, including acetylfentanyl,
furanylfentanyl, valerylfentanyl, butyrylfentanyl, isobutyrylfentanyl,
4-methoxybutyrylfentanyl, para-fluorobutyrylfentanyl, acrylfentanyl, and
ortho-fluorofentanyl:



         (a)   A chemical scaffold consisting of both of the
following:



            1.   A five, six, or seven member ring structure
containing a nitrogen, whether or not further substituted;



            2.   An attached nitrogen to the ring, whether or
not that nitrogen is enclosed in a ring structure, including an attached
aromatic ring or other lipophilic group to that nitrogen.



         (b)   A polar functional group attached to the chemical
scaffold, including but not limited to a hydroxyl, ketone, amide, or ester;



         (c)   An alkyl or aryl substitution off the ring
nitrogen of the chemical scaffold; and



         (d)   The compound has not been approved for medical use
by the United States food and drug administration.



   HARMFUL INTOXICANT.  Does not include beer or intoxicating liquor, but
means any of the following:



      (1)   Any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance the
gas, fumes, or vapor of which when inhaled can induce intoxication,
excitement, giddiness, irrational behavior, depression, stupefaction,
paralysis, unconsciousness, asphyxiation, or other harmful physiological
effects, and includes but is not limited to any of the following:



         (a)   Any volatile organic solvent, plastic cement,
model cement, fingernail polish remover, lacquer thinner, cleaning fluid,
gasoline, or other preparation containing a volatile organic solvent.



         (b)   Any aerosol propellant.



         (c)   Any fluorocarbon refrigerant.



         (d)   Any anesthetic gas.



      (2)   Gamma Butyrolactone;



      (3)   1,4 Butanediol.



   HASHISH.  The resin or a preparation of the resin contained in
marihuana, whether in solid form or in a liquid concentrate, liquid extract,
or liquid distillate form.



   HYPODERMIC.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.



   JUVENILE.  A person under 18 years of age.



   LICENSED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL AUTHORIZED TO PRESCRIBE DRUGS. Has the
same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.



   L.S.D.  Lysergic acid diethylamide.



   MAJOR DRUG OFFENDER.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.



   MANDATORY PRISON TERM.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.



   MANUFACTURE.  To plant, cultivate, harvest, process, make, prepare, or
otherwise engage in any part of the production of a drug, by propagation,
extraction, chemical synthesis, or compounding, or any combination of the
same, and includes packaging, repackaging, labeling, and other activities
incident to production.



   MANUFACTURER.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.



   MARIHUANA.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01, except that it
does not include hashish.



   METHAMPHETAMINE. Methamphetamine, any salt, isomer, or salt of an
isomer of methamphetamine, or any compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance containing methamphetamine or any salt, isomer, or salt of an
isomer of methamphetamine.



   MINOR DRUG POSSESSION OFFENSE.  Either of the following:



      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2925.11 as it existed prior to
July 1, 1996, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



      (2)   A violation of R.C. § 2925.11 as it exists on and after
July 1, 1996, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that is a
misdemeanor or a felony of the fifth degree.



   OFFICIAL WRITTEN ORDER.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.



   PERSON.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.



   PHARMACIST.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.



   PHARMACY.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.



   POSSESS or POSSESSION.  Having control over a thing or substance but
may not be inferred solely from mere access to the thing or substance through
ownership or occupation of the premises upon which the thing or substance is
found.



   PRESCRIPTION.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.



   PRESUMPTION FOR A PRISON TERM or PRESUMPTION THAT A PRISON TERM SHALL
BE IMPOSED.  A presumption as described in R.C. § 2929.13(D) that a prison
term is a necessary sanction for a felony in order to comply with the
purposes and principles of sentencing under R.C. § 2929.11.



   PROFESSIONAL LICENSE.  Any license, permit, certificate, registration,
qualification, admission, temporary license, temporary permit, temporary
certificate, or temporary registration that is described in R.C. §
2925.01(W)(1) to (37) and that qualifies a person as a professionally
licensed person.



   PROFESSIONALLY LICENSED PERSON.  Any of the following:



      (1)   A person who has received a certificate or temporary
certificate as a certified public accountant or who has registered as a
public accountant under R.C. Chapter 4701 and who holds an Ohio permit issued
under that chapter;



      (2)   A person who holds a certificate of qualification to
practice architecture issued or renewed and registered under R.C. Chapter
4703;



      (3)   A person who is registered as a landscape architect
under R.C. Chapter 4703 or who holds a permit as a landscape architect issued
under that chapter;



      (4)   A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4707;



      (5)   A person who has been issued a certificate of
registration as a registered barber under R.C. Chapter 4709;



      (6)   A person licensed and regulated to engage in the
business of a debt pooling company by a legislative authority, under
authority of R.C. Chapter 4710;



      (7)   A person who has been issued a cosmetologist’s
license, hair designer’s license, manicurist’s license, esthetician’s
license, natural hair stylist’s license, advanced cosmetologist’s
license, advanced hair designer’s license, advanced manicurist’s license,
advanced esthetician’s license, advanced natural hair stylist’s license,
cosmetology instructor’s license, hair design instructor’s license,
manicurist instructor’s license, esthetics instructor’s license, natural
hair style instructor’s license, independent contractor’s license, or
tanning facility permit under R.C. Chapter 4713;



      (8)   A person who has been issued a license to practice
dentistry, a general anesthesia permit, a conscious sedation permit, a
limited resident's license, a limited teaching license, a dental hygienist's
license, or a dental hygienist's teacher's certificate under R.C. Chapter
4715;



      (9)      A person who has been issued an embalmer's
license, a funeral director's license, a funeral home license, or a crematory
license, or who has been registered for an embalmer's or funeral director's
apprenticeship under R.C. Chapter 4717;



      (10)      A person who has been licensed as a registered
nurse or practical nurse, or who has been issued a certificate for the
practice of nurse-midwifery under R.C. Chapter 4723;



      (11)      A person who has been licensed to practice
optometry or to engage in optical dispensing under R.C. Chapter 4725;



      (12)      A person licensed to act as a pawnbroker under
R.C. Chapter 4727;



      (13)      A person licensed to act as a precious metals
dealer under R.C. Chapter 4728;



      (14)   A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 as a
pharmacist or pharmacy intern or registered under that chapter as a
registered pharmacy technician, certified pharmacy technician, or pharmacy
technician trainee;



      (15)   A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 as a
manufacturer of dangerous drugs, outsourcing facility, third-party logistics
provider, repackager of dangerous drugs, wholesale distributor of dangerous
drugs, or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs;



      (16)      A person who is authorized to practice as a
physician assistant under R.C. Chapter 4730;



      (17)      A person who has been issued a license to
practice medicine and surgery, osteopathic medicine and surgery, or podiatric
medicine and surgery under R.C. Chapter 4731 or has been issued a certificate
to practice a limited branch of medicine under that chapter;



      (18)      A person licensed as a psychologist or school
psychologist under R.C. Chapter 4732;



      (19)      A person registered to practice the profession of
engineering or surveying under R.C. Chapter 4733;



      (20)      A person who has been issued a license to
practice chiropractic under R.C. Chapter 4734;



      (21)      A person licensed to act as a real estate broker
or real estate salesperson under R.C. Chapter 4735;



      (22)      A person registered as a registered sanitarian
under R.C. Chapter 4736;



      (23)      A person licensed to operate or maintain a
junkyard under R.C. Chapter 4737;



      (24)      A person who has been issued a motor vehicle
salvage dealer's license under R.C. Chapter 4738;



      (25)      A person who has been licensed to act as a steam
engineer under R.C. Chapter 4739;



      (26)      A person who has been issued a license or
temporary permit to practice veterinary medicine or any of its branches, or
who is registered as a graduate animal technician under R.C. Chapter 4741;



      (27)      A person who has been issued a hearing aid
dealer's or fitter's license or trainee permit under R.C. Chapter 4747;



      (28)      A person who has been issued a class A, class B,
or class C license or who has been registered as an investigator or security
guard employee under R.C. Chapter 4749;



      (29)      A person licensed and registered to practice as a
nursing home administrator under R.C. Chapter 4751;



      (30)      A person licensed to practice as a
speech-language pathologist or audiologist under R.C. Chapter 4753;



      (31)      A person issued a license as an occupational
therapist or physical therapist under R.C. Chapter 4755;



      (32)      A person who is licensed as a licensed
professional clinical counselor, licensed professional counselor, social
worker, independent social worker, independent marriage and family therapist,
or marriage and family therapist, or registered as a social work assistant
under R.C. Chapter 4757;



      (33)      A person issued a license to practice dietetics
under R.C. Chapter 4759;



      (34)      A person who has been issued a license or limited
permit to practice respiratory therapy under R.C. Chapter 4761;



      (35)      A person who has been issued a real estate
appraiser certificate under R.C. Chapter 4763;



      (36)      A person who has been issued a home inspector
license under R.C. Chapter 4764;



      (37)   A person who has been admitted to the bar by order of
the Ohio Supreme Court in compliance with its prescribed and published rules.



   PUBLIC PREMISES. Any hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall, or
other place of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort.



   SALE.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.



   SAMPLE DRUG.  A drug or pharmaceutical preparation that would be
hazardous to health or safety if used without the supervision of a licensed
health professional authorized to prescribe drugs, or a drug of abuse, and
that, at one time, had been placed in a container plainly marked as a sample
by a manufacturer.



   SCHEDULE I, SCHEDULE II, SCHEDULE III, SCHEDULE IV or SCHEDULE V. Have
the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.



   SCHOOL.  Any school operated by a board of education, any community
school established under R.C. Chapter 3314, or any nonpublic school for which
the State Board of Education prescribes minimum standards under R.C. §
3301.07, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or
training provided by the school is being conducted at the time a criminal
offense is committed.



   SCHOOL BUILDING.  Any building in which any of the instruction,
extracurricular activities, or training provided by a school is conducted,
whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training
provided by the school is being conducted in the school building at the time
a criminal offense is committed.



   SCHOOL PREMISES.  Either of the following:



      (1)   The parcel of real property on which any school is
situated, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or
training provided by the school is being conducted on the premises at the
time a criminal offense is committed.



      (2)   Any other parcel of real property that is owned or
leased by a board of education of a school, the governing authority of a
community school established under R.C. Chapter 3314, or the governing body
of a school for which the State Board of Education prescribes minimum
standards under R.C. § 3301.07 and on which some of the instruction,
extracurricular activities, or training of the school is conducted, whether
or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training provided by
the school is being conducted on the parcel of real property at the time a
criminal offense is committed.



   STANDARD PHARMACEUTICAL REFERENCE MANUAL.  The current edition, with
cumulative changes if any, of references that are approved by the State Board
of Pharmacy.



   UNIT DOSE.  An amount or unit or a compound, mixture, or preparation
containing a controlled substance that is separately identifiable and in a
form that indicates that it is the amount or unit by which the controlled
substance is separately administered to or taken by an individual.



   WHOLESALER.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.



(R.C. §§ 2925.01)



§ 138.02  TRAFFICKING IN CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES; GIFT OF MARIHUANA.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:



      (1)   Sell or offer to sell a controlled substance or a
controlled substance analog;



      (2)   Prepare for shipment, ship, transport, deliver, prepare
for distribution, or distribute a controlled substance or a controlled
substance analog, when the offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe
that the controlled substance or a controlled substance analog is intended
for sale or resale by the offender or another person.



   (B)   This section does not apply to any of the following:



      (1)   Manufacturers, licensed health professionals authorized
to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, and other persons
whose conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729,
4730, 4731, and 4741.



      (2)   If the offense involves an anabolic steroid, any person
who is conducting or participating in a research project involving the use of
an anabolic steroid if the project has been approved by the United States
Food and Drug Administration.



      (3)   Any person who sells, offers for sale, prescribes,
dispenses, or administers for livestock or other nonhuman species an anabolic
steroid that is expressly intended for administration through implants to
livestock or other nonhuman species and approved for that purpose under the
“Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act” (21 U.S.C. 301 et seq., as
amended), and is sold, offered for sale, prescribed, dispensed, or
administered for that purpose in accordance with that Act.



   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of the
following:



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (C)(2) and
(C)(3) of this section, trafficking in controlled substances is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the
offense involves a gift of 20 grams or less of marihuana, trafficking in
marihuana is a minor misdemeanor upon a first offense and a misdemeanor of
the third degree upon a subsequent offense.  If the offense involves a gift
of 20 grams or less of marihuana and if the offense was committed in the
vicinity of a school or in the vicinity of a juvenile, trafficking in
marihuana is a misdemeanor of the third degree.



      (3)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is a combination of a
fentanyl-related compound and marihuana, one of the following applies:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(3)(b)
of this section, the offender is guilty of trafficking in marihuana and shall
be punished under division (C)(2) of this section. The offender is not guilty
of trafficking in a fentanyl-related compound and shall not be charged with,
convicted of, or punished under R.C. § 2925.03(C)(9) for trafficking in a
fentanyl-related compound.



         (b)   If the offender knows or has reason to know that
the compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is the drug involved
contains a fentanyl-related compound, the offender is guilty of trafficking
in a fentanyl-related compound and shall be punished under R.C. §
2925.03(C)(9).



   (D)   As used in this section, "drug" includes any substance that is
represented to be a drug.



(R.C. § 2925.03(A) - (C), (I)) Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Felony drug trafficking offenses, see R.C. § 2925.03(C)



§ 138.03  DRUG POSSESSION OFFENSES.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly obtain, possess, or use a controlled
substance or a controlled substance analog.



   (B)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:



         (a)   Manufacturers, licensed health professionals
authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, and other
persons whose conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723,
4729, 4730, 4731, and 4741.



         (b)   If the offense involves an anabolic steroid, any
person who is conducting or participating in a research project involving the
use of an anabolic steroid if the project has been approved by the United
States Food and Drug Administration.



         (c)   Any person who sells, offers for sale, prescribes,
dispenses, or administers for livestock or other nonhuman species an anabolic
steroid that is expressly intended for administration through implants to
livestock or other nonhuman species and approved for that purpose under the
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, and is sold, offered for sale,
prescribed, dispensed, or administered for that purpose in accordance with
that Act.



         (d)   Any person who obtained the controlled substance
pursuant to a prescription issued by a licensed health professional
authorized to prescribe drugs if the prescription was issued for a legitimate
medical purpose and not altered, forged, or obtained through deception or
commission of a theft offense. As used in this division (B)(1)(d),
"deception" and "theft offense" have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.



      (2)   (a)   As used in division (B)(2) of this section:



            COMMUNITY ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER. Has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 5119.01.



            COMMUNITY CONTROL SANCTION. Has the same meanings as
in R.C. § 2929.01



            DRUG TREATMENT PROGRAM. Has the same meanings as in
R.C. § 2929.01.



            HEALTH CARE FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 2919.16.



            MINOR DRUG POSSESSION OFFENSE. A violation of this
section or R.C. § 2925.11 that is a misdemeanor or a felony of the fifth
degree.



            PEACE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2935.01.



            POST-RELEASE CONTROL SANCTION. Has the same meaning
as in R.C. § 2967.28.



            PUBLIC AGENCY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2930.01.



            QUALIFIED INDIVIDUAL. A person who is not on
community control or post-release control and is a person acting in good
faith who seeks or obtains medical assistance for another person who is
experiencing a drug overdose, a person who experiences a drug overdose and
who seeks medical assistance for that overdose, or a person who is the
subject of another person seeking or obtaining medical assistance for that
overdose as described in division (B)(2)(b) of this section.



            SEEK OR OBTAIN MEDICAL ASSISTANCE. Includes, but is
not limited to making a 9-1-1 call, contacting in person or by telephone call
an on-duty peace officer, or transporting or presenting a person to a health
care facility.



         (b)   Subject to division (B)(2)(f) of this section, a
qualified individual shall not be arrested, charged, prosecuted, convicted,
or penalized pursuant to this chapter for a minor drug possession offense if
all of the following apply:



            1.   The evidence of the obtaining, possession, or
use of the controlled substance or controlled substance analog that would be
the basis of the offense was obtained as a result of the qualified individual
seeking the medical assistance or experiencing an overdose and needing
medical assistance.



            2.   Subject to division (B)(2)(g) of this
section, within 30 days after seeking or obtaining the medical assistance,
the qualified individual seeks and obtains a screening and receives a
referral for treatment from a community addiction services provider or a
properly credentialed addiction treatment professional.



            3.   Subject to division (B)(2)(g) of this
section, the qualified individual who obtains a screening and receives a
referral for treatment under division (B)(2)(b)2. of this section, upon the
request of any prosecuting attorney, submits documentation to the prosecuting
attorney that verifies that the qualified individual satisfied the
requirements of that division. The documentation shall be limited to the date
and time of the screening obtained and referral received.



         (c)   If a person is found to be in violation of any
community control sanction and if the violation is a result of either of the
following, the court shall first consider ordering the person’s
participation or continued participation in a drug treatment program or
mitigating the penalty specified in R.C. § 2929.13, 2929.15, or 2929.25, or
any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, whichever is applicable,
after which the court has the discretion either to order the person’s
participation or continued participation in a drug treatment program or to
impose the penalty with the mitigating factor specified in any of those
applicable sections:



            1.   Seeking or obtaining medical assistance in
good faith for another person who is experiencing a drug overdose;



            2.   Experiencing a drug overdose and seeking
medical assistance for that overdose or being the subject of another person
seeking or obtaining medical assistance for that overdose as described in
division (B)(2)(b) of this section.



         (d)   If a person is found to be in violation of any
post-release control sanction and if the violation is a result of either of
the following, the court or the parole board shall first consider ordering
the person’s participation or continued participation in a drug treatment
program or mitigating the penalty specified in R.C. § 2929.141 or 2967.28,
whichever is applicable, after which the court or the parole board has the
discretion either to order the person’s participation or continued
participation in a drug treatment program or to impose the penalty with the
mitigating factor specified in either of those applicable sections:



            1.   Seeking or obtaining medical assistance in
good faith for another person who is experiencing a drug overdose;



            2.   Experiencing a drug overdose and seeking
medical assistance for that emergency or being the subject of another person
seeking or obtaining medical assistance for that overdose as described in
division (B)(2)(b) of this section.



         (e)   Nothing in division (B)(2)(b) of this section
shall be construed to do any of the following:



            1.   Limit the admissibility of any evidence in
connection with the investigation or prosecution of a crime with regards to a
defendant who does not qualify for the protections of division (B)(2)(b) of
this section or with regards to any crime other than a minor drug possession
offense committed by a person who qualifies for protection pursuant to
division (B)(2)(b) of this section for a minor drug possession offense;



            2.   Limit any seizure of evidence or contraband
otherwise permitted by law;



            3.   Limit or abridge the authority of a peace
officer to detain or take into custody a person in the course of an
investigation or to effectuate an arrest for any offense except as provided
in that division;



            4.   Limit, modify, or remove any immunity from
liability available pursuant to law in effect prior to September 13, 2016 to
any public agency or to an employee of any public agency.



         (f)   Division (B)(2)(b) of this section does not apply
to any person who twice previously has been granted an immunity under
division (B)(2)(b) of this section. No person shall be granted an immunity
under division (B)(2)(b) of this section more than two times.



         (g)   Nothing in this section shall compel any qualified
individual to disclose protected health information in a way that conflicts
with the requirements of the “Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act of 1996,” 104 Pub. L. No. 191, 110 Stat. 2021, 42 U.S.C.
§§ 1320d et seq., as amended, and regulations promulgated by the United
States Department of Health and Human Services to implement the act or the
requirements of 42 C.F.R. Part 2.



   (C)    Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
one of the following:



      (1)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance included in Schedule I or Schedule II,
with the exception of marihuana or hashish, whoever violates division (A) of
this section is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.



      (2)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance included in Schedule III, Schedule IV, or
Schedule V, whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
possession of drugs. The penalty for the offense shall be determined as
follows:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(2)(b)
of this section, possession of drugs is a misdemeanor of the first degree or,
if the offender previously has been convicted of a drug abuse offense, a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



         (b)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or
exceeds the bulk amount, possession of drugs is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.



      (3)   If the drug involved in the violation is marihuana or a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance containing marihuana other than
hashish, whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
possession of marihuana. The penalty for the offense shall be determined as
follows:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(3)(b)
or (C)(3)(c) of this section, possession of marihuana is a minor misdemeanor.



         (b)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or
exceeds 100 grams but is less than 200 grams, possession of marihuana is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



         (c)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or
exceeds 200 grams, possession of marihuana is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



      (4)   If the drug involved in the violation is hashish or a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance containing hashish, whoever
violates division (A) of this section is guilty of possession of hashish. The
penalty for the offense shall be determined as follows:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(4)(b)
or (C)(4)(c) of this section, possession of hashish is a minor misdemeanor.



         (b)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or
exceeds five grams but is less than ten grams of hashish in a solid form or
equals or exceeds one gram but is less than two grams of hashish in a liquid
concentrate, liquid extract, or liquid distillate form, possession of hashish
is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



         (c)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or
exceeds ten grams of hashish in a solid form or equals or exceeds two grams
of hashish in a liquid concentrate, liquid extract, or liquid distillate
form, possession of hashish is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.



      (5)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is a combination of a
fentanyl-related compound and marihuana, one of the following applies:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(5)(b)
of this section, the offender is guilty of possession of marihuana and shall
be punished as provided in division (C)(3) of this section. Except as
otherwise provided in division (C)(5)(b) of this section, the offender is not
guilty of possession of a fentanyl-related compound under R.C. §
2925.11(C)(11) and shall not be charged with, convicted of, or punished under
R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11) for possession of a fentanyl-related compound.



         (b)   If the offender knows or has reason to know that
the compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is the drug involved
contains a fentanyl-related compound, the offender is guilty of possession of
a fentanyl-related compound and shall be punished under R.C. §
2925.11(C)(11).



      (6)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is a combination of a
fentanyl-related compound and any Schedule III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V
controlled substance that is not a fentanyl-related compound, one of the
following applies:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(6)(b)
of this section, the offender is guilty of possession of drugs and shall be
punished as provided in division (C)(2) of this section. Except as otherwise
provided in division (C)(6)(b) of this section, the offender is not guilty of
possession of a fentanyl-related compound under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11) and
shall not be charged with, convicted of, or punished under R.C. §
2925.11(C)(11) for possession of a fentanyl-related compound.



         (b)   If the offender knows or has reason to know that
the compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is the drug involved
contains a fentanyl-related compound, the offender is guilty of possession of
a fentanyl-related compound and shall be punished under R.C. §
2925.11(C)(11).



   (D)   Arrest or conviction for a minor misdemeanor violation of this
section does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the
person so arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the
person's criminal record, including any inquiries contained in any
application for employment, license, or other right or privilege, or made in
connection with the person's appearance as a witness.



   (E)   (1)   In addition to any prison term or jail term
authorized or required by division (C) of this section and R.C. §§ 2929.13,
2929.14, 2929.22, 2929.24, and 2929.25, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, and in addition to any other sanction that is imposed
for the offense under this section, R.C. §§ 2929.11 through 2929.18, or
R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the court that sentences an offender who is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a violation of division (A) of this section may suspend the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit for not
more than five years. However, if the offender pleaded guilty to or was
convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance or the law of another state or the United States arising
out of the same set of circumstances as the violation, the court shall
suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit for not more than five years.



      (2)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in
addition to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the
court immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.



   (F)   (1)   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of
the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under
this section prior to September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the
sentencing court requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an
offender who pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. §
4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another
state or the United States that arose out of the same set of circumstances as
the violation for which the offender’s license or permit was suspended
under this section shall not file such a motion.



      (2)   Upon the filing of a motion under division (F) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the
suspension.



(R.C. § 2925.11) Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Felony drug possession offenses, see R.C. § 2925.11(C)



§ 138.04  POSSESSING DRUG ABUSE INSTRUMENTS.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly make, obtain, possess, or use any
instrument, article, or thing the customary and primary purpose of which is
for the administration or use of a dangerous drug, other than marihuana, when
the instrument involved is a hypodermic or syringe, whether or not of crude
or extemporized manufacture or assembly, and the instrument, article, or
thing involved has been used by the offender to unlawfully administer or use
a dangerous drug, other than marihuana, or to prepare a dangerous drug, other
than marihuana, for unlawful administration or use.



   (B)   This section does not apply to manufacturers, licensed health
professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of
pharmacies, and other persons whose conduct was in accordance with R.C.
Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, and 4741.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing drug
abuse instruments, a misdemeanor of the second degree.  If the offender
previously has been convicted of a drug abuse offense, violation of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



   (D)   (1)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an
offender for a violation of this section, the court may suspend for not more
than five years the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or permit. However, if the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a
violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance or the law of another state or the United States arising out of the
same set of circumstances as the violation, the court shall suspend the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit for not
more than five years. If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in
addition to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the
court immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.



      (2)   (a)   Any offender who received a mandatory
suspension of the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit under this section prior to September 13, 2016 may file a motion with
the sentencing court requesting the termination of the suspension. However,
an offender who pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. §
4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another
state or the United States that arose out of the same set of circumstances as
the violation for which the offender’s license or permit was suspended
under this section shall not file such a motion.



         (b)   Upon the filing of a motion under division (D)(2)
of this section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the
suspension.



(R.C. § 2925.12)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 138.05  PERMITTING DRUG ABUSE.



   (A)   No person who is the owner, operator, or person in charge of a
locomotive, watercraft, aircraft, or other vehicle, as defined in R.C. §
4501.01, shall knowingly permit the vehicle to be used for the commission of
a felony drug abuse offense.



   (B)   No person, who is the owner, lessee, or occupant, or who has
custody, control, or supervision of premises, or real estate, including
vacant land, shall knowingly permit his or her premises, or real estate,
including vacant land, to be used for the commission of a felony drug abuse
offense by another person.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of permitting drug
abuse.



      (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(2) of this section,
permitting drug abuse is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (2)    Permitting drug abuse is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law if the felony drug abuse offense in question is a
violation of R.C. § 2925.02, 2925.03, or 2925.04, or if the felony drug
abuse offense in question is a violation of R.C. § 2925.041 and the offender
had actual knowledge, at the time the offender permitted the vehicle,
premises, or real estate to be used as described in division (A) or (B) of
this section, that the person who assembled or possessed the chemicals in
question in violation of R.C. § 2925.041 had assembled or possessed them
with the intent to manufacture a controlled substance in Schedule I or
Schedule II in violation of R.C. § 2925.04.



   (D)   Any premises or real estate that is permitted to be used in
violation of division (B) of this section constitutes a nuisance subject to
abatement pursuant to R.C. Chapter 3767.



(R.C. § 2925.13(A) - (C), (F))   Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 138.06  ILLEGAL CULTIVATION OF MARIHUANA.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly cultivate marihuana.



   (B)   This section does not apply to any person listed in R.C. §
2925.03(B)(1), (2) or (3), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
to the extent and under the circumstances described in that division.



   (C)   Whoever commits a violation of division (A) of this section is
guilty of illegal cultivation of marihuana.



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in the following divisions,
illegal cultivation of marihuana is a minor misdemeanor or, if the offense
was committed in the vicinity of a school or in the vicinity of a juvenile, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



      (2)   If the amount of marihuana involved equals or exceeds
100 grams but is less than 200 grams, illegal cultivation of marihuana is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree or, if the offense was committed in the
vicinity of a school or in the vicinity of a juvenile, a misdemeanor of the
third degree.



      (3)   If the amount of marihuana involved equals or exceeds
200 grams, illegal cultivation of marihuana is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.



   (D)   Arrest or conviction for a minor misdemeanor violation of this
section does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the
person so arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the
person's criminal record, including any inquiries contained in any
application for employment, license, or other right or privilege, or made in
connection with the person's appearance as a witness.



(R.C. § 2925.04(A), (B), (C)(5), (G))   Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Illegal manufacturing of controlled substances, felony, see R.C. §
2925.04



   Sale or use of drugs not approved by Food and Drug Administration,
felony, see R.C. § 2925.09



§ 138.07  ABUSING HARMFUL INTOXICANTS.



   (A)   Except for lawful research, clinical, medical, dental, or
veterinary purposes, no person, with purpose to induce intoxication or
similar physiological effects, shall obtain, possess, or use a harmful
intoxicant.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of abusing harmful
intoxicants, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the offender previously
has been convicted of a drug abuse offense, abusing harmful intoxicants is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



   (C)   (1)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an
offender for a violation of this section, the court may suspend for not more
than five years the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or permit. However, if the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a
violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance or the law of another state or the United States arising out of the
same set of circumstances as the violation, the court shall suspend the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit for not
more than five years. If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in
addition to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the
court immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.



      (2)   (a)   Any offender who received a mandatory
suspension of the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit under this section prior to the September 13, 2016 may file a motion
with the sentencing court requesting the termination of the suspension.
However, an offender who pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of
R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or law of
another state or the United States that arose out of the same set of
circumstances as the violation for which the offender’s license or permit
was suspended under this section shall not file such a motion.



         (b)   Upon the filing of a motion under division (C)(2)
of this section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the
suspension.



(R.C. § 2925.31)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 138.08  ILLEGAL DISPENSING OF DRUG SAMPLES.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly furnish a sample drug to another
person.



   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to manufacturers,
wholesalers, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, licensed health professionals
authorized to prescribe drugs, and other persons whose conduct is in
accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4725, 4729, 4730, 4731, and
4741.



   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal
dispensing of drug samples.



      (2)    If the drug involved in the offense is a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance included in Schedule I or Schedule II,
with the exception of marihuana, illegal dispensing of drug samples is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (3)   If the drug involved in the offense is a dangerous drug
or a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance included in Schedule III,
Schedule IV or Schedule V, or is marihuana, the penalty for the offense shall
be determined as follows:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in the following
division, illegal dispensing of drug samples is a misdemeanor of the second
degree.



         (b)   If the offense was committed in the vicinity of a
school or in the vicinity of a juvenile, illegal dispensing of drug samples
is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 2925.36(A) - (C)) Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Felony offenses, see R.C. § 2925.36(C)(2)



§ 138.09  FEDERAL PROSECUTION BAR TO MUNICIPAL PROSECUTION.



   No person shall be prosecuted for a violation of this chapter if the
person has been acquitted or convicted under the federal drug abuse control
laws of the same act or omission which, it is alleged, constitutes a
violation of this chapter.



(R.C. §§ 2925.50, 3719.19)



§ 138.10  NITROUS OXIDE: IMPROPER DISPENSING OR DISTRIBUTION; POSSESSION IN
A MOTOR VEHICLE.



   (A)   Improper dispensing or distribution.



      (1)   No person who dispenses or distributes nitrous oxide in
cartridges shall fail to comply with either of the following:



         (a)   The record-keeping requirements established under
division (A)(3) of this section.



         (b)   The labeling and transaction identification
requirements established under division (A)(4) of this section.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(1)(a) or (A)(1)(b) of this
section is guilty of improperly dispensing or distributing nitrous oxide, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



      (3)   Beginning July 1, 2001, a person who dispenses or
distributes nitrous oxide shall record each transaction involving the
dispensing or distribution of the nitrous oxide on a separate card.  The
person shall require the purchaser to sign the card and provide a complete
residence address.  The person dispensing or distributing the nitrous oxide
shall sign and date the card.  The person shall retain the card recording a
transaction for one year from the date of the transaction.  The person shall
maintain the cards at the person's business address and make them available
during normal business hours for inspection and copying by officers or
employees of the State Board of Pharmacy or of other law enforcement agencies
that are authorized to investigate violations of this code, R.C. Chapters
2925, 3719, or 4729, or federal drug abuse control laws.  The cards used to
record each transaction shall inform the purchaser of the following:



         (a)   That nitrous oxide cartridges are to be used only
for purposes of preparing food;



         (b)   That inhalation of nitrous oxide can have
dangerous health effects; and



         (c)   That it is a violation of state law to distribute
or dispense cartridges of nitrous oxide to any person under age 21,
punishable as a felony of the fifth degree.



      (4)   (a)   Each cartridge of nitrous oxide dispensed or
distributed in this municipality shall bear the following printed warning: 
“Nitrous oxide cartridges are to be used only for purposes of preparing
food.  Nitrous oxide cartridges may not be sold to persons under age 21. 
Do not inhale contents.  Misuse can be dangerous to your health.”



         (b)   Each time a person dispenses or distributes one or
more cartridges of nitrous oxide, the person shall mark the packaging
containing the cartridges with a label or other device that identifies the
person who dispensed or distributed the nitrous oxide and the person's
business address.



(R.C. § 2925.32(B)(4), (D)(2), (F), (G))



   (B)   Possession in a motor vehicle.



      (1)   As used in this section, MOTOR VEHICLE, STREET, and
HIGHWAY have the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.



      (2)   Unless authorized by this code or by state law, no
person shall possess an open cartridge of nitrous oxide in either of the
following circumstances:



         (a)   While operating or being a passenger in or on a
motor vehicle on a street, highway, or other public or private property open
to the public for purposes of vehicular traffic or parking.



         (b)   While being in or on a stationary motor vehicle on
a street, highway, or other public or private property open to the public for
purposes of vehicular traffic or parking.



      (3)   Whoever violates this division (B) is guilty of
possessing nitrous oxide in a motor vehicle, a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.



      (4)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an
offender for possessing nitrous oxide in a motor vehicle, the court may
suspend for not more than five years the offender’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit.



(R.C. § 2925.33)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Trafficking in harmful intoxicants, see R.C. § 2925.32



§ 138.11  LABORATORY REPORT REQUIRED.



   (A)   (1)   In any criminal prosecution for a violation of this
chapter or R.C. Chapters 2925 or 3719, a laboratory report from the Bureau of
Criminal Identification and Investigation or a laboratory operated by another
law enforcement agency, or a laboratory established by or under the authority
of an institution of higher education that has its main campus in this state
and that is accredited by the Association of American Universities or the
North Central Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools, primarily for
the purpose of providing scientific service to law enforcement agencies, and
signed by the person performing the analysis, stating that the substance that
is the basis of the alleged offense has been weighed and analyzed and stating
the findings as to the content, weight, and identity of the substance and
that it contains any amount of a controlled substance and the number and
description of unit dosages, is prima facie evidence of the content,
identity, and weight or the existence and number of unit dosages of the
substance. In any criminal prosecution for a violation of R.C. § 2925.041 or
a violation of this chapter, R.C. Chapter 2925 or R.C. Chapter 3719 that is
based on the possession of chemicals sufficient to produce a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance included in Schedule I, II, III, IV, or V,
a laboratory report from the Bureau or from any laboratory that is operated
or established as described in this division that is signed by the person
performing the analysis, stating that the substances that are the basis of
the alleged offense have been weighed and analyzed and stating the findings
as to the content, weight, and identity of each of the substances, is prima
facie evidence of the content, identity, and weight of the substances.



      (2)   Attached to that report shall be a copy of a notarized
statement by the signer of the report giving the name of the signer and
stating that the signer is an employee of the laboratory issuing the report
and that performing the analysis is a part of the signer’s regular duties,
and giving an outline of the signer’s education, training, and experience
for performing an analysis of materials included under this section.  The
signer shall attest that scientifically accepted tests were performed with
due caution, and that the evidence was handled in accordance with established
and accepted procedures while in the custody of the laboratory.



   (B)   The prosecuting attorney shall serve a copy of the report on
the attorney of record for the accused, or on the accused if the accused has
no attorney, prior to any proceeding in which the report is to be used
against the accused other than at a preliminary hearing or grand jury
proceeding where the report may be used without having been previously served
upon the accused.



   (C)   The report shall not be prima facie evidence of the contents,
identity, and weight or the existence and number of unit dosages of the
substance if the accused or the accused’s attorney demands the testimony of
the person signing the report, by serving the demand upon the prosecuting
attorney, within seven days from the accused or the accused’s attorney's
receipt of the report.  The time may be extended by a trial judge in the
interests of justice.



   (D)   Any report issued for use under this section shall contain
notice of the right of the accused to demand, and the manner in which the
accused shall demand, the testimony of the person signing the report.



   (E)   Any person who is accused of a violation of this chapter or
R.C. Chapters 2925 or 3719 is entitled, upon written request made to the
prosecuting attorney, to have a portion of the substance that is, or of each
of the substances that are, the basis of the alleged violation preserved for
the benefit of independent analysis performed by a laboratory analyst
employed by the accused person, or, if the accused is indigent, by a
qualified laboratory analyst appointed by the court.  Such portion shall be
a representative sample of the entire substance that is, or of each of the
substances that are, the basis of the alleged violation and shall be of
sufficient size, in the opinion of the court, to permit the accused's analyst
to make a thorough scientific analysis concerning the identity of the
substance or substances.  The prosecuting attorney shall provide the
accused's analyst with the sample portion at least 14 days prior to trial,
unless the trial is to be held in a court not of record or unless the accused
person is charged with a minor misdemeanor, in which case the prosecuting
attorney shall provide the accused's analyst with the sample portion at least
three days prior to trial.  If the prosecuting attorney determines that such
a sample portion cannot be preserved and given to the accused's analyst, the
prosecuting attorney shall so inform the accused person, or the accused’s
attorney.  In such a circumstance, the accused person is entitled, upon
written request made to the prosecuting attorney, to have the accused’s
privately employed or court appointed analyst present at an analysis of the
substance that is, or the substances that are, the basis of the alleged
violation, and, upon further written request, to receive copies of all
recorded scientific data that result from the analysis and that can be used
by an analyst in arriving at conclusions, findings, or opinions concerning
the identity of the substance or substances subject to the analysis.



   (F)   In addition to the rights provided under division (E) of this
section, any person who is accused of a violation of this chapter or R.C.
Chapters 2925 or 3719 that involves a bulk amount of a controlled substance,
or any multiple thereof, or who is accused of a violation of R.C. § 2925.11
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, other than a minor
misdemeanor violation, that involves marihuana, is entitled, upon written
request made to the prosecuting attorney, to have a laboratory analyst of the
accused’s choice, or, if the accused is indigent, a qualified laboratory
analyst appointed by the court, present at a measurement or weighing of the
substance that is the basis of the alleged violation.  Also, the accused
person is entitled, upon further written request, to receive copies of all
recorded scientific data that result from the measurement or weighing and
that can be used by an analyst in arriving at conclusions, findings, or
opinions concerning the weight, volume, or number of unit doses of the
substance subject to the measurement or weighing.



(R.C. § 2925.51)



   (G)   In addition to the financial sanctions authorized or required
under R.C. §§ 2929.18 and 2929.28 and to any costs otherwise authorized or
required under any provision of law, the court imposing sentence upon an
offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a drug abuse offense may
order the offender to pay to the state, municipal, or county law enforcement
agencies that handled the investigation and prosecution all of the costs that
the state, municipal corporation, or county reasonably incurred in having
tests performed under this section or R.C. § 2925.51 or in any other manner
on any substance that was the basis of, or involved in, the offense to
determine whether the substance contained any amount of a controlled
substance if the results of the tests indicate that the substance tested
contained any controlled substance. No court shall order an offender under
this section to pay the costs of tests performed on a substance if the
results of the tests do not indicate that the substance tested contained any
controlled substance. The court shall hold a hearing to determine the amount
of costs to be imposed under this section. The court may hold the hearing as
part of the sentencing hearing for the offender.



(R.C. § 2925.511)



§ 138.12  COUNTERFEIT CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly possess any counterfeit controlled
substance.



   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section shall be guilty
of possession of counterfeit controlled substances, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.



(R.C. § 2925.37(A), (G))  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Trafficking and other felony counterfeit controlled substance offenses,
see R.C. § 2925.37(H) - (M)



§ 138.13  USE, POSSESSION, OR SALE OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.



   (A)   As used in this section, DRUG PARAPHERNALIA means any
equipment, product, or material of any kind that is used by the offender,
intended by the offender for use, or designed for use, in propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging,
storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introduced into the human body, a controlled substance in violation of this
chapter.  DRUG PARAPHERNALIA includes, but is not limited to, any of the
following equipment, products, or materials that are used by the offender,
intended by the offender for use, or designed by the offender for use, in any
of the following manners:



      (1)   A kit for propagating, cultivating, growing, or
harvesting any species of a plant that is a controlled substance or from
which a controlled substance can be derived.



      (2)   A kit for manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing, or preparing a controlled substance.



      (3)   Any object, instrument, or device for manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing methamphetamine.



      (4)   An isomerization device for increasing the potency of
any species of a plant that is a controlled substance.



      (5)   Testing equipment for identifying, or analyzing the
strength, effectiveness, or purity of, a controlled substance.



      (6)   A scale or balance for weighing or measuring a
controlled substance.



      (7)   A diluent or adulterant, such as quinine hydrochloride,
mannitol, mannite, dextrose, or lactose, for cutting a controlled substance.



      (8)   A separation gin or sifter for removing twigs and seeds
from, or otherwise cleaning or refining, marihuana.



      (9)   A blender, bowl, container, spoon, or mixing device for
compounding a controlled substance.



      (10)   A capsule, balloon, envelope, or container for
packaging small quantities of a controlled substance.



      (11)   A container or device for storing or concealing a
controlled substance.



      (12)   A hypodermic syringe, needle, or instrument for
parenterally injecting a controlled substance into the human body.



      (13)   An object, instrument, or device for ingesting,
inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body, marihuana, cocaine,
hashish, or hashish oil, such as a metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone,
plastic, or ceramic pipe, with or without a screen, permanent screen, hashish
head, or punctured metal bowl; water pipe; carburetion tube or device;
smoking or carburetion mask; roach clip or similar object used to hold
burning material, such as a marihuana cigarette, that has become too small or
too short to be held in the hand; miniature cocaine spoon, or cocaine vial;
chamber pipe; carburetor pipe; electric pipe; air driver pipe; chillum; bong;
or ice pipe or chiller.



   (B)   In determining if any equipment, product, or material is drug
paraphernalia, a court or law enforcement officer shall consider, in addition
to other relevant factors, the following:



      (1)   Any statement by the owner or by anyone in control of
the equipment, product, or material, concerning its use.



      (2)   The proximity in time or space of the equipment,
product, or material, or of the act relating to the equipment, product, or
material, to a violation of any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter
2925.



      (3)   The proximity of the equipment, product, or material to
any controlled substance.



      (4)   The existence of any residue of a controlled substance
on the equipment, product, or material.



      (5)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of the
owner, or of anyone in control, of the equipment, product, or material, to
deliver it to any person whom he or she knows intends to use the equipment,
product, or material to facilitate a violation of any provision of this
chapter or R.C. Chapter 2925.  A finding that the owner or anyone in control
of the equipment, product, or material is not guilty of a violation of any
other provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2925 does not prevent a
finding that the equipment, product, or material was intended or designed by
the offender for use as drug paraphernalia.



      (6)   Any oral or written instruction provided with the
equipment, product, or material concerning its use.



      (7)   Any descriptive material accompanying the equipment,
product, or material and explaining or depicting its use.



      (8)   National or local advertising concerning the use of the
equipment, product, or material.



      (9)   The manner and circumstances in which the equipment,
product, or material is displayed for sale.



      (10)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of the
sales of the equipment, product, or material to the total sales of the
business enterprise.



      (11)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses of the
equipment, product, or material in the community.



      (12)   Expert testimony concerning the use of the equipment,
product, or material.



   (C)   (1)   Subject to division (D)(2) of this section, no person
shall knowingly use, or possess with purpose to use, drug paraphernalia.



      (2)   No person shall knowingly sell, or possess or
manufacture with purpose to sell, drug paraphernalia, if he or she knows or
reasonably should know that the equipment, product, or material will be used
as drug paraphernalia.



      (3)   No person shall place an advertisement in any newspaper,
magazine, handbill, or other publication that is published and printed and
circulates primarily within this state, if he or she knows that the purpose
of the advertisement is to promote the illegal sale in this municipality or
in this state of the equipment, product, or material that the offender
intended or designed for use as drug paraphernalia.



   (D)   (1)   This section does not apply to manufacturers,
licensed health professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists,
owners of pharmacies, and other persons whose conduct is in accordance with
R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, and 4741.  This section
shall not be construed to prohibit the possession or use of a hypodermic as
authorized by R.C. § 3719.172.



      (2)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not apply to a
person’s use, or possession with purpose to use, any drug paraphernalia
that is equipment, a product, or material of any kind that is used by the
person, intended by the person for use, or designed for use in storing,
containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing into the human body marihuana.



   (E)   Notwithstanding R.C. Chapter 2981, any drug paraphernalia that
was used, possessed, sold, or manufactured in violation of this section shall
be seized, after a conviction for that violation, shall be forfeited, and
upon forfeiture shall be disposed of pursuant to R.C. § 2981.12(B).



   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates division (C)(1) of this section is
guilty of illegal use or possession of drug paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.



      (2)   Except as provided in division (F)(3) of this section,
whoever violates division (C)(2) of this section is guilty of dealing in drug
paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the second degree.



      (3)   Whoever violates division (C)(2) of this section by
selling drug paraphernalia to a juvenile is guilty of selling drug
paraphernalia to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (4)   Whoever violates division (C)(3) of this section is
guilty of illegal advertising of drug paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the
second degree.



   (G)   (1)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an
offender for a violation of this section, the court may suspend for not more
than five years the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or permit. However, if the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a
violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance or the law of another state or the United States arising out of the
same set of circumstances as the violation, the court shall suspend the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit for not
more than five years. If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in
addition to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the
court immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.



      (2)   (a)   Any offender who received a mandatory
suspension of the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit under this section prior to September 13, 2016 may file a motion with
the sentencing court requesting the termination of the suspension. However,
an offender who pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. §
4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another
state or the United States that arose out of the same set of circumstances as
the violation for which the offender’s license or permit was suspended
under this section shall not file such a motion.



         (b)   Upon the filing of a motion under division (G)(2)
of this section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the
suspension.



(R.C. § 2925.14)



   (H)   Illegal use or possession of marihuana drug paraphernalia.



      (1)   As used in this division (H), DRUG PARAPHERNALIA has the
same meaning as in division (A) of this section.



      (2)   In determining if any equipment, product, or material is
drug paraphernalia, a court or law enforcement officer shall consider, in
addition to other relevant factors, all factors identified in division (B) of
this section.



      (3)   No person shall knowingly use, or possess with purpose
to use, any drug paraphernalia that is equipment, a product, or material of
any kind that is used by the person, intended by the person for use, or
designed for use in storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting,
inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body marihuana.



      (4)   This division (H) does not apply to any person
identified in division (D)(1) of this section, and it shall not be construed
to prohibit the possession or use of a hypodermic as authorized by R.C. §
3719.172.



      (5)   Division (E) of this section applies with respect to any
drug paraphernalia that was used or possessed in violation of this section.



      (6)   Whoever violates division (H)(3) of this section is
guilty of illegal use or possession of marihuana drug paraphernalia, a minor
misdemeanor.



      (7)   (a)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon
an offender for a violation division (H) of this section, the court may
suspend for not more than five years the offender’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit. However, if the offender pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or the law of another state or
the United States arising out of the same set of circumstances as the
violation, the court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit for not more than five years. If the offender is
a professionally licensed person, in addition to any other sanction imposed
for a violation of division (H) of this section, the court immediately shall
comply with R.C. § 2925.38.



         (b)   1.   Any offender who received a mandatory
suspension of the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit under division (H) of this section prior to September 13, 2016 may
file a motion with the sentencing court requesting the termination of the
suspension. However, an offender who pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a
violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance or law of another state or the United States that arose out of the
same set of circumstances as the violation for which the offender’s license
or permit was suspended under division (H) of this section shall not file
such a motion.



            2.   Upon the filing of a motion under division
(H)(7)(b) of this section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may
terminate the suspension.



(R.C. § 2925.141)



§ 138.14  CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE OR PRESCRIPTION LABELS.



   (A)   Whenever a manufacturer sells a controlled substance, and
whenever a wholesaler sells a controlled substance in a package the
wholesaler has prepared, the manufacturer or wholesaler shall securely affix
to each package in which the controlled substance is contained a label
showing in legible English the name and address of the vendor and the
quantity, kind and form of controlled substance contained therein.  No
person, except a pharmacist for the purpose of dispensing a controlled
substance upon a prescription, shall alter, deface or remove any label so
affixed.



   (B)   No person shall alter, deface or remove any label affixed
pursuant to R.C. § 3719.08 as long as any of the original contents remain.



(R.C. § 3719.08(A), (E))



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.  If the offender previously has been convicted of a
violation of this section, or R.C. § 3719.07 or 3719.08, or a drug abuse
offense, a violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.  If the violation involves the sale, offer to sell,
or possession of a Schedule I or II controlled substance, with the exception
of marihuana, and if the offender, as a result of the violation, is a major
drug offender, then R.C. § 3719.99(D) applies.



(R.C. § 3719.99(C))  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 138.15  POSSESSION, SALE AND DISPOSAL OF HYPODERMICS.



   (A)   Possession of a hypodermic is authorized for the following:



      (1)   A manufacturer or distributor of, or dealer in
hypodermics, or medication packaged in hypodermics, and any authorized agent
of employee of that manufacturer, distributor or dealer, in the regular
course of business;



      (2)   A terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, in the
regular course of business;



      (3)   A person authorized to administer injections, in the
regular course of the person's profession or employment;



      (4)   A person, when the hypodermic in his possession was
lawfully obtained and is kept and used for the purpose of self-administration
of insulin or other drug prescribed for the treatment of disease by a
licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs;



      (5)   A person whose use of a hypodermic is for legal
research, clinical, educational or medicinal purposes;



      (6)   A farmer, for the lawful administration of a drug to an
animal;



      (7)   A person whose use of a hypodermic is for lawful
professional, mechanical, trade or craft purposes.



   (B)   No manufacturer or distributor of, or dealer in, hypodermics
or medication packaged in hypodermics, or their authorized agents or
employees, and no terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, shall display any
hypodermic for sale.  No person authorized to possess a hypodermic pursuant
to division (A) of this section shall negligently fail to take reasonable
precautions to prevent any hypodermic in the person's possession from theft
or acquisition by any unauthorized person.



(R.C. § 3719.172(A), (B))



   (C)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.  If the offender previously has been
convicted of a violation of division (B) of this section, R.C. § 3719.05,
3719.06, 3719.13, 3719.172(B), or 3719.31, or a drug abuse offense, a
violation of division (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.



(R.C. § 3719.99(E))  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Felony offenses, see R.C. § 3719.172(C), (D)



§ 138.16  CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE SCHEDULES.



   Controlled Substance Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as established in
R.C. § 3719.41 and amended by R.C. §§ 3719.43 and 3719.44, are hereby
adopted by reference, and shall be treated as if set forth in full herein.



§ 138.17  UNLAWFUL FURNISHING OF PRESCRIPTION TO ENABLE PERSONS TO BE
ISSUED HANDICAPPED PARKING PLACARDS OR LICENSE PLATES.



   (A)   No physician or chiropractor shall do either of the following:



      (1)   Furnish a person with a prescription in order to enable
the person to be issued a removable windshield placard, temporary removable
windshield placard, or license plates under R.C. § 4503.44, knowing that the
person does not meet any of the criteria contained in R.C. § 4503.44(A)(1).



      (2)   Furnish a person with a prescription described in
division (A)(1) of this section and knowingly misstate on the prescription
the length of time the physician or chiropractor expects the person to have
the disability that limits or impairs the person's ability to walk in order
to enable the person to retain a placard issued under R.C. § 4503.44 for a
period of time longer than that which would be estimated by a similar
practitioner under the same or similar circumstances.



(R.C. §§ 4731.481, 4734.161)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.



(R.C. §§ 4731.99(F), 4734.99(B))



Cross-reference:



   Parking privileges for persons with disabilities, see § 76.05



§ 138.18  PSEUDOEPHEDRINE SALES.



   (A)   Unlawful purchases.



      (1)   As used in divisions (A), (B), (C) and (D) of this
section:



         CONSUMER PRODUCT. Any food or drink that is consumed or
used by humans and any drug, including a drug that may be provided legally
only pursuant to a prescription, that is intended to be consumed or used by
humans.



         EPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation
that contains any quantity of ephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers,
or salts of optical isomers.



         EPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains
ephedrine.



         PSEUDOEPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture, or
preparation that contains any quantity of pseudoephedrine, any of its salts,
optical isomers, or salts of optical isomers.



         PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains
pseudoephedrine.



         RETAILER. A place of business that offers consumer products
for sale to the general public.



         SINGLE-INGREDIENT PREPARATION. A compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance that contains a single active ingredient.



         TERMINAL DISTRIBUTOR OF DANGEROUS DRUGS. Has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.



      (2)   (a)   1.   No individual shall knowingly purchase,
receive, or otherwise acquire an amount of pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product that is greater than either of the following unless the
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product is dispensed by a pharmacist
pursuant to a valid prescription issued by a licensed health professional
authorized to prescribe drugs and the conduct of the pharmacist and the
licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs is in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, or 4741:



               a.   Three and six tenths grams within a
period of a single day;



               b.   Nine grams within a period of 30
consecutive days.



            2.   The limits specified in divisions
(A)(2)(a)1.a. and (A)(2)(a)1.b. of this section apply to the total amount of
base pseudoephedrine or base ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product, respectively. The limits do not apply to the product’s
overall weight.



         (b)   It is not a violation of division (B)(1) of this
section for an individual to receive or accept more than an amount of
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product specified in division
(A)(2)(a)1.a. or (A)(2)(a)1.b. of this section if the individual is an
employee of a retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, and the
employee receives or accepts from the retailer or terminal distributor of
dangerous drugs the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product in a sealed
container in connection with manufacturing, warehousing, placement, stocking,
bagging, loading, or unloading of the product.



      (3)   (a)   No individual under 18 years of age shall
knowingly purchase, receive, or otherwise acquire a pseudoephedrine product,
or ephedrine product unless the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
is dispensed by a pharmacist pursuant to a valid prescription issued by a
licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs and the conduct of
the pharmacist and the licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731,
or 4741.



         (b)   Division (A)(3)(a) of this section does not apply
to an individual under 18 years of age who purchases, receives, or otherwise
acquires a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product from any of the
following:



            1.   A licensed health professional authorized to
prescribe drugs or pharmacist who dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides the
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to that individual and whose
conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730,
4731, or 4741;



            2.   A parent or guardian of that individual who
provides the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the individual;



            3.   A person, as authorized by that
individual’s parent or guardian, who dispenses, sells, or otherwise
provides the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the individual;



            4.   A retailer or terminal distributor of
dangerous drugs who provides the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
to that individual if the individual is an employee of the retailer or
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs and the individual receives or
accepts from the retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs the
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product in a sealed container in
connection with manufacturing, warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging,
loading, or unloading of the product.



      (4)   No individual under 18 years of age shall knowingly show
or give false information concerning the individual’s name, age, or other
identification for the purpose of purchasing, receiving, or otherwise
acquiring a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product.



      (5)   No individual shall knowingly fail to comply with the
requirements of R.C. § 3715.051(B).



      (6)   Whoever violates division (A)(2)(a) of this section is
guilty of unlawful purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product, a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (7)   Whoever violates division (A)(3)(a) of this section is
guilty of underage purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product, a delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if
it could be committed by an adult.



      (8)   Whoever violates division (A)(4) of this section is
guilty of using false information to purchase a pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product, a delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor of the first
degree if it could be committed by an adult.



      (9)   Whoever violates division (A)(5) of this section is
guilty of improper purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 2925.55)



   (B)   Unlawful retail sales.



      (1)   (a)   1.   Except as provided in division
(B)(1)(b) of this section, no retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous
drugs or an employee of a retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs
shall knowingly sell, offer to sell, hold for sale, deliver, or otherwise
provide to any individual an amount of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product that is greater than either of the following:



               a.   Three and six tenths grams within a
period of a single day;



               b.   Nine grams within a period of 30
consecutive days.



            2.   The maximum amounts specified in divisions
(B)(1)(a)1.a. and (B)(1)(a)1.b. of this section apply to the total amount of
base pseudoephedrine or base ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product, respectively. The maximum amounts do not apply to the
product’s overall weight.



         (b)   1.   Division (B)(1)(a) of this section does
not apply to any quantity of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
dispensed by a pharmacist pursuant to a valid prescription issued by a
licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs if the conduct of
the pharmacist and the licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731,
or 4741.



            2.   It is not a violation of division (B)(1)(a)
of this section for a retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, or
employee of either to provide to an individual more than an amount of
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product specified in division
(B)(1)(a)1.a. or (B)(1)(a)1.b. of this section under either of the following
circumstances:



               a.   The individual is an employee of the
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, and the employee
receives or accepts from the retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous
drugs, or employee the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product in a
sealed container in connection with manufacturing, warehousing, placement,
stocking, bagging, loading, or unloading of the product;



               b.   A stop-sale alert is generated after
the submission of information to the national precursor log exchange under
the conditions described in R.C. § 3715.052(A)(2).



      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (B)(2)(b) of
this section, no retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs or an
employee of a retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall sell,
offer to sell, hold for sale, deliver, or otherwise provide a pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to an individual who is under 18 years of age.



         (b)   Division (B)(2)(a) of this section does not apply
to any of the following:



            1.   A licensed health professional authorized to
prescribe drugs or pharmacist who dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides a
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to an individual under 18 years
of age and whose conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723,
4729, 4730, 4731, or 4741;



            2.   A parent or guardian of an individual under
18 years of age who provides a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
to the individual;



            3.   A person who, as authorized by the
individual’s parent or guardian, dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides a
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to an individual under 18 years
of age;



            4.   The provision by a retailer, terminal
distributor of dangerous drugs, or employee of either of a pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product in a sealed container to an employee of the
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs who is under 18 years of
age in connection with manufacturing, warehousing, placement, stocking,
bagging, loading, or unloading of the product.



      (3)   No retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs
shall fail to comply with the requirements of R.C. § 3715.051(A) or R.C. §
3715.052(A)(2).



      (4)   No retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs
shall fail to comply with the requirements of R.C. § 3715.052(A)(1).



      (5)   Whoever violates division (B)(1)(a) of this section is
guilty of unlawfully selling a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product,
a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (6)   Whoever violates division (B)(2)(a) of this section is
guilty of unlawfully selling a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
to a minor, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



      (7)   Whoever violates division (B)(3) of this section is
guilty of improper sale of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
misdemeanor of the second degree.



      (8)   Whoever violates division (B)(4) of this section is
guilty of failing to submit information to the national precursor log
exchange, a misdemeanor for which the offender shall be fined not more than
$1,000 per violation.



(R.C. § 2925.56)



   (C)   Transaction scans.



      (1)   As used in this division and division (D) of this
section:



         CARD HOLDER. Means any person who presents a driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or an identification card to a seller, or an
agent or employee of a seller, to purchase or receive any pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product from the seller, agent, or employee.



         IDENTIFICATION CARD and TRANSACTION SCAN DEVICE . Have the
same meanings as in R.C. § 2927.021.



         SELLER. Means a retailer or terminal distributor of
dangerous drugs.



         TRANSACTION SCAN. Means the process by which a seller or an
agent or employee of a seller checks by means of a transaction scan device
the validity of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an
identification card that is presented as a condition for purchasing or
receiving any pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product.



      (2)   (a)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller
may perform a transaction scan by means of a transaction scan device to check
the validity of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
identification card presented by a card holder as a condition for selling,
giving away, or otherwise distributing to the card holder a pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product.



         (b)   If the information deciphered by the transaction
scan performed under division (C)(2)(a) of this section fails to match the
information printed on the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
identification card presented by the card holder, or if the transaction scan
indicates that the information so printed is false or fraudulent, neither the
seller nor any agent or employee of the seller shall sell, give away, or
otherwise distribute any pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the
card holder.



         (c)   Division (C)(2)(a) of this section does not
preclude a seller or an agent or employee of a seller as a condition for
selling, giving away, or otherwise distributing a pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product to the person presenting the document from using a
transaction scan device to check the validity of a document other than a
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification card if the
document includes a bar code or magnetic strip that may be scanned by the
device.



      (3)   Rules adopted by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles under
R.C. § 4301.61(C) apply to the use of transaction scan devices for purposes
of this division (C)  and division (D) of this section.



      (4)   (a)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller
shall electronically or mechanically record or maintain any information
derived from a transaction scan, except the following:



            1.   The name, address, and date of birth of the
person listed on the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
identification card presented by a card holder;



            2.   The expiration date, identification number,
and issuing agency of the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
identification card presented by a card holder.



         (b)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall
use the information that is derived from a transaction scan or that is
permitted to be recorded and maintained under division (C)(4)(a) of this
section except for purposes of division (D) of this section, R.C. § 2925.58,
or R.C. § 3715.052(A)(1).



         (c)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall
use a transaction scan device for a purpose other than the purpose specified
in division (C)(2)(a) of this section.



         (d)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall
sell or otherwise disseminate the information derived from a transaction scan
to any third party, including, but not limited to, selling or otherwise
disseminating that information for any marketing, advertising, or promotional
activities, but a seller or agent or employee of a seller may release that
information pursuant to a court order or as specifically authorized by
division (D) of this section or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code.



      (5)   Nothing in this division (C) or division (D) of this
section relieves a seller or an agent or employee of a seller of any
responsibility to comply with any other applicable state or federal laws or
rules governing the sale, giving away, or other distribution of
pseudoephedrine products or ephedrine products.



      (6)   Whoever violates division (C)(2)(b) or (C)(4) of this
section is guilty of engaging in an illegal pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product transaction scan, and the court may impose upon the
offender a civil penalty of up to $1,000 for each violation. The Clerk of the
Court shall pay each collected civil penalty to the County Treasurer for
deposit into the County Treasury.



(R.C. § 2925.57)



   (D)   Affirmative defenses.



      (1)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may not be
found guilty of a charge of a violation of division (B) of this section in
which the age of the purchaser or other recipient of a pseudoephedrine
product is an element of the alleged violation if the seller, agent, or
employee raises and proves as an affirmative defense that all of the
following occurred:



         (a)   A card holder attempting to purchase or receive a
pseudoephedrine product presented a driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or an identification card.



         (b)   A transaction scan of the driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or identification card that the card holder presented
indicated that the license or card was valid.



         (c)   The pseudoephedrine product was sold, given away,
or otherwise distributed to the card holder in reasonable reliance upon the
identification presented and the completed transaction scan.



      (2)   In determining whether a seller or an agent or employee
of a seller has proven the affirmative defense provided by division (D)(1) of
this section, the trier of fact in the action for the alleged violation of
division (B) of this section shall consider any written policy that the
seller has adopted and implemented and that is intended to prevent violations
of division (B) of this section. For purposes of division (D)(1)(c) of this
section, the trier of fact shall consider that reasonable reliance upon the
identification presented and the completed transaction scan may require a
seller or an agent or employee of a seller to exercise reasonable diligence
to determine, and that the use of a transaction scan device does not excuse a
seller or an agent or employee of a seller from exercising reasonable
diligence to determine, the following:



         (a)   Whether a person to whom the seller or agent or
employee of a seller sells, gives away, or otherwise distributes a
pseudoephedrine product is 18 years of age or older;



         (b)   Whether the description and picture appearing on
the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card
presented by a card holder is that of the card holder.



      (3)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense
provided by division (D)(1) of this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles or a deputy registrar who issued an identification card under R.C.
§§ 4507.50 through 4507.52 shall be permitted to submit certified copies of
the records of that issuance in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of or
contractors with the Bureau of Motor Vehicles in the action.



(R.C. § 2925.58)



   (E)   Retailer’s duties.



      (1)   As used in divisions (E) and (F) of this section:



         CONSUMER PRODUCT. Any food or drink that is consumed or
used by humans and any drug, including a drug that may be provided legally
only pursuant to a prescription, that is intended to be consumed or used by
humans.



         DRUG. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.



         EPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation
that contains any quantity of ephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers,
or salts of optical isomers.



         EPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains
ephedrine.



         LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL. An officer or employee of any
agency or authority of the United States, a state, a territory, a political
subdivision of a state or territory, or an Indian tribe, who is empowered by
the law to investigate or conduct an official inquiry into a potential
violation of law or prosecute or otherwise conduct a criminal, civil, or
administrative proceeding arising from an alleged violation of law.



         LICENSED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL AUTHORIZED TO PRESCRIBE DRUGS.
Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.



         NATIONAL PRECURSOR LOG EXCHANGE or EXCHANGE. The electronic
system for tracking sales of pseudoephedrine products and ephedrine products
on a national basis that is administered by the National Association of Drug
Diversion Investigators or a successor organization.



         PHARMACIST. A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 to
engage in the practice of pharmacy.



         PHARMACY. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.



         PRESCRIBER. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.



         PRESCRIPTION. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.



         PROOF OF AGE. A driver’s license, a commercial driver’s
license, a military identification card, a passport, or an identification
card issued under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to 4507.52 that shows a person is 18
years of age or older.



         PSEUDOEPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture, or
preparation that contains any quantity of pseudoephedrine, any of its salts,
optical isomers, or salts of optical isomers.



         PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains
pseudoephedrine.



         RETAILER. A place of business that offers consumer products
for sale to the general public.



         SINGLE-INGREDIENT PREPARATION. A compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance that contains a single active ingredient.



         STOP-SALE ALERT. A notification sent from the national
precursor log exchange to a retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous
drugs indicating that the completion of a sale of a pseudoephedrine product
or ephedrine product would result in a violation of R.C. § 2925.56(A)(1) or
federal law.



         TERMINAL DISTRIBUTOR OF DANGEROUS DRUGS. Has the same
meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.



         WHOLESALER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.



      (2)   A retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs
that sells, offers to sell, holds for sale, delivers, or otherwise provides a
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the public shall do all of
the following:



         (a)   Segregate pseudoephedrine products or ephedrine
products from other merchandise so that no member of the public may procure
or purchase such products without the direct assistance of a pharmacist or
other authorized employee of the retailer or terminal distributor of
dangerous drugs;



         (b)   With regard to each time a pseudoephedrine product
or ephedrine product is sold or otherwise provided without a valid
prescription:



            1.   Determine, by examination of a valid proof of
age, that the purchaser or recipient is at least 18 years of age;



            2.   a.   Using any information available,
including information from the national precursor log exchange if the
information is accessible, make a reasonable attempt to ensure that no
individual purchases or receives an amount of pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product that is greater than either of the following:



                  i.   Three and six tenths grams within
a period of a single day;



                  ii.   Nine grams within a period of 30
consecutive days.



               b.   The maximum amounts specified in
divisions (E)(2)(b)2.a.i. and (E)(2)(b)2.a.ii. of this section apply to the
total amount of base pseudoephedrine or base ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product, respectively. The maximum amounts do not apply
to the product’s overall weight.



         (c)   Maintain a log book of pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product purchases, in accordance with R.C. § 3715.051;



         (d)   If required to comply with section R.C. §
3715.052, submit the information specified in divisions (A)(1)(a) to
(A)(1)(d) of that section to the national precursor log exchange.



      (3)   Prescriptions, orders, and records maintained pursuant
to this section and stocks of pseudoephedrine products and ephedrine products
shall be open for inspection to federal, state, county, and municipal
officers, and employees of the State Board of Pharmacy whose duty it is to
enforce the laws of this state or of the United States relating to controlled
substances. Such prescriptions, orders, records, and stocks shall be open for
inspection by the State Medical Board and its employees for purposes of
enforcing R.C. Chapter 4731.



(R.C. § 3715.05)



   (F)   Theft or loss; reporting requirements.



      (1)   Each retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs,
pharmacy, prescriber, or wholesaler that sells, offers to sell, holds for
sale, delivers, or otherwise provides any pseudoephedrine product and that
discovers the theft or loss of any pseudoephedrine product in an amount of
more than nine grams per incident of theft or loss shall notify all of the
following upon discovery of the theft or loss:



         (a)   The State Board of Pharmacy, by telephone
immediately upon discovery of the theft or loss;



         (b)   Law enforcement authorities. If the incident is a
theft and the theft constitutes a felony, the retailer, terminal distributor
of dangerous drugs, pharmacy, prescriber, or wholesaler shall report the
theft to the law enforcement authorities in accordance with R.C. §  2921.22.



      (2)   Within 30 days after making a report by telephone to the
State Board of Pharmacy pursuant to division (F)(1)(a) of this section, a
retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, pharmacy, prescriber, or
wholesaler shall send a written report to the State Board of Pharmacy.



      (3)   The reports required under this section shall identify
the product that was stolen or lost, the amount of the product stolen or
lost, and the date and time of discovery of the theft or loss.



(R.C. § 3715.06)



§ 138.19  SALE OF PURE CAFFEINE PRODUCT.



   (A)   As used in this section, PURE CAFFEINE PRODUCT means:



      (1)   Subject to division (A)(2) of this section, a product
that consists solely or primarily of caffeine and is manufactured into a
crystalline, liquid, or powdered form.



      (2)   The phrase does not include any of the following that
contains caffeine and is formulated, manufactured, and labeled in accordance
with the laws and regulations enforced by the United States Food and Drug
Administration:



         (a)   Coffee, tea, any soft drink, any energy drink, or
any other caffeine-containing beverage;



         (b)   Any energy product.



   (B)   Except as provided in division (C) of this section, no person
shall knowingly sell or offer for sale a pure caffeine product.



   (C)   Division (B) of this section does not prohibit a person from
selling or offering for sale any product manufactured in a unit-dose form
such as a pill, tablet, or caplet, but only if each unit dose of the product
contains not more than 250 milligrams of caffeine.



   (D)   Nothing in this section prohibits either of the following:



      (1)   Possession of a product described in division (C) of
this section;



      (2)   Possession of a pure caffeine product by any of the
following:



         (a)   A food processing establishment, as defined in
R.C. § 3715.021;



         (b)   A manufacturer of a drug that is available without
a prescription;



         (c)   A laboratory that holds a current, valid category
III terminal distributor of dangerous drugs license issued by the state board
of pharmacy under R.C. § 4729.54;



         (d)   A laboratory of any agency or department of this
state that performs testing, analysis, and other laboratory services on
behalf of the state;



         (e)   A postal or delivery service that transports or
delivers a pure caffeine product to an entity specified in divisions
(D)(2)(a) to (D)(2)(d) of this section.



   (E)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
illegal sale of pure caffeine, a minor misdemeanor on a first offense and a
misdemeanor of the third degree on each subsequent offense.



(R.C. § 2925.34)



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



   Chapter



      150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS



      151.   ZONING



CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING REGULATIONS



Section



   150.01   Building permits



   150.02   Building Department; enforcement of Codes



 



   150.99   Penalty



§ 150.01  BUILDING PERMITS.



   Building permits are required as set forth in the village zoning code.



(Ord. 78-3-1, passed 3 - -78)



§ 150.02  BUILDING DEPARTMENT; ENFORCEMENT OF CODES.



   (A)   The Village of Minster Building Department is hereby
created/established.



   (B)   Said Department shall have full authority to enforce all laws,
statutes and regulations as provided and authorized in the Ohio Revised Code
and the Ohio Administrative Code pursuant to the Certification approved by
the Ohio Board of Building Standards.



   (C)   Ohio Administrative Code 4101:1 - the Ohio Building Code, and
4101:2 - the Ohio Mechanical Code, and Ohio Administrative Code 4101:3 - the
Ohio Plumbing Code as promulgated by the Ohio Board of Building Standards,
shall apply and be enforced within the Village of Minster, Ohio.



   (D)   Ohio Administrative Code 4101:1 - the Ohio Building Code; and
4101:2 - the Ohio Mechanical Code, and Ohio Administrative Code 4101:3 - the
Ohio Plumbing Code as promulgated by the Ohio Board of Building Standards,
shall apply and be enforced within the Village of Minster, Ohio, with the
exception that the Ohio Plumbing Code will be enforced by the Auglaize County
Board of Health.



   (E)   This section shall be in full force and effect from and after
the earliest period permitted by law following promulgation of the Ohio
Building Code and Ohio Mechanical Code, and Ohio Plumbing Code by the Board
of Building Standards through the certification process, adoption and
effective date of certification issued by the Ohio Board of Building
Standards.



   (F)   The Village Administrator of the Village of Minster is hereby
authorized and directed to sign and submit an application to the Ohio Board
of Building Standards requesting said Board to certify the Village of Minster
as a Sub-Department of Auglaize County Building Department for enforcement of
the Ohio State Building Codes with the condition that the Miami County
Building Department exercise the enforcement authority as necessary in
accordance with the Ohio State Building Codes within the limits of said
village in accordance with the executed agreement between the Auglaize County
Commissioners and the Miami County Commissioners.



(Ord. 17-02-01, passed 2-7-17)



§ 150.99  PENALTY.



   Any person or persons, firm or corporation or their agent violating the
provisions of § 150.01 shall be fined not more than $25 per day for
violation. After receipt of notice from the Zoning Commissioner of the
violation of those provisions, each additional 24 hours noncompliance with §
150.01 shall be deemed a separate violation.



(Ord. 78-3-1, passed 3 - -78)



CHAPTER 151:  ZONING



Section



   151.01   Zoning Code adopted by reference



§ 151.01  ZONING CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The provisions of Ordinance 02-10-01, passed 11-5-02, the zoning code
of the village, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this code
the same as if set forth in full herein. Copies of the zoning code are
available for public inspection in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer.



(Ord. 96-5-4, passed 6-18-96; Am. Ord. 02-10-01, passed 11-5-02)



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



      Table




         I.   ANNEXATIONS





         II.   DEDICATIONS AND ACCEPTANCES





         III.   EASEMENTS





         IV.   FRANCHISES





         V.   REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS





         VI.   STREET NAMES AND STREET NAME CHANGES





         VII.   VACATIONS





         VIII.   ZONING MAP CHANGES




TABLE I:  ANNEXATIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




1968-
 
- -68
 
Authorizing the annexation of certain territory being the east part of outlot
number one, the east part containing 2.46 acres, on the south side of the
northeast quarter of section 27, town 7 south, range 4 east


72-8-2
 
8-19-72
 
Annexation of certain territory situate in the Township of Jackson, County of
Auglaize, being a tract of land comprising 1.05 acres measuring 282.6 feet
from north to south and 161.3 feet from east to west


74-
 
- -74
 
Annexation of certain territory, being part of Outlot No. 1 of William
Menke’s Subdivision of the northwest quarter of the northeast quarter of
Section 35 Jackson Township, town 7 south, range 4 east


75-4-
 
4-1-75
 
Annexing certain territory situate in the Township of Jackson, being part of
outlot number 1 of William Menke's Subdivision, a part of the northwest
quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 35, Jackson Township, tier 7
south, range 4 east, with respect to the first principal meridian


75-9-2
 
10-7-75
 
Annexation of the land adjoining the sewage plant


76-4-1
 
4-12-76
 
Annexation of a 15.08 acre parcel being part of Lots 3, 4, and 5 of the F.H.
Bushman Survey within the south half of the northwest quarter of Section 26,
Jackson Township T7S, R4E


76-11-4
 
- -76
 
Accepting annexation of certain territory commencing at the intersection of
State Route 66 and State Route 362, said point being the northwest corner of
the southwest quarter of section 35, town 7 south, range 4 east, Jackson
Township, containing in all 6.89 acres


80-8-1
 
- -80
 
Accepting the annexation of certain territory in Jackson Township being a
strip of land 34 feet in width along the east side of the Miami and Erie
Canal extending from the Minster- Egypt Road south, to the land owned by the
Village of Minster, known as the sewage disposal plant ground


82-12-1
 
1-4-83
 
Accepting the annexation of certain territory located in Jackson Township
situate in the southeast quarter of section 34, township 7 south, range 4
east, containing 21.0 acres of land more or less


84-
 
- -84
 
Accepting the annexation of certain territory located in Jackson Township
containing 8 acres more or less


84-
 
- -84
 
Accepting the annexation of certain territory located in Jackson Township
containing 8.812 acres more or less


85-6-4
 
6-18-85
 
Authorizing the annexation of the industrial park, being 57.6 acres located
in the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter and part of the west half
of the west half of the southeast quarter of section 34, town 7 south, range
4 east


86-2-1
 
3-18-86
 
Accepting the annexation of certain territory in Jackson Township containing
57.6 acres


87-7-2
 
8-4-87
 
Authorizing the annexation of the former Thelma Schmitmeyer land, containing
102 acres more or less


88-1-
 
- -88
 
Authorizing annexation of the former Farno property


88-
 
- -88
 
Accepting annexation of 102.68 acres located in Jackson Township


88-3-4
 
- -88
 
Accepting annexation of 6.115 acres located in Jackson Township


91-
 
- -91
 
Annexing certain territory (State Route 66 North) in Jackson Township


93-
 
2-12-93
 
Annexing certain territory in Jackson Township containing 0.688 acres more or
less


93-10-2
 
- -93
 
Annexing certain territory in Jackson Township containing 7.77 acres more or
less


93-
 
- -93
 
Annexing certain territory in Jackson Township containing 6.443 acres more or
less


94-3-4
 
6-9-94
 
Annexing certain territory in Jackson Township containing 81.543 acres more
or less


94-12-1
 
1-3-95
 
Annexing certain territory in Jackson Township containing 0.84 acres more or
less


94-12-2
 
1-3-95
 
Annexing certain territory in Jackson Township containing 14.105 acres more
or less


95-6-5
 
- -95
 
Annexing certain territory in Jackson Township containing 1.182 acres more or
less


95-7-2
 
8-15-95
 
Annexing certain territory in Jackson Township containing 3.48 acres more or
less


99-9-1
 
- -99
 
Annexing certain territory in Jackson Township containing 0.619 acres more or
less


00-2-1
 
2-15-00
 
Annexing certain territory in Jackson Township containing 24.322 acres more
or less


01-09-01
 
- -01
 
Annexing certain territory in Jackson Township containing .241 acres more or
less (Arrowhead Park Golf Course)


06-09-01
 
9-5-06
 
Annexing certain territory in Jackson Township containing 3.214 acres more or
less


07-02-03
 
2-27-07
 
Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement by village with Jackson
Township for property owned by Steven and Teresa M. Wacker


07-05-01
 
5-1-07
 
Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement by village with Jackson
Township for property owned by Diamond Estates, LLC


07-05-02
 
5-1-07
 
Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement by village with Jackson
Township for property owned by Gary John Oldiges and Mary Phyllis Oldiges


07-07-01
 
7-17-07
 
Annexing certain territory in Jackson Township containing 4.000 acres more or
less


07-08-02
 
8-21-07
 
Annexing certain territory in Jackson Township containing 10.582 acres more
or less


07-08-03
 
8-21-07
 
Annexing certain territory in Jackson Township containing 4.288 acres more or
less


08-01-03
 
2-19-08
 
Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement by the village with
Jackson Township with Juliana M. Weigandt and Richard L. Weigandt


08-07-01
 
8-5-08
 
Annexing certain territory containing 1.863 acres, more or less, in Jackson
Township


09-09-03
 
10-20-09
 
Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement by the village with
Jackson Township with Joan Homan


10-03-01
 
4-6-10
 
Annexing certain territory containing 1.439 acres, more or less, in Jackson
Township


10-12-06
 
12-7-10
 
Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement by the village with
Jackson Township with the Dannon Company


11-03-02
 
4-5-11
 
Annexing certain territory containing 22.723 acres, more or less, in Jackson
Township to the village


11-03-05
 
3-15-11
 
Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement by the village with
Jackson Township for property owned by Kay Schmiesing (Petitioner) as
attached to Ordinance 11-03-05


11-07-01
 
8-2-11
 
Annexing certain territory containing .583 acres, more or less, in Jackson
Township to the village


13-01-01
 
2-5-13
 
Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Jackson Township
for property owned by Jeannette Weaver (Petitioner)


13-05-01
 
6-18-13
 
Annexing certain territory containing .42 acres, more or less, in Jackson
Township to the village


15-02-01
 
3-3-15
 
Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement by the village with
Jackson Township


15-02-02
 
3-3-15
 
Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement by the village with
Jackson Township


15-07-01
 
8-4-15
 
Annexing certain territory containing 3.21 acres, more or less, in Jackson
Township to the village


16-05-01
 
7-5-16
 
Annexing certain territory containing 1.537 acres, more or less, in Jackson
Township to the village.


16-11-01
 
12-6-16
 
Authorizing execution of an annexation agreement by the village with Jackson
Township.


17-01-01
 
2-7-17
 
Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement by the village with
Jackson Township.


17-02-03
 
3-7-17
 
Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement by the village with
Jackson Township.


17-03-01
 
4-18-17
 
Annexing certain territory containing 7.000 acres, more or less, in Jackson
Township to the village.


17-07-02
 
8-1-17
 
Annexing certain territory containing 17.501 acres, more or less, in Jackson
Township to the village.


17-07-03
 
8-1-17
 
Annexing certain territory containing 0.907 acres, more or less, in Jackson
Township to the village.


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE II:  DEDICATIONS AND ACCEPTANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




1966-
 
- -66
 
Dedicating Block I of Lot 30 for the purposes of a village park


1966-
 
- -66
 
Dedicating Block G, H, I, and K of Lots 124, 125, and 126, for the purposes
of a village park


88-
 
- -88
 
Accepting dedication of the street known as Southgate Drive by the Dannon
Company, Inc., and the L & E Tool Company, Inc.


89-
 
- -89
 
Dedication by Wagner's ICA, Inc., of the street situated in the village,
being a parcel of land 30 feet in width running east and west from Garfield
Street to Washington Street, being known as Washington Street


94-
 
- -94
 
Dedicating Industrial Drive and Ohio Street within the Minster Industrial Park


95-4-4
 
- -95
 
Dedicating phase IV of the Parkview Acres Subdivision within the village


95-6-1
 
- -95
 
Dedicating phase I, II, and III of the Parkview Acres Subdivision within the
village


98-8-2
 
9-22-98
 
Accepting Miami-Erie Drive in Parkview Acres Subdivision phase V


04-05-04
 
5-18-04
 
Accepting the plat of Golf Club Court located in the Eagle Acres Subdivision
and dedicating the right-of-way as village right- of-way.


07-07-3
 
8-21-07
 
Dedicating the Northcrest Drive section of the Parkview Acres Subdivision


07-08-05
 
8-21-07
 
Accepting the dedication of a public right-of- way dedicated by John H.
Woehrmyer and Judith M. Woehrmyer


08-03-02
 
4-23-08
 
Dedicating and accepting the improvements to the property known as the
Diamond Estates Subdivision


14-11-03
 
11-18-14
 
Dedicating Boulder Lane within the village to the public for public use


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE III:  EASEMENTS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




79-4-3
 
4-3-79
 
Accepting an easement from the State of Ohio from First Street to South for
1,100 feet on the east side of the canal


79-8-2
 
8-7-79
 
Signing of easement for the driveway immediately east of the canal north of
First Street, from First Street to the sewage disposal plant


80-
 
1-12-80
 
Easement authorizing Columbia Gas Transmission Corporation across property of
various owners and Village of Minster immediately left of Miami and Erie
Canal five feet west of the alley, across Seventh, Sixth and Fifth Street and
Lot No. 60 between the canal and alley east thereof


94-3-
 
- -94
 
Accepting the grant of a utility easement from Kimberly Prenger for utility
purposes


97-9-2
 
10-7-97
 
Vacating a utility easement in favor of the village on Lot Numbers 34, 35,
and 36 of Block F of the village


10-03-02
 
3-2-10
 
Vacating a utility easement between Lots 20 and 21 of Diamond Estates
Subdivision Phase 1


10-09-06
 
10-19-10
 
Vacating a utility easement located on Lots 32 and 33 of Block A


13-10-02
 
10-1-13
 
Authorizing purchase power agreements and easements with Solar Planet to
construct, operate and maintain solar facilities on municipal property, and
to supply and sell up to 3MW of capacity and energy through the village’s
electric utility system


13-11-03
 
12-3-13
 
Vacating a utility easement located between Lots 1 and 3 and between Lots 3
and 5 of Diamond Estates Subdivision Phase 1


17-08-04
 
8-15-17
 
Accepting an easement from the Dannon Company, Inc.


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE IV:  FRANCHISES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




78-
 
- -78
 
Telephone service franchise granted to General Telephone Company of Ohio


81-10-2
 
10-6-81
 
Granting franchise to Dayton Power and Light for the distribution of natural
gas within the municipality


83-10-1
 
11-15-83
 
Granting Dayton Power and Light Company the right for 25 years to construct,
maintain and operate electric transmission and distribution lines in and
through the village


93-
 
- -93
 
Granting a nonexclusive franchise to Chillicothe Cablevision, Inc., to
operate and maintain a cable television system in the village for a primary
term of ten years


96-11-3
 
- -96
 
Granting a nonexclusive franchise to New Knoxville Telephone Company dba New
Knoxville Cable Systems, to operate and maintain a cable television system in
the village for a primary term of ten years


06-06-02
 
6-20-06
 
Renewal of existing nonexclusive franchise agreement with Adelphia Cable, to
operate and maintain a cable television system in the village for a term of
one year


11-09-03
 
10-18-11
 
Granting to Vectren Energy Delivery of Ohio, Inc., and Indiana Gas Company,
as tenants in common, their successors and assigns, a gas franchise in the
village for a period of 25 years, automatically renewing for additional
periods of five years unless notice is given


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE V:  REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




1962-
 
3-6-62
 
Purchase of Lot 31, Block E and Lot 32, Block E in the village


72-3-4
 
- -72
 
Purchase of George Busse and Irene Hegemann lots located at the southwest
corner of Fourth and Hanover Streets


73-3-2
 
3-20-73
 
Acquiring land from School Board in new recreation area being immediately
north of the high school building


75-10-1
 
10-7-75
 
Signing of lease for the use of a warehouse at 53 Jefferson Street, owned by
Victor Baumer


75-12-1
 
12-2-75
 
Lease agreement with Auglaize County Library


76-4-2
 
4-6-76
 
Lease of the westernmost part of the first floor of the Cramer building to
the Minster Civic Association (Amended by Ord. 86-, passed 4-17-86)


82-4-1
 
4-6-82
 
Purchase of part of Block E, Lots 35 and 36 in the village, owned by Wallace
Wagner and lying immediately west of the fire house


84-11-3
 
11-8-84
 
Signing a 60-day option to purchase a 78 acre tract of land located
immediately south and west of the village


85-3-4
 
3-5-85
 
Authorizing a real estate purchase agreement with Clem and Zita Emmering for
the purchase of 54.8 acres


85-5-1
 
5-21-85
 
Authorizing a real estate purchase agreement with Enneking and Seger for the
purchase of 56,851 acres of land for the total price of $250,000


85-5-2
 
5-21-85
 
Authorizing a purchase agreement with I.E. Farno for the purchase of three
acres for the price of $10,000


86-5-2
 
- -86
 
Renewal of lease of building for use as public library between the village
and Auglaize County Public Library (Amended by Ords. passed 7-22-86 and
8-19-86)


86-
 
7-22-86
 
Amending Ord. 86-5-2 concerning library lease


86-
 
8-19-86
 
Amending Ord. 86-5-2 concerning library lease


86-
 
10-7-86
 
Authorizing the sale of the house and garage located in the industrial park
to Mr. and Mrs. Jim Barhorst


89-2-3
 
3-21-89
 
Authorizing the sale or lease of real property bounded to the west by
Washington Street, bounded to the south by Clay Street, bounded to the east
by Garfield Street, and bounded to the north by Fourth Street


90-4-1
 
4-3-90
 
Authorizing the option to purchase 1.704 acres presently under option with
Paul M. Meyer and Audrey A Meyer


90-9-2
 
- -90
 
Authorizing the sale or lease of real property being a parcel of land
situated in Jackson Township


91-3-1
 
- -91
 
Authorizing renewal of the library lease


92-
 
- -92
 
Authorizing the sale or lease of land owned by the village determined not
required for municipal purposes for $29, 380


92-9-
 
- -92
 
Authorizing the sale or lease of certain property being the Minster
Industrial Park located in the southeast quarter of section 34, town 7S,
range 4E


93-9-3
 
- -93
 
Authorizing the sale or lease of certain property located in the southwest
quarter of section 34, town 75, range 6E for the consideration of $29,380


94-6-2
 
- -94
 
Authorizing the sale or lease of certain property for the consideration of
$28,640


96-2-
 
- -96
 
Authorizing the sale or lease of certain property for the consideration of
$10,000 per acre


96-2-2
 
- -96
 
Authorizing the sale or lease of certain property for the consideration of
$10,000 per acre


96-4-1
 
4-16-96
 
Authorizing lease with Dr. Atillo be extended for an additional term of three
months renewable at the option of the tenant for two additional three month
terms


96-4-2
 
- -96
 
Authorizing the renewal of the lease of part of the Kramer Building


96-5-
 
- -96
 
Authorizing the sale or lease of certain property for the consideration of
$10,000 per acre


96-10-1
 
- -96
 
Lease with JTDMH Family Practice, Inc., for a portion of the Kramer Building


97-2-2
 
- -97
 
Authorizing the sale or lease of certain property for the consideration of
$10,000 per acre


97-3-3
 
3-4-97
 
Authorizing the lease purchase of land with Globus Printing Company


97-3-4
 
- -97
 
Authorizing the sale or lease of certain property for the consideration of
$10,000 per acre


97-9-5
 
- -97
 
Authorizing the sale or lease of certain property for the consideration of
$10,000 per acre


98-4-1
 
4-7-98
 
Receipt of deed from Century Tool and Machine Company, canceling promissory
note and mortgage, returning down payment


98-4-
 
- -98
 
Authorizing the sale or lease of certain property for the consideration of
$10,000 per acre


98-11-1
 
11-3-98
 
Confirming the real estate purchase contract dated 10-22-98


99-10-3
 
- -99
 
Purchasing 12 lots, being lots 121, and 122 and 123 of the four blocks
adjacent to Paris Street (just North of the Pads Street Park) at a price of
$165,000


99-11-2
 
- -99
 
Authorizing the sale of Lot 31 of Block T for the consideration of $7,500


99-12-5
 
- -99
 
Authorizing the sale or lease of certain property for the consideration of
$10,000 per acre


01-12-08
 
12-26-01
 
Accepting a CIC real estate purchase option agreement for the purchase of the
Jerome and Kathleen Schmitmeyer real estate


01-12-09
 
12-26-01
 
Authorizing exercise of a purchase option for the purchase of real estate


02-11-03
 
11-19-02
 
Authorizing the purchase of land from Dannon for the southeast substation


03-07-02
 
7-15-03
 
Authorizing the purchase of real estate owned by the trustees of the Louise
E. Luedeke Trust


03-07-03
 
7-15-03
 
Authorizing exercise of a purchase option for the purchase of real estate


05-08-04
 
8-2-05
 
Authorizing real estate purchase agreement with the Minster Machine Company
for the purchase of approximately 11.7 acres of land


06-09-02
 
9-5-06
 
Authorizing the purchase of real property located at 140 West Fourth Street,
and 140 West Fourth Street, rear, from Bonita R. Frierott


08-08-02
 
9-2-08
 
Authorizing the sale or lease of certain property for the consideration of
$10,000 per acre


09-01-03
 
1-20-09
 
Authorizing the sale or lease of certain property for $10,000 per acre


09-10-02
 
10-20-09
 
Authorizing the purchase of .310 acres of land at a price of $122,285.49 from
Kurt M. and Charity J. Ranly


10-12-02
 
12-7-10
 
Designating public lands under R.C. § 1724.10 and authorizing the Minster
Community Improvement Corporation to sell or lease such public lands


11-04-02
 
4-5-11
 
Authorizing purchase of a strip of land four feet by 655 feet for a sum of
$2,500


14-07-02
 
7-15-14
 
Designating lands under R.C. § 1724.10 and authorizing the Minster Community
Improvement Corporation to sell or lease the described premises


14-08-02
 
8-5-14
 
Designating lands under R.C. § 1724.10 and authorizing the Minster Community
Improvement Corporation to sell or lease the described premises


14-12-05
 
12-16-14
 
Designating lands under R.C. § 1724.10 and authorizing the Minster Community
Improvement Corporation to sell or lease the described premises


16-01-01
 
2-2-16
 
Designating lands under R.C. § 1724.10 and authorizing the Minster Community
Improvement Corporation to sell or lease the described premises


16-05-02
 
5-17-16
 
Authorizing the Mayor and the Fiscal Officer to purchase approximately 32.660
acres from FRJH Ltd.


16-06-02
 
6-28-16
 
Designating lands under R.C. § 1724.10 and authorizing the Minster Community
Improvement Corporation to sell,  lease, or exchange the described premises
(amended by Ord. 16-07-01)


16-07-01
 
7-19-16
 
Amending Ordinance 16-06-02.


16-12-02
 
12-20-16
 
Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into a lease agreement with
Half Moon Power.


17-07-04
 
7-25-17
 
Designating lands under R.C. § 1724.10.


17-07-08
 
7-25-17
 
Designating lands under R.C. § 1724.10.


17-08-01
 
8-15-17
 
Accepting property from the Dannon Company, Inc.


17-08-03
 
8-15-17
 
Transferring property to the Dannon Company, Inc.


18-09-04
 
9-18-18
 
Purchasing approximately 1.345 acres from Heyne Enterprises, LLC.


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE VI:  STREET NAMES AND STREET NAME CHANGES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


67-8-
 
9-19-67
 
Naming the street between Ohio Street to Cleveland Street across blocks I and
K of lot 21 as Wooden Shoe Drive


83-2-
 
- -83
 
Changing the name of Clay Street to Washington Street and Grant Street to
Jackson Street


92-10-1
 
- -92
 
Naming the public right-of-way located as a southward extension of Ohio
Street in the village Ohio Street and naming the east west public
right-of-way located immediately south of First Street in the Industrial Park
as Industrial Drive


 
 
 
 
 



 



TABLE VII:  VACATIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




1960-4
 
2-3-60
 
Vacating the alley lying parallel with and between Ohio and Cleveland
Streets, from the south line of Lot 55 to the north line of Lot 58 being so
much of the alley as lies between Lots 55, 56, 57 and 58 K and 55, 56, 57 and
58 I


1960-
 
4-5-60
 
Vacating the alley lying parallel with and between Ohio and Cleveland
Streets, from the south line of Lot 59 to the north line of Lot 60 being so
much of the alley as lies between lots 59 and 60 K and 59 and 60 I


1960-
 
6-7-60
 
Vacating the alley lying parallel with and midway between Ohio and Cleveland
Streets, from Fourth Street to Fifth Street, being the alley lying between
lots 37 through 48, Block I and 37 through 48, Block K


1963-27
 
11-19-63
 
Vacating that part of Fifth Street between Cleveland Street and Ohio Street
in the village which lies east of the alley lying midway between Cleveland
Street and Ohio Street and which lies 56 feet west of the west side of
Cleveland Street, being bordered on the west by the ally parallel Cleveland
Street and on the east by a line parallel with and 56 feet west of the west
line of Cleveland Street and being approximately 162.75 feet long and 50 feet
wide


1963-28
 
11-19-63
 
Vacating that part of Fifth Street between Cleveland Street and Ohio Street
being the south half of the east 56 feet of that part of Fifth Street that
lies between Cleveland Street and Ohio Street in the village


1966-21
 
8-16-66
 
Vacating the alley or walkway which runs between Block C of Lot 44 and Block
C of Lot 43 in the village, from the west line of Lincoln Street to the east
line of the first alley west of Lincoln Street


71-1-2
 
2-16-71
 
Vacating the alley that lies between Lots 64 through 72 of Block I and Lots
64 through 72 of Block K in the village, bordered on the north by the south
line of Seventh Street on the east by the west line of Lots 64 through 72,
Block I, on the south by the line from the southwest corner of Lot 64, Block
I and the southeast corner of Lot 64, Block K, being approximately 16 feet
wide and approximately 618.75 feet long


73-7-1
 
7-17-73
 
Vacating an alley lying between Lots 49, 50, 51 and 52, Block C and Lots 49,
50, 51 and 52 of Block D, between the north line of Fifth Street and the
south line of Lot number 4 of Joseph Melcher's Subdivision


73-10-2
 
- -73
 
Vacating part of Ohio Street


76-8-5
 
8-31-76
 
Vacating the alleys from Fourth to Fifth Street between Hamilton and Paris
Streets


79-
 
- -79
 
Vacating Webster Street between Fourth Street and Fifth Street


82-11-1
 
12-7-82
 
Vacating a road lying between Lots 4 and 5 of the subdivision of the
southwest of Section 27 in the village


88-
 
- -88
 
Vacating an alley lying between Block B of Lots 143 and144 and Block A of
Lots 143 and 144 except the northerly 16 feet of said section of the alley,
and the alley lying between Block B of Lot 143 and Block B of Lot 144


89-
 
- -89
 
Vacating part of Washington Street running south from Fourth Street a
distance of 180 feet measured along the west line of Public Lot F in the
village


90-10-2
 
12-4-90
 
Vacating a portion of a certain north-south alley located between Garfield
and Jefferson Streets and north of Third Street


90-
 
7-12-90
 
Vacating a portion of Third Street in the village


93-
 
3- -93
 
Vacating East Street within the village


00-6-1
 
6-6-00
 
Vacating so much of Webster Street as lies south of Third Street and adjacent
to Lots 121, 122, 123, 124, 125 and 126. Also so much of the two alleys
running north and south, as lies south of Third Street and between Hamilton
Street on the west and Paris Street on the east and adjacent to Lots 121,
122, 123, 124, 125 and 126


08-07-02
 
8-5-08
 
Vacating a utility easement located between Lots 59 and 60 of Parkview Acres
Subdivision Phase V


08-11-02
 
12-2-08
 
Vacating a portion of a certain north-south alley located between Ohio and
Cleveland Streets and Third Street and Wooden Shoe Drive


09-04-01
 
5-19-09
 
Vacating a portion of a certain north-south alley located between Jefferson
and Garfield Streets and Third and Fourth Streets


11-06-01
 
7-19-11
 
Reconfirming the vacation of certain alleys and streets, being specifically:


 
 
 
 
Street lying between Lots 4 and 5 of the subdivision of the southwest 1/4 of
Section 27, in the village, from Ohio Street to the west corporation line


 
 
 
 
Alley that lies between Lots 64 through 72 of Block “I” and Lots 64
through Lots 72 of Block “K” in the village and bordered on the north by
the south line of Seventh Street, on the east by the wets line of Lots 64
through 72 of Block “I”, on the south by the line from the southwest
corner of Lot 64 of Block “I” and the southwest corner of Lot 64 of Block
“K” and on the west by the east line of Lots 64 though 72 of Block
“K”, being approximately 16 feet wide and approximately 618.75 feet long


11-09-02
 
10-18-11
 
Narrowing a portion of a certain north-south alley located between Lincoln
Drive and Main Street and Fifth and Fourth Streets


12-04-04
 
5-15-12
 
Vacating the portion of North Street that lies south of Fourth Street for a
distance of approximately 341 feet


15-07-06
 
8-18-15
 
Vacating a portion of an alley south of Fifth Street and between Jefferson
Street and Hamilton Street within the village


17-03-02
 
4-18-17
 
Vacating a utility easement


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE VIII:  ZONING MAP CHANGES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




99-
 
- -99
 
Zoning newly-annexed territory, part of the southwest quarter of section 35,
town 7 south, range 4 east, containing14.105 acres, as I-1


99-4-1
 
5-4-99
 
Establishing the zoning classification of Lots 28, 29, and 30 of Block I in
the village to be I-1


00-1-3
 
1-18-00
 
Amending the zoning map as follows:


 
 
 
 
1. Zoning classification of the .619 acres of real estate owned by Jeff
Piening and Lisa Piening and recently annexed to the village shall be R-1


 
 
 
 
2.  Zoning classification of the 24.322 acres of real estate owned by the
Eiting Family Limited Partnership and recently annexed to the village shall
be I-1


 
 
 
 
3.  Zoning classification of Tract Number 1 and 2.92 acres south of Tract
Number 1 in the Rosebud Acres First Addition owned by Hon Woehmyer shall be
changed from C-3 to R-2


04-11-04
 
11-23-04
 
Establishing the zoning classification of approximately 1.15 acres of land
located at the south end of the Woehrmyer Commercial Subdivision to be R-1.


07-02-05
 
2-27-07
 
Amending the zoning map for the property purchased from Minster Machine and
located west of Minster Machine to be used for a new industrial park


07-07-02
 
7-17-07
 
Amending the zoning map for certain real property


07-11-02
 
12-4-07
 
Approving the proposed Residential Planned Unit Development and establishing
the zoning classification of approximately 5.0168 acres of land located at
the north end of the RoseBud Subdivision and know as the Heritage Manor Group
Home Plat


08-01-01
 
2-19-08
 
Amending the zoning map by establishing the zoning classification of
approximately 1.709 acres of land located at the north end of the RoseBud
Subdivision and known as the Heritage Manor Group Home Plat to be C-3


08-03-01
 
4-23-08
 
Amending the zoning map by establishing the zoning classification for Lot 22
and Lot 23 of Block 1 in the village to be I-1


08-05-02
 
7-1-08
 
Amending the zoning map by establishing the zoning classification of
approximately 1.0393 acres of land located at the north end of the RoseBud
Subdivision and known as the Heritage Manor Group Home Plat in the village to
be C-3


 
 
 
 
 




 



PARALLEL REFERENCES




History References to Ohio Revised Code





References to Ordinances




HISTORY REFERENCES TO OHIO REVISED CODE



Editor's note:



   This table lists those Ohio Revised Code sections which have been
substantially duplicated by corresponding Code of Ordinance sections.  All
legislative history references to “(R.C. § xx.xx)” which appear at the
end of sections (or divisions of sections) in the village's Code of
Ordinances have been listed here.  Example: to determine which section of
the Code of Ordinances is based on R.C. § 4511.19, scan down this table to
the citation for “4511.19” and examine the entry across from it: in this
case, the corresponding Code of Ordinances section is § 73.01, which means
that § 73.01 (or a part thereof) is based directly on R.C. § 4511.19.



 

R.C. Section
 
Code Section




1.01
 
10.01


1.02
 
10.02


1.05
 
10.02


1.14
 
10.03


1.15
 
10.03


1.23
 
10.05


1.42
 
10.03


1.43
 
10.03


1.44
 
10.02


1.45
 
10.03


1.46
 
10.03


1.47
 
10.18


1.48
 
10.18


1.49
 
10.18


1.50
 
10.07


1.51
 
10.06


1.52
 
10.06


1.54
 
10.04


1.55
 
10.05


1.56
 
10.05


1.57
 
10.04


1.58
 
10.04


1.59
 
10.02


9.481
 
30.12


9.60
 
38.14


128.01(A)
 
136.20


128.32(E)-(G)
 
136.20


128.99(A), (B)
 
136.20


146.01
 
38.30


146.02
 
38.31


146.03
 
38.32


146.04
 
38.33


146.05
 
38.34


146.06
 
38.35


149.39
 
30.09


149.43(B), (E)
 
30.08


701.01
 
10.02


715.67
 
130.99


731.09
 
32.01


731.091
 
32.01


731.10
 
32.02


731.11
 
32.03


731.12
 
32.04


731.13
 
32.05


731.43(A)
 
32.06


731.44
 
32.07


731.45
 
32.08


731.47
 
32.10


731.49
 
32.11


731.50
 
32.12


733.23
 
31.01


733.24
 
31.05


733.25
 
31.12


733.26
 
31.20


733.27
 
31.21


733.28
 
31.22


733.29
 
31.23


733.30
 
31.06


733.31(A)
 
30.07


733.32
 
31.07


733.33
 
31.08


733.34
 
31.09


733.35
 
31.11


733.36
 
31.11


733.37
 
31.11


733.38
 
31.11


733.39
 
31.11


733.40
 
31.13


733.41
 
31.10


733.42
 
31.20


733.43
 
31.22


733.44
 
31.21


733.45
 
31.24


733.46
 
31.25


733.47
 
31.26


733.48
 
31.40


733.68
 
30.02


733.69
 
30.04


733.70
 
30.05


733.71
 
30.06


733.79
 
30.11


735.27
 
32.13


735.273
 
31.41


737.04
 
34.16


737.041
 
34.16


737.15
 
34.02


737.16
 
34.03


737.161
 
34.04


737.162
 
34.05


737.17
 
34.05


737.171
 
34.06


737.18
 
34.07


737.19
 
34.08


737.20
 
34.09


737.21
 
38.01


737.22
 
38.02


737.221
 
38.02


737.23
 
38.03


737.24
 
38.04


737.25
 
38.05


737.27
 
38.08


737.28
 
38.15


737.29
 
34.10


737.31
 
34.11


737.32
 
34.12


737.33
 
34.13


901.51
 
131.21


901.99(A)
 
131.21


925.62
 
95.24


925.99(B)
 
95.24


951.02
 
95.01


951.10
 
95.01


951.11
 
95.02


951.12
 
95.03


951.13
 
95.04


951.99
 
95.01


955.011(B)
 
95.22


955.10
 
95.17


955.11
 
95.18


955.21
 
95.19


955.22
 
95.01


955.222
 
95.01


955.24
 
95.20


955.25
 
95.21


955.26
 
95.05


955.28(A)
 
95.07


955.39
 
95.05


955.43
 
95.22


955.50
 
95.23


955.54
 
95.26


955.99(A)
 
95.18


955.99(B)
 
95.17, 95.20, 95.21


955.99(C)
 
95.05, 95.23


955.99(D)
 
95.22


955.99(E)
 
95.19


955.99(E)-(H), (J), (L)-(N), (P), (Q)
 
95.01


955.99(O)
 
95.26


959.01
 
95.10


959.02
 
95.11


959.03
 
95.12


959.04
 
95.11, 95.12


959.13
 
95.13


959.131
 
95.13


959.15
 
95.14


959.17
 
95.15


959.21
 
95.27


959.99(B)
 
95.11


959.99(C)
 
95.12, 95.14, 95.15


959.99(D)
 
95.13, 95.27


959.99(E)
 
95.13


959.99(E)(2)
 
95.10


959.99(E)(6)
 
95.27


1349.17
 
131.31


1349.99(A)
 
131.31


1533.161
 
95.25


1533.171(A)
 
131.24, 135.05


1533.99(B)
 
95.25


1533.99(C)
 
131.24, 135.05


1905.01
 
33.01


1905.05
 
33.04


1905.20
 
33.02


1905.201
 
33.05


1905.21
 
33.03


2705.01
 
33.20


2705.02
 
33.21


2705.03
 
33.22


2705.031
 
33.23


2705.04
 
33.24


2705.05
 
33.25


2705.06
 
33.26


2705.07
 
33.27


2705.08
 
33.28


2705.09
 
33.29


2705.10
 
33.30


2901.01
 
130.02


2901.02
 
130.03


2901.03
 
130.04


2901.04
 
130.05


2901.05
 
130.13


2901.06
 
130.14


2901.08
 
130.15


2901.09
 
130.20


2901.11
 
130.16


2901.13
 
130.06


2901.21
 
130.07


2901.22
 
130.08


2901.23
 
130.09


2901.24
 
130.10


2903.05
 
135.02


2903.06
 
135.03


2903.08(A)(3), (C)(3), (D)(3), (E) - (G)
 
135.03


2903.09
 
135.01


2903.10
 
135.19


2903.13
 
135.04


2903.14
 
135.04


2903.16
 
135.19


2903.21
 
135.06


2903.211
 
135.06


2903.22
 
135.06


2903.31
 
135.17


2903.33
 
135.20


2903.34
 
135.20


2903.341
 
135.20


2903.35
 
135.20


2903.36
 
135.20


2905.03
 
135.07


2905.05
 
135.08


2905.12
 
135.09


2907.01
 
133.01


2907.04
 
133.02


2907.06
 
133.03


2907.08
 
133.05


2907.09
 
133.04


2907.10
 
133.06


2907.23
 
133.07


2907.24(A), (C)(1), (D), (E)
 
133.08


2907.241
 
133.08


2907.25
 
133.09


2907.26
 
133.13


2907.31
 
133.10


2907.311
 
133.11


2907.33
 
133.12


2907.35
 
133.10


2907.36
 
133.14


2907.37
 
133.15


2907.38
 
133.16


2907.39
 
133.17


2907.40
 
133.18


2909.01
 
131.01


2909.03
 
131.02


2909.06
 
131.03


2909.07
 
131.04


2909.08(A)-(E)
 
131.05


2909.09
 
131.03


2909.10
 
131.34


2909.101
 
131.34


2909.11(B)-(D)
 
131.02


2909.31
 
136.21


2911.21
 
131.06


2911.211
 
131.06


2911.23
 
131.06


2911.32
 
131.07


2913.01
 
131.01


2913.02
 
131.08


2913.03
 
131.09


2913.04
 
131.10


2913.07
 
131.33


2913.11
 
131.11


2913.21
 
131.12


2913.31(B),(C)(2)
 
131.26


2913.32
 
131.27


2913.33
 
131.13


2913.34
 
131.29


2913.40
 
131.23


2913.401
 
131.23


2913.41
 
131.14


2913.42
 
131.15


2913.43
 
131.16


2913.44
 
131.28


2913.441
 
132.11


2913.45
 
131.17


2913.47
 
131.23


2913.48
 
131.23


2913.51
 
131.18


2913.61(B)-(E)
 
131.19


2913.71
 
131.20


2913.72
 
131.25


2913.73
 
131.25


2915.01
 
134.01


2915.02(A)-(G), (K)
 
134.02


2915.03
 
134.03


2915.04
 
134.04


2915.05
 
134.05


2915.06
 
134.14


2915.061
 
134.14


2915.09
 
134.06


2915.091
 
134.10


2915.092
 
134.11


2915.093
 
134.12


2915.094
 
134.13


2915.10
 
134.07


2915.11
 
134.08


2915.12
 
134.09


2915.13
 
134.12


2917.01
 
132.10


2917.03
 
132.01


2917.031
 
132.01


2917.04
 
132.02


2917.05
 
132.03


2917.11
 
132.04


2917.12
 
132.05


2917.13
 
132.06


2917.21
 
132.07


2917.31
 
132.08


2917.32
 
132.09


2917.40
 
132.13


2917.41
 
132.14


2919.01
 
135.10


2919.11
 
135.11


2919.12
 
135.11


2919.121
 
135.11


2919.122
 
135.11


2919.14
 
135.12


2919.18
 
135.11


2919.21
 
135.13


2919.211
 
133.20


2919.22(A)-(E),(H)
 
135.14


2919.23
 
135.15


2919.231
 
135.15


2919.24
 
135.18


2919.25
 
135.16


2919.27
 
135.23


2921.01
 
136.01


2921.04
 
136.17


2921.13
 
136.02


2921.14
 
136.14


2921.15
 
136.19


2921.21
 
136.03


2921.22
 
136.04


2921.23
 
136.05


2921.24
 
136.16


2921.25
 
136.16


2921.29
 
136.21


2921.31
 
136.06


2921.32
 
136.07


2921.321
 
136.15


2921.33
 
136.08


2921.331(A)-(C),(E),(F)
 
70.02


2921.36
 
136.13


2921.37
 
136.13


2921.42
 
136.09


2921.43
 
136.10


2921.44
 
136.11


2921.45
 
136.12


2921.51
 
132.12


2921.52(A)-(D)
 
136.18


2923.02
 
130.11


2923.03
 
130.12


2923.11
 
137.01


2923.11(M)
 
92.25


2923.12
 
137.02


2923.122(C)-(G)
 
137.11


2923.126
 
137.13


2923.1211(B), (C)
 
137.13


2923.1212
 
137.13


2923.131
 
137.12


2923.15
 
137.03


2923.16
 
137.04


2923.18
 
137.10


2923.19
 
137.06


2923.20
 
137.07


2923.201
 
137.14


2923.211
 
137.08


2923.24
 
137.05


2925.01
 
138.01


2925.03(A) - (C), (I)
 
138.02


2925.04(A), (B), (C)(5), (G)
 
138.06


2925.03
 
138.02


2925.04
 
138.06


2925.11
 
138.03


2925.12
 
138.04


2925.13 (A) - (C), (F)
 
138.05


2925.14
 
138.13


2925.141
 
138.13


2925.31
 
138.07


2925.32(B)(4),(D)(2),(F),(G)
 
138.10


2925.33
 
138.10


2925.34
 
138.19


2925.36 (A) - (C)
 
138.08


2925.37(A),(G)
 
138.12


2925.50
 
138.09


2925.51
 
138.11


2925.511
 
138.11


2925.55
 
138.18


2925.56
 
138.18


2925.57
 
138.18


2925.58
 
138.18


2927.01
 
135.28


2927.02
 
135.25


2927.021
 
135.25


2927.022
 
135.25


2927.023
 
135.25


2927.03
 
135.21


2927.11
 
131.35


2927.12
 
135.22


2927.15
 
135.29


2927.17
 
133.19


2927.27
 
130.21


2929.21
 
130.99


2929.22
 
130.18


2929.23
 
133.99


2929.24
 
130.99


2929.25
 
130.99


2929.26
 
130.99


2929.27
 
130.99


2929.28
 
130.99


2929.31
 
130.99


2929.41
 
130.19


2935.041
 
131.22


2935.081
 
34.15


2935.11
 
33.21


2935.28
 
70.08


2935.36(E)
 
130.02


2981.07
 
131.30


2981.11
 
130.17


2981.12
 
130.17


2981.13(A)
 
130.17


3701.81
 
135.27


3701.99(C)
 
135.27


3715.05
 
138.18


3715.06
 
138.18


3716.11
 
135.24


3716.99(C)
 
135.24


3719.08(A),(E)
 
138.14


3719.172(A),(B)
 
138.15


3719.19
 
138.09


3719.99(C)
 
138.14


3719.99(E)
 
138.15


3737.14(A)
 
38.09


3737.14(B)
 
38.10


3737.24
 
38.08


3737.64
 
38.11


3737.65(A),(B)
 
38.12


3737.66
 
38.13


3737.99(D)
 
38.11


3737.99(E)
 
38.12


3737.99(G)
 
38.13


3743.01
 
92.25


3743.25
 
92.34


3743.54
 
92.27


3743.60(E)-(J)
 
92.28


3743.61(E)-(J)
 
92.28


3743.63
 
92.29


3743.64(C)-(G)
 
92.30


3743.65(A)-(F)
 
92.26


3743.66
 
92.31


3743.68
 
92.33


3743.80
 
92.32


3743.99(C),(D)
 
92.99


3767.201
 
70.09


3767.99(D)
 
70.09


3781.55
 
133.04


3791.031
 
135.26


4115.02
 
38.07


4301.01
 
90.01


4301.20
 
90.02


4301.21
 
90.03


4301.22
 
90.04


4301.244
 
90.01


4301.58
 
90.05


4301.60
 
90.06


4301.61
 
90.28


4301.611
 
90.29


4301.62
 
90.07


4301.63
 
90.08


4301.631
 
90.09


4301.633
 
90.11


4301.634
 
90.12


4301.637
 
90.14


4301.638
 
90.04, 90.13


4301.639(A),(C)
 
90.15


4301.64
 
90.16


4301.65
 
90.10


4301.66
 
90.18


4301.67
 
90.19


4301.68
 
90.20


4301.69
 
90.13


4301.70
 
90.99


4301.74
 
90.27


4301.99(A)
 
90.07, 90.10, 90.99


4301.99(B)
 
90.04, 90.09, 90.16, 90.19


4301.99(C)
 
90.03, 90.05, 90.06, 90.11, 90.13, 90.18, 90.20, 90.27


4301.99(D)
 
90.04


4301.99(E)
 
90.08, 90.09


4301.99(F)
 
90.12


4301.99(H)
 
90.04


4301.99(I)
 
90.13


4301.99(J)
 
90.10


4303.202(D)(2)
 
90.17


4303.208(C)
 
90.17


4303.25
 
90.05


4303.40
 
90.26


4303.99(D)
 
90.17


4399.09
 
90.21


4399.10
 
90.22


4399.14
 
90.23


4399.15
 
90.24


4399.16
 
90.25


4399.99(A)
 
90.25


4399.99(B)
 
90.21


4399.99(C)
 
90.22


4399.99(D)
 
90.23


4399.99(E)
 
90.24


4501.01(LL)
 
70.01


4501.01(TT)
 
72.41


4503.05
 
71.02


4503.11(A), (D)
 
71.01


4503.111(A), (C)
 
71.01


4503.111(B)
 
71.01


4503.12(A)
 
71.01


4503.12(D)
 
71.01


4503.21(A), (B)
 
71.01


4503.21(C)
 
71.01


4503.236
 
71.03


4505.18
 
71.04


4506.01
 
71.25


4506.011
 
71.26


4506.03
 
71.28


4506.04
 
71.27


4506.05
 
71.28


4506.10(A), (E)
 
71.29


4506.12(I), (J)
 
71.27


4506.15
 
71.30


4506.17(H), (N)
 
71.30


4506.19
 
71.31


4506.20
 
71.32


4506.23
 
71.30


4506.99
 
71.99


4507.02(A)
 
71.12


4507.03
 
71.12


4507.04
 
71.12


4507.05(F), (I)
 
71.11


4507.071(B)-(J)
 
71.11


4507.213
 
71.12


4507.30
 
71.10


4507.31(A), (B)
 
71.11


4507.321
 
71.13


4507.35
 
71.16


4507.36
 
71.17


4507.99
 
71.99


4509.102
 
136.02


4509.74
 
73.23


4510.037(J)
 
71.18


4510.04
 
71.18, 71.20, 71.21, 71.22


4510.05
 
71.15


4510.11
 
71.18


4510.111
 
71.18


4510.12
 
71.19


4510.14
 
71.20


4510.15
 
71.15


4510.16
 
71.21


4510.21
 
71.22


4510.44
 
73.03


4511.01
 
70.01


4511.03
 
70.03


4511.031
 
70.29


4511.04
 
70.04


4511.041
 
70.04


4511.042
 
70.04


4511.05
 
70.05


4511.051
 
70.06


4511.08
 
70.07


4511.12
 
70.20


4511.121
 
70.20


4511.13
 
70.21


4511.131
 
70.22


4511.132
 
70.23


4511.14
 
70.24


4511.16
 
70.26


4511.17
 
70.27


4511.18
 
70.28


4511.181
 
73.01


4511.19(A)-(M)
 
73.01


4511.191(A), (D)
 
73.011


4511.192
 
73.011


4511.194
 
73.012


4511.20
 
73.05


4511.201
 
73.06


4511.202
 
73.07


4511.203
 
71.14


4511.204
 
72.72


4511.205
 
72.73


4511.21(A)-(G),(O), (P)
 
73.10


4511.211
 
73.10


4511.213
 
72.60


4511.214
 
73.141


4511.215
 
73.141


4511.216
 
73.141


4511.22
 
73.11


4511.23
 
73.14


4511.24
 
73.12


4511.25
 
72.01


4511.251
 
73.13


4511.26
 
72.03


4511.27
 
72.04


4511.28
 
72.05


4511.29
 
72.06


4511.30
 
72.07


4511.31
 
72.08


4511.32
 
72.09


4511.33
 
72.10


4511.34
 
72.11


4511.35
 
72.12


4511.36
 
72.13


4511.37
 
72.14


4511.38
 
72.15


4511.39
 
72.16


4511.40
 
72.17


4511.41
 
72.20


4511.42
 
72.21


4511.43
 
72.22


4511.431
 
72.23


4511.432
 
72.23


4511.44
 
72.24


4511.441
 
72.25


4511.45
 
72.26


4511.451
 
72.27


4511.452
 
72.28


4511.46
 
72.29


4511.47
 
72.30


4511.48
 
72.31


4511.481
 
72.40


4511.49
 
72.35


4511.491
 
72.39


4511.50
 
72.36


4511.51
 
72.37


4511.511
 
72.38


4511.512
 
72.41


4511.513
 
72.42


4511.52
 
75.01


4511.521
 
75.02


4511.522
 
75.03


4511.53
 
75.04


4511.54
 
75.05


4511.55
 
75.06


4511.56
 
75.07


4511.60
 
72.02


4511.61
 
72.45


4511.62
 
72.46


4511.63
 
72.47


4511.64
 
72.48


4511.65
 
70.10


4511.66
 
76.01


4511.661
 
76.02


4511.67
 
76.03


4511.68
 
76.04


4511.681
 
76.06


4511.69
 
76.05


4511.70
 
72.55


4511.701
 
72.56


4511.71
 
72.57


4511.711
 
72.58


4511.712
 
72.59


4511.713
 
72.58


4511.714
 
72.57


4511.72
 
72.60


4511.73
 
72.61


4511.74
 
72.62


4511.75
 
72.80


4511.751
 
72.81


4511.76(C),(E), (F)
 
72.82


4511.761
 
72.83


4511.762
 
72.84


4511.763
 
72.85


4511.764
 
72.86


4511.77
 
72.87


4511.771
 
72.88


4511.772
 
72.89


4511.79
 
73.02


4511.81(A)-(H), (K), (L)
 
72.63


4511.82
 
72.62


4511.84
 
72.66


4511.85
 
72.67


4511.99
 
70.99(A)


4511.99
 
70.99(B)


4513.02(A), (H)
 
74.01


4513.021
 
74.02


4513.03
 
74.03


4513.04
 
74.04


4513.05
 
74.05


4513.06
 
74.06


4513.07
 
74.07


4513.071
 
74.08


4513.08
 
74.09


4513.09
 
74.10


4513.10
 
74.11


4513.11
 
74.12


4513.111
 
74.12


4513.12
 
74.13


4513.13
 
74.14


4513.14
 
74.15


4513.15
 
74.16


4513.16
 
74.17


4513.17
 
74.18


4513.171
 
74.18


4513.18
 
74.19


4513.181
 
74.20


4513.182
 
74.21


4513.19
 
74.22


4513.20
 
74.23


4513.201
 
74.24


4513.202
 
74.25


4513.21
 
74.26


4513.22
 
74.27


4513.23
 
74.28


4513.24
 
74.29


4513.241(C)-(K)
 
74.31


4513.25
 
74.30


4513.26
 
74.31


4513.261
 
74.32


4513.262
 
74.33


4513.263
 
72.64


4513.27
 
74.34


4513.28
 
74.35


4513.29
 
74.36


4513.30
 
74.41


4513.31
 
74.42


4513.32
 
74.43


4513.33
 
74.44


4513.34
 
74.40


4513.36
 
73.15


4513.361
 
73.16


4513.50
 
74.38


4513.51(A),(B), (D)
 
74.38


4513.60
 
91.01


4513.601
 
91.01


4513.61
 
91.02


4513.62
 
91.03


4513.63
 
91.04


4513.64
 
91.05


4513.65
 
91.06


4513.66
 
70.12


4513.68
 
70.12


4513.99
 
74.11, 74.21, 74.23, 74.24, 74.25, 74.30, 74.31, 74.34, 74.36, 74.40, 74.41,
74.42, 74.43


4519.01
 
75.25


4519.02
 
75.34


4519.20
 
75.26


4519.22
 
75.26


4519.40
 
75.27


4519.401
 
73.141


4519.41
 
75.28


4519.44
 
75.29


4519.45
 
75.30


4519.46
 
75.31


4519.47
 
75.32


4519.48
 
75.33


4519.66
 
75.36


4549.02
 
73.20


4549.021
 
73.21


4549.03
 
73.22


4549.05
 
70.11


4549.08
 
71.06


4549.081(B), (C)
 
70.20


4549.10
 
71.07


4549.11
 
71.01


4549.12
 
71.01


4549.18
 
71.05


4549.20
 
74.39


4731.481
 
138.17


4731.99(F)
 
138.17


4734.161
 
138.17


4734.99(B)
 
138.17


4933.18
 
131.32


4933.19
 
131.32


5577.02
 
74.45


5577.03
 
74.46


5577.04
 
74.46


5577.041
 
74.46


5577.042
 
74.51


5577.043
 
74.51


5577.044
 
74.51


5577.05
 
74.47


5577.06
 
74.47


5577.10
 
74.48


5577.11
 
74.49


5577.12
 
74.50


5577.15
 
74.43


5577.99(A)
 
74.45


5577.99(C)
 
74.46, 74.47


5577.99(D)
 
74.48


5577.99(E)
 
74.49


5589.01
 
94.01


5589.08
 
72.68


5589.081
 
74.37


5589.12
 
131.10


5589.99(A)
 
94.01


5589.99(B)
 
72.68, 74.37, 131.10


O.A.C. Section
 
Code Section


901:5-37-01
 
92.10


4301:1-1-49
 
90.17


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




58-
 
3- -58
 
Ch. 77, Sch. IV


1959-
 
7-7-59
 
94.03


1960-4
 
2-3-60
 
T.S.O. VII


1960-
 
4-5-60
 
T.S.O. VII


1960-
 
6-7-60
 
T.S.O. VII


61-
 
9-5-61
 
Ch. 77, Sch. V


1961-2
 
9-5-61
 
Ch. 78, Sch. II


1962-
 
5-9-62
 
Ch. 78, Sch. II; T.S.O. V


1963-7
 
4-2-63
 
50.03


1963-27
 
11-19-63
 
T.S.O. VII


1963-28
 
11-19-63
 
T.S.O. VII


64-
 
3-3-64
 
Ch. 77, Sch. V


1965-13
 
7-6-65
 
132.15


1966-
 
- -66
 
32.09, T.S.O. II


66-
 
5-3-66
 
Ch. 77, Sch. IV


1966-21
 
8-16-66
 
T.S.O. VII


1967-3
 
2-7-67
 
Ch. 78, Sch. I


67-8-
 
9-19-67
 
T.S.O. VI


1968-
 
- -68
 
T.S.O. I


70-
 
-5-70
 
Ch. 77, Sch. III


70-
 
9-1-70
 
92.01


71-1-2
 
2-16-71
 
T.S.O. VII


71-1-3
 
4-6-71
 
Ch. 77, Sch. III


71-4-2
 
5-4-71
 
75.07, 75.08


72-3-4
 
- -72
 
T.S.O. V


72-5-5
 
5-20-72
 
Ch. 77, Sch. III


72-5-6
 
5-20-72
 
Ch. 77, Sch. III


72-8-2
 
8-19-72
 
T.S.O. I


72-10-2
 
10- -72
 
Ch. 77, Sch. I


73-1-3
 
1-5-73
 
31.41


73-3-2
 
3-20-73
 
T.S.O. V


73-5-2
 
6-19-73
 
91.06


73-7-1
 
7-17-73
 
T.S.O. VII


73-10-2
 
- -73
 
T.S.O. VII


74-
 
- -74
 
T.S.O. I


74-2-3
 
4-2-74
 
Ch. 78, Sch. I


74-2-4
 
4-2-74
 
76.15


75-4-
 
4-1-75
 
T.S.O. I


75-
 
5-6-75
 
Ch. 77, Sch. III


75-
 
5-6-75
 
Ch. 77, Sch. III


75-9-2
 
10-7-75
 
T.S.O. I


75-9-3
 
- -75
 
Ch. 77, Sch. III


75-10-1
 
10-7-75
 
T.S.O. V


75-12-1
 
12-2-75
 
T.S.O. V


76-
 
- -76
 
Ch. 78, Sch. I


76-2-4
 
2-17-76
 
75.09


76-4-2
 
4-6-76
 
T.S.O. V


76-4-1
 
4-12-76
 
T.S.O. I


76-8-5
 
8-31-76
 
T.S.O. VII


76-9-
 
9-7-76
 
Ch. 78, Sch. I


76-11-4
 
- -76
 
T.S.O. I


76-
 
12-7-76
 
Ch. 77, Sch. I


76-
 
12-7-76
 
Ch. 78, Sch. I


77-4-1
 
4-19-77
 
51.04


77-7-1
 
8-16-77
 
Ch. 77, Sch. III


77-10-3
 
- -77
 
94.04


77-11-1
 
11-1-77
 
Ch. 77, Sch. III


78-
 
- -78
 
T.S.O. IV


1978-
 
- -78
 
53.01


78-3-1
 
3- -78
 
150.01, 150.99


1978-10-1
 
- -78
 
53.02


79-
 
- -79
 
T.S.O. VII


1979-
 
- -79
 
30.12


79-2-2
 
2-20-79
 
75.26 - 75.28, 75.37, 75.38


79-
 
3- -79
 
Ch. 78, Sch. I


79-4-3
 
4-3-79
 
T.S.O. III


79-8-1
 
8-7-79
 
Ch. 77, Sch. III


79-8-2
 
8-7-79
 
T.S.O. III


79-9-3
 
9-21-79
 
94.03


79-12-3
 
12-18-79
 
Ch. 77, Sch. I


80-
 
1-12-80
 
T.S.O. III


80-1-5
 
1-22-80
 
Ch. 77, Sch. VI


80-7-3
 
7-15-80
 
30.13


80-8-1
 
- -80
 
T.S.O. I


81-10-2
 
10-6-81
 
T.S.O. IV


81-10-3
 
12-3-81
 
Ch. 78, Sch. I


81-10-4
 
- -81
 
Ch. 77, Sch. III


82-2-1
 
3-2-82
 
50.15 - 50.22


82-4-1
 
4-6-82
 
T.S.O. V


82-11-1
 
12-7-82
 
T.S.O. VII


82-12-1
 
1-4-83
 
T.S.O. I


83-2-
 
- -83
 
T.S.O. VI


1983-5
 
5-16-83
 
72.08


1983-6-1
 
6-27-83
 
50.03


83-10-1
 
11-15-83
 
T.S.O. IV


84-
 
- -84
 
T.S.O. I


84-6-1
 
6-7-84
 
Ch. 77, Sch. II


84-11-3
 
11-8-84
 
T.S.O. V


85-2-1
 
- -85
 
93.01


85-3-4
 
3-5-85
 
T.S.O. V


85-5-1
 
5-21-85
 
T.S.O. V


85-5-2
 
5-21-85
 
T.S.O. V


85-5-6
 
5-21-85
 
50.21


85-6-4
 
6-18-85
 
T.S.O. I


85-10-1
 
10-1-85
 
Ch. 78, Sch. II


85-
 
10-15-85
 
Ch. 77, Sch. III


85-11-4
 
12-17-85
 
76.13


1985-
 
12-30-85
 
32.15


86-2-1
 
3-18-86
 
T.S.O. I


86-
 
4-17-86
 
T.S.O. V


86-5-2
 
- -86
 
T.S.O. V


86-
 
7-22-86
 
T.S.O. V


86-
 
8-19-86
 
T.S.O. V


86-
 
10-7-86
 
T.S.O. V


86-
 
12-15-86
 
34.18


87-3-1
 
4- -87
 
Ch. 77, Sch. III


87-5-1
 
6-2-87
 
30.03


87-
 
7-10-87
 
94.02, 94.17


87-7-2
 
8-4-87
 
T.S.O. I


87-7-5
 
8-5-87
 
71.45


87-
 
11-20-87
 
Ch. 77, Sch. III


88-
 
- -88
 
T.S.O. I, T.S.O. II, T.S.O. VII


88-1-
 
- -88
 
T.S.O. I


88-3-4
 
- -88
 
T.S.O. I


88-7-3
 
7-25-88
 
Ch. 78, Sch. I


88-12-9
 
- -88
 
50.02


89-
 
- -89
 
Ch. 78, Sch. I, T.S.O. II, T.S.O. VII


89-2-3
 
3-21-89
 
T.S.O. V


89-9-1
 
9-5-89
 
Ch. 77, Sch. IV


90-4-1
 
4-3-90
 
T.S.O. V


90-
 
7-12-90
 
T.S.O. VII


90-9-2
 
- -90
 
T.S.O. V


90-10-2
 
12-4-90
 
T.S.O. VII


91-
 
- -91
 
T.S.O. I


91-3-1
 
- -91
 
T.S.O. V


91-5-1
 
5-7-91
 
Ch. 77, Sch. III


91-5-4
 
7-23-91
 
50.35 - 50.39


91-6-1
 
- -91
 
Ch. 77, Sch. III


92-
 
- -92
 
T.S.O. V


92-2-1
 
3- -92
 
Ch. 78, Sch. I


92-3-2
 
3-17-92
 
51.01 - 51.05, 51.99


92-9-
 
- -92
 
T.S.O. V


92-10-1
 
- -92
 
T.S.O. VI


93-
 
- -93
 
T.S.O. I, T.S.O. IV


93-
 
2-12-93
 
T.S.O. I


93-
 
3- -93
 
T.S.O. VII


93-4-4
 
- -93
 
50.01


93-5-1
 
- -93
 
Ch. 77, Sch. II


93-7-1
 
- -93
 
Ch. 78, Sch. I


93-8-2
 
8-13-93
 
Ch. 78, Sch. II


93-9-3
 
- -93
 
T.S.O. V


93-10-2
 
- -93
 
T.S.O. I


94-
 
- -94
 
T.S.O. II


94-3-
 
- -94
 
T.S.O. III


94-3-4
 
6-9-94
 
T.S.O. I


94-4-2
 
- -94
 
30.10


94-6-2
 
- -94
 
T.S.O. V


94-8-1
 
8-16-94
 
70.40 - 70.42


94-8-2
 
8-16-94
 
110.03, 110.04, 110.06, 110.14, 110.99


94-12-1
 
1-3-95
 
T.S.O. I


94-12-2
 
1-3-95
 
T.S.O. I


95-3-4
 
3-21-95
 
34.18


95-4-1
 
- -95
 
32.14


95-4-4
 
- -95
 
T.S.O. II


95-5-3
 
- -95
 
32.05


95-6-1
 
- -95
 
T.S.O. II


95-6-5
 
- -95
 
T.S.O. I


95-7-2
 
8-15-95
 
T.S.O. I


96-2-
 
- -96
 
T.S.O. V


96-2-2
 
- -96
 
T.S.O. V


96-3-1
 
2-19-96
 
36.04


96-3-2
 
- -96
 
75.08


96-4-1
 
4-16-96
 
T.S.O. V


96-4-2
 
- -96
 
T.S.O. V


96-5-
 
- -96
 
T.S.O. V


96-5-4
 
6-18-96
 
151.01


96-10-1
 
- -96
 
T.S.O. V


96-11-3
 
- -96
 
T.S.O. IV


96-11-1
 
- -96
 
94.15, 94.16


97-
 
- -97
 
110.03


97-2-2
 
- -97
 
T.S.O. V


97-3-3
 
3-4-97
 
T.S.O. V


97-3-4
 
- -97
 
T.S.O. V


97-4-1
 
- -97
 
Ch. 77, Sch. II


97-5-1
 
- -97
 
93.02


97-6-1
 
- -97
 
53.03


97-9-1
 
- -97
 
Ch. 77, Sch. III


97-9-2
 
10-7-97
 
T.S.O. III


97-9-5
 
- -97
 
T.S.O. V


97-9-6
 
- -97
 
Ch. 77, Sch. III


97-10-2
 
- -97
 
Ch. 77, Sch. III


97-10-3
 
- -97
 
94.01


98-4-
 
- -98
 
T.S.O. V


98-4-1
 
4-7-98
 
T.S.O. V


98-4-4
 
- -98
 
36.03


98-4-5
 
5-5-98
 
34.17


98-5-2
 
- -98
 
33.06


98-6-5
 
- -98
 
Ch. 77, Sch. III


98-6-7
 
- -98
 
35.01 - 35.19


98-8-2
 
9-22-98
 
T.S.O. II


98-11-1
 
11-3-98
 
T.S.O. V


99-
 
- -99
 
T.S.O. VIII


99-3-3
 
- -99
 
Ch. 77, Sch. III


99-4-1
 
5-4-99
 
T.S.O. VIII


99-5-
 
- -99
 
Ch. 77, Sch. II


99-8-3
 
- -99
 
Ch. 77, Sch. III


99-8-4
 
- -99
 
Ch. 77, Schs. I, III, V


99-9-1
 
- -99
 
T.S.O. I


99-10-1
 
11-1-99
 
51.04


99-10-3
 
- -99
 
T.S.O. V


99-11-2
 
- -99
 
T.S.O. V


99-12-5
 
- -99
 
T.S.O. V


99-12-3
 
- -99
 
36.02


00-
 
- -00
 
36.01


00-1-3
 
1-18-00
 
T.S.O. VIII


00-1-4
 
2-15-00
 
50.17


00-2-1
 
2-15-00
 
T.S.O. I


00-3-2
 
3-7-00
 
Ch. 77, Sch. III


00-3-4
 
- -00
 
76.14, Ch. 77, Sch. IV


00-6-1
 
6-6-00
 
T.S.O. VII


00-12-01
 
- -00
 
37.16


00-12-6
 
- -00
 
51.04


2000-1
 
- -00
 
Ch. 77, Sch. III


01-3-2
 
4-17-01
 
72.71


01-09-01
 
- -01
 
T.S.O. I


01-10-01
 
- -01
 
76.14, Ch. 77, Sch. VII


01-12-08
 
12-26-01
 
T.S.O. V


01-12-09
 
12-26-01
 
T.S.O. V


02-5-4
 
5-7-02
 
93.02


02-05-06
 
7-9-02
 
92.10 - 92.14


02-07-02
 
7-23-02
 
94.25 - 94.29


02-10-01
 
11-5-02
 
151.01


02-11-03
 
11-19-02
 
T.S.O. V


03-04-01
 
4-15-03
 
Adopting Ordinance


03-07-02
 
7-15-03
 
T.S.O. V


03-07-03
 
7-15-03
 
T.S.O. V


03-08-01
 
8-26-03
 
Ch. 78, Sch. II


03-08-02
 
8-12-03
 
Ch. 77, Sch. II


04-01-02
 
2-17-04
 
93.03


04-05-01
 
6-29-04
 
37.01 - 37.16


04-05-03
 
5-4-04
 
Adopting Ordinance


04-05-04
 
5-18-04
 
T.S.O. II


04-05-05
 
5-18-04
 
51.04


04-06-01
 
7-6-04
 
96.01 - 96.17, 96.25


04-06-02
 
7-20-04
 
75.39


04-11-02
 
12-7-04
 
50.18, 50.35, 50.36, 50.38, 50.40


04-11-04
 
11-23-04
 
T.S.O. VIII


04-11-3
 
6-7-05
 
52.001 - 52.004, 52.015 - 52.017, 52.025 - 52.029, 52.040 - 52.046, 52.055,
52.056, 52.060 - 52.067, 52.075 - 52.078, 52.085 - 52.087, 52.998, 52.999


05-01-02
 
1-18-05
 
Ch. 77, Sch. III


05-01-03
 
1-18-05
 
Ch. 77, Sch. II


05-04-01
 
4-5-05
 
Adopting Ordinance


05-06-05
 
7-19-05
 
Ch. 78, Sch. III


05-08-01
 
8-2-05
 
51.04


05-08-04
 
8-2-05
 
T.S.O. V


05-11-02
 
11-1-05
 
37.02


05-12-05
 
2-21-06
 
50.16, 50.18, 50.20


06-02-01
 
2-21-06
 
50.17


06-03-01
 
4-4-06
 
37.16


06-04-01
 
4-4-06
 
Adopting Ordinance


06-06-02
 
6-20-06
 
T.S.O. IV


06-08-01
 
10-3-06
 
36.01


06-09-01
 
9-5-06
 
T.S.O. I


06-09-02
 
9-5-06
 
T.S.O. V


06-11-13
 
12-26-06
 
92.02


07-02-03
 
2-27-07
 
T.S.O. I


07-02-05
 
2-27-07
 
T.S.O. VIII


07-03-01
 
3-20-07
 
51.04


07-05-01
 
5-1-07
 
T.S.O. I


07-05-02
 
5-1-07
 
T.S.O. I


07-05-03
 
5-1-07
 
Adopting Ordinance


07-07-01
 
7-17-07
 
T.S.O. I


07-07-02
 
7-17-07
 
T.S.O. VIII


07-07-3
 
8-21-07
 
T.S.O. II


07-08-02
 
8-21-07
 
T.S.O. I


07-08-03
 
8-21-07
 
T.S.O. I


07-08-04
 
10-2-07
 
Ch. 77, Sch. III


07-08-05
 
8-21-07
 
T.S.O. II


07-10-01
 
11-20-07
 
Ch. 77, Sch. III


07-11-02
 
12-4-07
 
T.S.O. VIII


08-01-01
 
2-19-08
 
T.S.O. VIII


08-01-03
 
2-19-08
 
T.S.O. I


08-03-01
 
4-23-08
 
T.S.O. VIII


08-03-02
 
4-23-08
 
T.S.O. II


08-05-02
 
7-1-08
 
T.S.O. VIII


08-07-01
 
8-5-08
 
T.S.O. I


08-07-02
 
8-5-08
 
T.S.O. VII


08-08-02
 
9-2-08
 
T.S.O. V


08-11-02
 
12-2-08
 
T.S.O. VII


08-12-01
 
1-6-09
 
53.03


08-12-02
 
1-6-09
 
52.003


09-01-03
 
1-20-09
 
T.S.O. V


09-02-03
 
3-3-09
 
Ch. 78, Sch. III


09-02-04
 
3-3-09
 
Ch. 78, Sch. II


Res. 09-04-01
 
4-21-09
 
30.15


Res. 09-04-02
 
5-5-09
 
38.45


09-04-01
 
5-19-09
 
T.S.O. VII


09-08-02
 
8-4-09
 
51.04


09-09-03
 
10-20-09
 
T.S.O. I


10-01-01
 
2-2-10
 
76.15, 76.16


10-02-02
 
3-2-10
 
54.01 - 54.08


10-03-02
 
3-2-10
 
T.S.O. III


10-03-01
 
4-6-10
 
T.S.O. I


10-09-04
 
10-5-10
 
96.01 - 96.27


10-09-06
 
10-19-10
 
T.S.O. III


10-09-08
 
10-19-10
 
52.003


10-12-02
 
12-7-10
 
T.S.O. V


10-12-06
 
12-7-10
 
T.S.O. I


10-12-05
 
1-4-11
 
97.01 - 97.19, 97.99


11-03-04
 
3-15-11
 
51.04


11-03-05
 
3-15-11
 
T.S.O. I


11-03-01
 
4-5-11
 
Ch. 78, Sch. II


11-03-02
 
4-5-11
 
T.S.O. I


11-04-02
 
4-5-11
 
T.S.O. V


11-04-03
 
4-19-11
 
Adopting Ordinance


11-06-01
 
7-19-11
 
T.S.O. VII


11-07-01
 
8-2-11
 
T.S.O. I


11-09-02
 
10-18-11
 
T.S.O. VII


11-09-03
 
10-18-11
 
T.S.O. IV


12-03-01
 
4-17-12
 
93.02


12-04-01
 
4-3-12
 
Adopting Ordinance


12-04-02
 
4-17-12
 
92.03


12-04-04
 
5-15-12
 
T.S.O. VII


12-05-01
 
6-19-12
 
92.11


12-05-02
 
6-19-12
 
Ch. 77, Sch. III


12-06-01
 
6-19-12
 
Ch. 77, Sch. III


12-07-01
 
8-7-12
 
Ch. 78, Sch. II


13-01-01
 
2-5-13
 
T.S.O. I


13-05-01
 
6-18-13
 
T.S.O. I


13-07-01
 
7-16-13
 
37.13


13-10-01
 
11-5-13
 
94.05


13-10-02
 
10-1-13
 
T.S.O. III


13-11-03
 
12-3-13
 
T.S.O. III


14-03-01
 
3-4-14
 
51.04


14-03-02
 
4-15-14
 
53.03


14-07-02
 
7-15-14
 
T.S.O. V


14-08-01
 
9-2-14
 
36.01


14-08-02
 
8-5-14
 
T.S.O. V


14-11-02
 
11-18-14
 
Ch. 77, Sch. III


14-11-03
 
11-18-14
 
T.S.O. II


14-12-05
 
12-16-14
 
T.S.O. V


15-01-04
 
2-3-15
 
37.13


15-02-01
 
3-3-15
 
T.S.O. I


15-02-02
 
3-3-15
 
T.S.O. I


15-03-01
 
4-21-15
 
54.01 - 54.08


15-06-01
 
6-16-15
 
54.01 - 54.08


15-07-01
 
8-4-15
 
T.S.O. I


15-07-06
 
8-18-15
 
T.S.O. VII


15-08-02
 
9-15-15
 
Ch. 77, Sch. II


15-09-01
 
10-20-15
 
Ch. 78, Sch. I


15-09-03
 
10-20-15
 
Ch. 77, Sch. III


15-10-03
 
11-17-15
 
39.01 - 39.99


16-01-01
 
2-2-16
 
T.S.O. V


16-05-01
 
7-5-16
 
T.S.O. I


16-05-02
 
5-17-16
 
T.S.O. V


16-06-02
 
6-28-16
 
T.S.O. V


16-07-01
 
7-19-16
 
T.S.O. V


16-08-01
 
9-20-16
 
50.17


16-11-01
 
12-6-16
 
T.S.O. I


16-12-02
 
12-20-16
 
T.S.O. V


17-01-01
 
2-7-17
 
T.S.O. I


17-02-01
 
2-7-17
 
150.02


17-02-03
 
3-7-17
 
T.S.O. I


17-02-04
 
2-21-17
 
51.04


17-03-01
 
4-18-17
 
T.S.O. I


17-03-02
 
4-18-17
 
T.S.O. VII


17-05-01
 
7-11-17
 
50.23


17-07-01
 
8-1-17
 
Ch. 77, Sch. III


17-07-02
 
8-1-17
 
T.S.O. I


17-07-03
 
8-1-17
 
T.S.O. I


17-07-04
 
7-25-17
 
T.S.O. V


17-07-05
 
8-1-17
 
Ch. 78, Sch. II


17-07-08
 
7-25-17
 
T.S.O. V


17-07-09
 
9-5-17
 
52.004


17-08-01
 
8-15-17
 
T.S.O. V


17-08-03
 
8-15-17
 
T.S.O. V


17-08-04
 
8-15-17
 
T.S.O. III


17-09-01
 
10-3-17
 
52.003


18-02-02
 
2-22-18
 
93.03


18-02-03
 
2-22-18
 
39.062


18-04-01
 
5-15-18
 
53.01


18-07-01
 
7-3-18
 
Ch. 77, Sch. II


18-09-01
 
9-4-18
 
Ch. 77, Sch. III


18-09-04
 
9-18-18
 
T.S.O. V


18-10-01
 
11-6-18
 
137.09


18-10-02
 
2-19-19
 
98.01 - 98.13, 98.99


18-11-02
 
12-4-18
 
Ch. 77, Sch. III


 
VILLAGE OF MINSTER, OHIO
OFFICIAL ZONING CODE
ORDINANCE NUMBER: 02-10-01
ADOPTED: DECEMBER 15, 1970
REVISED: 1979, 1989, 1995, 1996, 2002
VILLAGE OF MINSTER, OHIO, ZONING REGULATIONS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
VILLAGE OF MINSTER, OHIO, ZONING REGULATIONS..............................................................2
CHAPTER ONE:GENERAL REGULATIONS........................................................................................5
SECTION A: TITLE AND ENACTMENT...............................................................................................5
SECTION B: AREA OF JURISDICTION.................................................................................................5
SECTION C: OFFICIAL ZONING DISTRICT MAP...............................................................................5
SECTION D: INTERPRETATION AND PURPOSES.............................................................................5
SECTION E: ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS..................................................................................6
SECTION F: RULES FOR OFFICIAL ZONING DISTRICT MAP INTERPRETATION.......................6
SECTION G: RULES FOR TEXT INTERPRETATION OF ZONING REGULATIONS........................7
SECTION H: REQUIRED CONFORMANCE.........................................................................................7
SECTION I: REGULATIONS NOT RETROACTIVE.............................................................................8
SECTION J: REGULATIONS OF NON-CONFORMITIES....................................................................8
SECTION K: PENDING APPLICATIONS FOR ZONING COMPLIANCE CERTIFICATE.................9
SECTION L: ESSENTIAL SERVICES....................................................................................................9
SECTION M: INVALIDITY OF A PART................................................................................................9
SECTION N: APPLICABILITY.............................................................................................................10
SECTION O: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.................................................................................10
SECTION P: REPEAL OF EXISTING ORDINANCES.........................................................................11
SECTION Q: SCHEDULE OF MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.............................................................11
CHAPTER TWO: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS.......................................................12
SECTION A: STATEMENTS OF INTENT............................................................................................12
SECTION B: LOT SIZE AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS..............................................................12
SECTION C: USE LIMITATIONS AND STANDARDS.......................................................................12
SECTION D: REFERENCE TO ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.....................................................13
CHAPTER THREE: COMMERCIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS.................................................14
SECTION A: STATEMENT OF INTENT..............................................................................................14
SECTION B: LOT SIZE AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS..............................................................14
SECTION C: USE OF LIMITATIONS AND STANDARDS.................................................................14
SECTION D: REFERENCE TO ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.....................................................14
CHAPTER FOUR: INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS........................................................15
SECTION A: STATEMENT OF INTENT..............................................................................................15
SECTION B: LOT SIZE AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS..............................................................15
SECTION C: USE LIMITATIONS AND STANDARDS.......................................................................15
SECTION D: REFERENCE TO ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.....................................................15
CHAPTER FIVE: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) DISTRICT REGULATIONS........16
SECTION A: STATEMENTS OF INTENT............................................................................................16
SECTION B: GENERAL PUD DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS..............................................................16
SECTION C: PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (PRD)................................................................17
SECTION D: PLANNED COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (PCD)...............................................................18
SECTION E: PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (PID)....................................................................19
SECTION F: PLANNED MOBILE HOME PARK DISTRICT (PMHP)................................................20
SECTION G: GENERAL PUD REVIEW CRITERIA............................................................................21
SECTION H: PUD APPLICATION PROCESS......................................................................................22
SECTION I: CHANGES IN THE PLANNED DEVELOPMENT...........................................................27
SECTION J: REVOCATION OF PERMIT.............................................................................................27
SECTION K: APPLICATION LIMITATION.........................................................................................27
CHAPTER SIX: OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING/UNLOADING REGULATIONS.....28
SECTION A: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.........................................................................................28
SECTION B: OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS..................................................................31
SECTION C: DESIGN STANDARDS FOR OFF-STREET PARKING.................................................34
SECTION D: OFF-STREET LOADING/UNLOADING REQUIREMENTS.........................................36
SECTION E: DESIGN STANDARDS FOR OFF-STREET LOADING/UNLOADING AREAS..........36
SECTION F: PARKING AND STORING REQUIREMENTS FOR RECREATIONAL AND COMMERCIAL VEHICLES...................................................................................................................37
CHAPTER SEVEN: SIGN REGULATIONS.........................................................................................40
SECTION A: STATEMENT OF INTENT..............................................................................................40
SECTION B: GENERAL REGULATIONS............................................................................................40
SECTION C: PERMITTED SIGNS FOR WHICH NO PERMIT IS REQUIRED...................................41
SECTION D: PERMITTED SIGN FOR WHICH A PERMIT IS REQUIRED.......................................42
SECTION E: TEMPORARY SIGNS......................................................................................................46
SECTION F: PROHIBITED SIGNS........................................................................................................46
SECTION G: SIGN SETBACK REQUIREMENTS...............................................................................46
CHAPTER EIGHT: OUTDOOR LIGHTING CONTROL REGULATIONS.....................................49
SECTION A: PURPOSE AND INTENT............................................................................................49
SECTION B: CONFORMANCE WITH APPLICABLE CODES AND ORDINANCES..................49
SECTION C: APPROVED MATERIALS AND METHODS OF INSTALLATION.........................49
SECTION D: DEFINITIONS.............................................................................................................49
SECTION E: SHIELDING.................................................................................................................50
SECTION F: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL ZONING DISTRICTS..............................50
SECTION G: EXEMPTIONS.............................................................................................................51
SECTION H: APPLICATIONS..........................................................................................................52
SECTION I: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT FOR LIGHTING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY....................53
SECTION J: AMENDMENT TO PERMIT FOR LIGHTING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.............53
SECTION K: APPEALS.....................................................................................................................53
SECTION L: REQUEST FOR TEMPORARY EXEMPTIONS.........................................................53
CHAPTER NINE: SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS..................................................................55
SECTION A: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS TO REGULATE POTENTIAL HAZARDS AND NUISANCES............................................................................................................................................55
SECTION B: REGULATION OF ACCESSORY USES.........................................................................57
SECTION C: REGULATION OF HOME OCCUPATIONS..................................................................59
SECTION D: REGULATION OF CONDITIONAL USES.....................................................................62
SECTION E: REQUIRED FENCING, SCREENING, BUFFERING AND LANDSCAPING...............69
SECTION F: REGULATIONS OF TEMPORARY USES......................................................................74
SECTION G: YARD MODIFICATIONS...............................................................................................76
SECTION H: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL, ACCESSORY, AND CONDITIONAL USES.....................77
CHAPTER TEN: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT........................................................81
SECTION A: ADMINISTRATIVE ENTITIES.......................................................................................81
SECTION B: ADMINISTRTIVE PROCEDURES.................................................................................84
SECTION C: ENFORCEMENT..............................................................................................................98
CHAPTER ELEVEN: DEFINITIONS:................................................................................................100
TABLE OF FIGURES
TABLE I: LOT AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS..............................................................................11
TABLE II: EXTERIOR LIGHTING REQUIREMENTS.........................................................................54 3
TABLE III: PERMITED USES BY ZONING DISTRICT.......................................................................77
FIGURE I: OFF-STREET PARKING MINIMUM DIMENSIONAL TABLE.......................................35
FIGURE II. STRUCTURAL TYPES OF SIGNS.....................................................................................45
FIGURE III: HEIGHT AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.................................................................47
FIGURE IV: SANITATION ENCLOSURE DETAIL.............................................................................73
TABLES OF EXHIBITS
EXHIBIT A.....................................................................APPLICATION FOR ZONING CERTIFICATE
EXHIBIT B...........................................................APPLICATION FOR CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT
EXHIBIT C.....................................................................................APPLICATION FOR SIGN PERMIT
EXHIBIT D..........................................................................................APPLICATION FOR VARIANCE
EXHIBIT E............................................................................................ZONING VIOLATION NOTICE
EXHIBIT F...................................................................REVOCATION OF ZONING PERMIT LETTER
EXHIBIT G.............................................................................STATEMENT OF ZONING VIOLATION
EXHIBIT H......................................................................NOTICE OF ZONING VIOLATION LETTER
EXHIBIT I........................................................APPLICATION FOR ZONING MAP AMMENDMENT
EXHIBIT J.......................................................APPLICATION FOR ZONING TEXT AMMENDMENT
EXHIBIT K.................................................................................................TEMPORARY USE PERMIT
EXHIBIT L......................................................................DETERMINIATION OF BASEMENT LEVEL
EXHIBIT M.......................................................................BUILDING-PRINCIPAL AND LOT TERMS
EXHIBIT N.......................................................................................................................TYPE OF LOTS
EXHIBIT O............................................................EXAMPLES OF COMMON LIGHTING FIXTURES
4
CHAPTER ONE:GENERAL REGULATIONS
SECTION A: TITLE AND ENACTMENT
AN ORDINANCE TO REGULATE, RESTRICT AND LIMIT THE LOCATION AND USE OF BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND LAND, FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY, RESIDENCE OR OTHER PURPOSES; TO REGULATE THE HEIGHT OF STRUCTURES; TO PROVIDE A METHOD OF ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT; AND TO PRESCRIBE PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION OF THE WITHIN PROVISIONS.
WHEREAS, it is determined by the Village Council of the Village of Minster, Ohio, that it is in the interest of the public health, safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity and general welfare of the Village of Minster, Ohio, to regulate, restrict and limit the location and use of buildings, structures and land for trade, industry, residence or other purposes and for said purposes, to divide the Village of Minster, Ohio, into such districts or zones as are deemed best suited for said purposes;
WHEREAS, these Regulations are intended to conserve and protect property and property values, to secure the most appropriate and most aesthetic use of land, to regulate population density and to facilitate adequate and economical provisions for public improvements;
WHEREAS, it is lawful and appropriate to provide a method of administration and enforcement and to prescribe penalties for the violations of provisions hereafter described, all as authorized by Chapters 711 and 713 of the Ohio Revised Code;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED BY THE VILLAGE COUNCIL OF THE VILLAGE OF MINSTER, STATE OF OHIO:
That these Zoning Regulations shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the “Village of Minster, Ohio, Zoning Regulations,” that they may be referred to within as “these Regulations,” and that they shall contain the following provisions.
SECTION B: AREA OF JURISDICTION
The provisions of these Regulations shall apply to all of the incorporated territory of the Village of Minster, Ohio.
SECTION C: OFFICIAL ZONING DISTRICT MAP
The official Zoning District Map dated June 1, 2002 is an integral part of these Regulations. The official Zoning District Map, and all notations and references and other matters shown thereon, shall be and is hereby made part of these Regulations and shall carry the same force and effect as the balance of the material contained herein.
SECTION D: INTERPRETATION AND PURPOSES
In interpreting and applying the provisions of these Regulations, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety,
5
comfort, convenience and general health. The lot or yard areas required by these Regulations for a particular building shall not be diminished and shall not be included as a part of the required lot or yard areas of any other building. These Regulations shall not repeal, abrogate, annul or in any other way impair or interfere with any existing provisions of law or ordinance or any rules or regulations previously adopted or issued or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the use of buildings or premises; provided that where these Regulations impose greater restrictions upon the use of buildings or premises or upon the height of buildings or require larger lots or yards than are imposed or required by such existing provisions of law or ordinance by such rules or regulations the provisions of these Regulations shall control.
SECTION E: ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
For the purpose of regulating the location of buildings, other structures and premises to be used for trade, industry, residence or other specified uses; regulating the location of buildings and other structures hereafter erected or altered, setback building lines and the areas of yards, courts and other open spaces; and regulating and limiting the height of buildings and other structures hereafter erected or altered, the Village of Minster is herby divided into nine (9) Zoning Districts, termed respectively; R-1, Single and Double Family Residential District; R-2 Single Family Residential District; C-1, Central Commercial District; C-2, General Commercial District; C-3, Regional Commercial District; I-1, Industrial District; PRD, Planned Residential District: PMHP, Planned Mobile Home Park District; PCD, Planned Commercial District; and PHD, Planned Industrial Development.
The Districts enumerated above are depicted on the Official Zoning District Map, available for public inspection at the Minster Village Administrative Offices. The official Zoning District Map shall be an integral part of these Regulations, and no structures shall be erected, nor shall any land be used, except in conformity with the regulations for the district in which the proposed use is located.
SECTION F: RULES FOR OFFICIAL ZONING DISTRICT MAP INTERPRETATION
It is the intent of these Regulations that the entire area under the jurisdiction of the Village of Minster Zoning, including all land, water areas, streets, alleys, railroads and other right-of-ways, be included in the Districts established by these Regulations. In any case where territory is not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning District Map of the Village as being in any District, such territory shall automatically be classified as R-1, Low-Density Single-Family Residential District, until otherwise classified.
When definite distances in feet are not shown on the Official Zoning District Map, the district boundaries on the Official Zoning District Map are intended to be along existing street, alley or property lines or extensions of or from the same, and if exact location of such line is not clear, it shall be determined by either supplemental detail drawings or rules of interpretation, adopted by the concurring vote of a majority of the Board of Zoning Appeals.
6
When the streets or alleys on the ground differ from the streets or alleys shown on the Official Zoning District Map, the Board of Zoning Appeals may apply the district designations on the map to the property on the ground in such manner as to conform to the intent and purposes of this section in the judgment of the Board of Zoning Appeals.
SECTION G: RULES FOR TEXT INTERPRETATION OF ZONING REGULATIONS
In the interpretation of the text, the rules of interpretation contained in this section shall be observed and applies, except when the context clearly indicates otherwise. The following rules apply to the text:
1. The particular shall control the general.
2. In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text and any caption or illustration, the text shall control.
3. The word “shall” shall be mandatory and not discretionary. The word “may” shall be permissive.
4. Words used in the present tense shall include the future; words used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicated the contrary.
5. The phrase “used for” includes “arranged for,” “designed for,” “maintained for,” or “occupied for.”
SECTION H: REQUIRED CONFORMANCE
Except as hereinafter specifically provided:
1. No land shall be used except for a use permitted in the Zoning District where it is located, or for a use conditionally permitted and subject to the granting of a conditional use by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
2. No building or structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered, nor shall any building be used, except for a use permitted or conditionally permitted in the District in which such building is located and only after a Zoning Compliance Certificate has been obtained.
3. Every building erected or structurally altered shall be located on a lot as herein defined. No more than one principal building per lot shall be permitted except on corner lots that are split in accordance with Chapter Two, Section C.
4. No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered to exceed the height limit herein established for the District in which such building is located.
7
5. No parcel of land described by metes and bounds or lot hereafter shall be established which does not conform and meet the requirements of these Regulations.
6. No lot, yard, court, parking area or other space shall be reduced in area or dimension so as to make such area less than the minimum required by the Resolutions; and, if already less than the minimum required by these Resolutions such area or dimension shall not be further reduced. No part of a yard, court, parking area or other space provided about, or for, any building or structure for the purpose of complying with provisions of these Regulations shall be included as part of a yard, court, parking area or other space required under these Regulation for another building or structure.
SECTION I: REGULATIONS NOT RETROACTIVE
Except as otherwise specified in these Regulations, any use, lot, building or structure that exists as of the enactment date of these Resolutions, the original zoning regulations (1970), or any amendment thereof, may be continued even though such use, lot, building or structure may not conform to the provisions of the Zoning District where it is located. The provisions for non-conforming uses shall apply.
SECTION J: REGULATIONS OF NON-CONFORMITIES
Non-conforming uses include buildings, structures or uses that lawfully existed prior to the adoption of these Regulations and are prohibited or further restricted as a result of the provisions adopted in these Regulations.
1. All non-conforming uses are considered by these Zoning Regulations to be incompatible with the permitted uses of the Zoning District in which the non-conforming uses are located.
2. A non-conforming use of a building may be changed to another non-conforming use only by the Board of Zoning Appeals and shall be restricted as follows:
a. The Board of Zoning Appeals may permit substitution of a new non-conforming use in place of an existing non-conforming use, provided that the Board of Zoning Appeals determines that any changes of use will be less detrimental to the neighborhood than the existing use.
3. Any non-conforming use of land that is discontinued, or building or structure left vacant or abandoned for a period of twelve (12) months or more, shall not thereafter be returned to a non-conforming use.
4. Any non-conforming buildings, structures or use of land superseded by a permitted use within the Zoning District where it is located shall thereafter be in conformance with these Regulations, and the previous non-conforming use shall not be resumed.
8
5. No non-conforming use shall be enlarged, extended, reconstructed, or structurally altered except as pursuant to the provisions of these Regulations.
6. No non-conforming building or structure shall be moved in whole or in part to any other location unless such building or structure and the yard and other open spaces provided are made to conform to all of the regulations of the Zoning District in which such building or structures are to be located.
7. Any non-conforming building or use of land destroyed by natural causes (fire, flood, earthquake, tornado, or the like) to the extent of more than sixty percent (60%) of its replacement value shall not be resumed or reconstructed. The remains of any building or structure shall be razed as soon as possible. Any subsequent use of the land shall be in conformance with these Regulations. Replacement value shall be based upon the reproduction cost of the building, structure or use prior to the calamity and determined by the Zoning Administrator. In case of any uncertainty about the replacement value of a particular building, structure or use, the determination of the Board of Zoning Appeals or their designated representative shall be final.
8. Nothing in these Regulations shall grant legal non-conforming use status to a use that existed unlawfully prior to the enactment of these Regulations.
SECTION K: PENDING APPLICATIONS FOR ZONING COMPLIANCE CERTIFICATE
Nothing in these Regulations shall require any change in the overall layout, plans, construction, size or designated use of any development, building, structure or part thereof for which official approvals and required building permits have been legally granted before the enactment of these Regulations, the construction of which, conforming with such plans, shall have been started within twelve (12) months of the effective date of these Regulations and completed in a normal manner within a subsequent one (1) year period and not discontinued until completion, except for reasons beyond the builder’s control. All permits, for which construction has not begun within twelve (12) months of the effective date or amendment of these Regulations, are hereby revoked and void.
SECTION L: ESSENTIAL SERVICES
The location, erection, construction, reconstruction, change, alteration, maintenance, removal, use or enlargement of any building or structure of any public utility or public facility shall be permitted in any Zoning District provided every effort is made to conform to the building design, lot and yard requirements for the Zoning District in which it is to be located; and proper safeguards are provided to protect the character and general welfare of the Zoning District. A special permit issued by the Zoning Administrator will be required to assume compliance with these Regulations.
SECTION M: INVALIDITY OF A PART
If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of these Regulations is declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction in a valid judgment or decree, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not
9
affect the constitutionality or validity of the remaining articles, sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases of these Regulations since the same would have been enacted without the unconstitutional or invalid article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase.
SECTION N: APPLICABILITY
These Regulations shall apply to all land, every structure and every use of land or structure except for those uses specifically mentioned in Section K, as required by the Ohio Revised Code.
SECTION O: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
1. Street Frontage Required: Except as permitted by other provisions of these Regulations, all lots created after the adoption of these Regulations shall have frontage on a public street.
2. Prohibited Uses: Within the Village of Minster, no lot, premises, place or buildings shall be used and no buildings or structures shall be erected or placed that are arranged, intended or designed to be used for any use that would constitute a violation of any one or more of the performances standards for potential hazards and/or nuisances specified in Chapter Nine, Section A.
3. Vision Clearance: A “sight triangle,” defined as that area from the intersection point of two (2) streets on the lot to a point twenty (20) feet back from this point on the lot lines, shall be required on corner lots at all street intersections in all Districts except C-1. To ensure that traffic visibility is not obstructed and driving hazards are not created, visibility between two (2) and ten (10) feet above the plane of established grades of the street shall be clear of landscape materials, vehicles, fences, signs or any other view-obstructing structures. Trees shall be permitted in the sight triangle as long as only the trunk is visible within ten (10) feet above ground.
4. Unsafe Buildings: Nothing in these Regulations shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any part of any building or structure.
5. Height Limitation Exceptions: The height of these Regulations shall not apply to barns, silos or other farm structures or buildings, church spires, belfries, cupolas, domes, monuments, chimneys, smokestacks, flag poles, aerials, water towers, grain elevators and other structures the Board of Zoning Appeals deems to require excessive height in order to function properly.
6. Annexed Land: When land is annexed to the Village of Minster, the Jackson Township Zoning regulations then in effect shall remain in full force and shall be enforced by the township officials until such time as the Village shall adopt regulations for said land. Within ninety- (90) days after the annexation, the Planning Commission shall make a recommendation to the Village Council as to the zoning of the annexed area following the procedures outlined in Chapter Nine.
10
SECTION P: REPEAL OF EXISTING ORDINANCES
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with or in conflict with these Regulations are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to give these Regulations full force and effect. These Regulations shall become effective from and after the date of their approval and adoption, as provided by law.
SECTION Q: SCHEDULE OF MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS
The following table provides the minimum parcel or lot size, minimum setbacks, and height limitations for all zoning districts in the Village of Minster.
TABLE I
SETBACKS
ZONING DISTRICT
MINIMUM LOT SIZE
LOT WIDTH****
Front
Side
Rear
MAXIMUM HEIGHT*
R-1: Single & Double Family
5,000 S.F.
68 FEET
35 FEET
7.5 FEET
35 FEET
35 FEET
R-2: Single Family
8,000 S.F.
80 FEET
35 FEET
15 FEET
35 FEET
40 FEET
C-1: Central Commercial
N/A
N/A
N/A
7.5 FEET
25 FEET
35 FEET
C-2: General Commercial
4,000 S.F.
60 FEET
25 FEET
7.5 FEET
25 FEET
35 FEET
C-3: Regional Commercial***
43,560 S.F.
150 FEET**
80 FEET
20 FEET
35 FEET
35 FEET
I-1: Industrial
20,000 S.F.
125 FEET
35 Feet
20 FEET
35 FEET
45 Feet
Planned Unit Development
To Be Determined
To Be Determined
To Be Determined
To Be Determined
To Be Determined
To Be Determined
* The Maximum Height shall be measured to the highest point of the rood structure excluding chimneys.
** The C-3 Regional Commercial District shall also maintain a minimum lot depth of 200 feet,
*** Any development within the C-3 Regional Commercial District shall be required to maintain a fifteen (15) foot wide buffer area containing a fence, wall, or hedge that is erected, constructed, or planted to a height of six (6) feet.
**** The minimum lot width required for each district shall also be the minimum frontage required on an improved and dedicated street.
11
CHAPTER TWO: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS
SECTION A: STATEMENTS OF INTENT
1. Single and Double-Family Residential Central District (R-1)
The Single- and Double-Family Residential District (R-1) is intended to provide space in the Village for medium-density, single- and double-family residential development and to preserve the residential character of the existing central area of the Village. Land best suited for this Zoning District includes those sections of the Village that pose few natural barriers to development. The density in this Zoning District shall not exceed 8.0 housing units per acre except where higher densities are permitted by conditional use permit.
2. Single Family Residential District (R-2)
The Single Family Residential District (R-2) is intended to provide space in the Village for low density, single-family residential development and to preserve the residential character of the existing central area of the Village. Land best suited for this Zoning District includes those sections of the Village that pose few natural barriers to development. The density in this Zoning Density shall not exceed 5.0 housing per units per acre. The minimum lot size for the R-2 District shall be 8,000 square feet.
SECTION B: LOT SIZE AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS
See Chapter 1, Section Q: Schedule of Minimum Requirements
SECTION C: USE LIMITATIONS AND STANDARDS
1. Double Frontage Lots: Where lots have a double frontage, the required front yard shall be provided on both streets.
2. Corner Lots: Lots formed at the intersection of two (2) streets shall not be required to provided two (2) front yard setbacks. The side abutting the street with the least amount of frontage shall be considered the front yard and shall be required to have a front yard setback of thirty-five (35) feet. The side abutting the street with the most amount of frontage shall be considered the side yard and shall be required to have a side yard setback of seventeen and a half (17.5) feet. The required “sight-triangle” (Chapter 1, Section O, Paragraph 3) shall be maintained and shall not be obstructed in cases where it conflicts with the reduced setbacks.
3. Corner Lot Splits: Corner lots fronting on north-south streets in the R-1 District and having a depth of two hundred nineteen and 58/100 (218.58) feet may be divided into two (2) lots for the purpose of making land available for the erection of an additional dwelling fronting on the east-west street. Such second dwellings shall be subject to a fifteen (15) foot minimum front yard and a fifteen (15) foot minimum rear yard requirement, rather than the thirty-five (35) foot minimum otherwise required in the R-1 District. The rear yard of the original lot becomes a
12
side yard to the new lot and the seven and a half (7.5) foot side yard setback becomes applicable.
4. Accessory Use: No accessory uses or buildings shall be located in the required front yard of any lot. On corner lots, no accessory use or buildings shall be located in the required side yard, which has street frontage.
5. Mobile Homes: No mobile home shall be located within the Single-Double Family Residential Central Districts (R-1) or the Single Family Residential District (R-2). Mobile homes will be permitted in Planned Mobile Home Districts only.
SECTION D: REFERENCE TO ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS
1. Off-street parking and loading and unloading spaces shall be subject to additional requirements set forth in Chapter Six.
2. Signs shall be subject to additional requirements set forth in Chapter Seven.
3. All uses shall be subject to additional requirements set forth in Chapter Nine, as appropriate.
13
CHAPTER THREE: COMMERCIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS
SECTION A: STATEMENT OF INTENT
1. Central Commercial District (C-1)
The Central Commercial District (C-1) is intended to preserve the commercial character of the existing downtown area of the Village by allowing for the continuation and expansion of commercial establishments traditionally found in a Village downtown area.
2. General Commercial District (C-2)
The General Commercial District (C-2) is intended to accommodate commercial activities along state highways or other major street frontages where parcels of land may be restricted due to adjacent developed lands.
3. Regional Commercial District (C-3)
The Regional Commercial District (C-3) is intended to provide for a full range of commercial activities to and fronting on state highways or other major roadways and is intended to serve a population base larger than that of the Village.
SECTION B: LOT SIZE AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS
See Chapter 1, Section Q: Schedule of Minimum requirements
SECTION C: USE OF LIMITATIONS AND STANDARDS
1. Buffer yards: All commercial uses adjacent residential uses or Districts, either along rear or side lot lines, shall provide a buffer yard, according to the Regulations specified in Chapter Nine, Section E.
2. Accessory Uses: No accessory uses or buildings shall be located in the required front yard of any lot. On corner lots, no accessory uses or buildings shall be located in the required side yard, which has street frontage.
SECTION D: REFERENCE TO ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS
1. Off-street parking and loading and unloading spaces shall be subject to additional requirements set forth in Chapter Six.
2. Signs shall be subject to additional requirements set forth in Chapter Seven.
3. All uses shall be subject to additional requirements set forth in Chapter Eight, as appropriate.
4. All uses shall be subject to additional requirements set forth in Chapter Nine, as appropriate.
14
CHAPTER FOUR: INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS
SECTION A: STATEMENT OF INTENT
Industrial District (I-1)
The Industrial District (I-1) is intended to accommodate existing industrial development, allow land for its future expansion and to provide land for new industrial sites. The Industrial District is best suited for lands located where convenient access exists to major highways and/or rail systems. Preferably, Industrial Districts should be separated physically and functionally from the Village’s residential neighborhoods.
SECTION B: LOT SIZE AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS
See Chapter 1, Section Q: Schedule of Minimum requirements
SECTION C: USE LIMITATIONS AND STANDARDS
1. Accessory Uses: No accessory uses or buildings shall be located in the required front yard of any lot. On corner lots, no accessory uses or buildings shall be located in the required side yard that has street frontage.
2. Buffer yards: All industrial uses adjacent residential uses or Districts, either along rear or side lot lines, shall provide a buffer yard according to regulations specified in Chapter Nine, Section E.
3. Storage and Service Areas: Outdoor storages of materials shall be allowed provided such materials are enclosed and secured, and in no case shall such materials be stored higher than twelve (12) feet in height.
All storage and service areas shall be screened from view from the perimeter of the site with landscaping and /or fencing.
SECTION D: REFERENCE TO ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS
1. Off-street parking and loading and unloading spaces shall be subject to additional requirements set forth in Chapter Six.
2. Signs shall be subject to additional requirements set forth in Chapter Seven.
3. All uses shall be subject to additional requirements set forth in Chapter Nine, as appropriate.
15
CHAPTER FIVE: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) DISTRICT REGULATIONS
SECTION A: STATEMENTS OF INTENT
It is the intent of the Planned Unit Development (PUD) Districts Planned Residential District (PRD), Planned Mobile Home Park District (PMHP), Planned Commercial District (PCD) and Planned Industrial District (PID) to allow space in the Village for innovative developments that do not lend themselves to traditional development standards and to provide a flexible process to review these development proposals while ensuring that they are compatible with other uses in the Village.
The PRD will allow a wide range of housing opportunities to develop in the Village.
The PMHP will allow the option of mobile homes in the Village in a well organizes way compatible with the character of the surrounding area.
The PCD will allow retail development in a cluster or shopping center type layouts and will encourage new types of retail centers in a place of “strip” developments.
The PID will allow industrial uses to develop in ways that promote efficiency and are compatible with surrounding uses.
SECTION B: GENERAL PUD DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS
All PUD developments shall comply with the general requirements and with those requirements specifically applicable to their development type.
1. Open Space
There shall be reserved, within the tract to be developed on a planned unit basis, a minimum land area of twenty percent (20%) of the tract for use as common open space. No more than fifty percent (50%) of this open space shall be water surface and not more than forty percent (40%) of the open space shall have a slope of ten percent (10%) or greater. This common open space shall not consist of isolated or fragmented pieces of land that would serve no useful purpose.
Pedestrian walkways, bikeways, park land, open areas, swimming pools, tennis courts and other lands of essentially open character may be included in this common open space, exclusive of off-street parking areas.
If the Planning Commission determines that sufficient open space is available in the area, the Commission may determine that the developer can pay a fee in lieu of holding space open. This fee schedule will be determined and approved by the Planning Commission and Village Council.
2. Preservation of Natural Resources
Where significant natural features, such as large trees, wood lots, streams, ponds, wildlife habitat or other landscape features, are present on the site, these features
16
shall be preserved wherever possible. These areas may fulfill open space requirements where the specified open space criteria can be met.
3. Utilities
All electrical and telephone facilities, street light wiring and other wiring conduits and similar facilities shall be placed underground by the developer, unless waived by the Planning Commission for technical reasons.
4. Preservation of Historical Structures
Where significant historical structures, such as bridges, stonewalls and buildings, are present on the site, these structures shall be preserved wherever possible. These areas may fulfill the open space requirements where the specified open space criteria can be met. The historic structures shall not be calculated as part of the impervious surface.
SECTION C: PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (PRD)
1. Area Requirements
All Planned Residential Districts shall be a minimum of five (5) acres in size.
2. Permitted Use
o Single-Family Dwellings
o Double-Family Dwellings
o Multi-Family Dwellings
o Schools
o Churches
o Parks
o Golf Courses
o Rest Homes/Nursing Homes
o Hospitals
o Community Centers
3. Accessory Uses
o Home Occupations
o Garages/Shed
o Satellite Receiving Stations
o Swimming Pools
o Game Courts
4. Site Requirements
There shall be a setback of fifty (50) feet maintained around the total perimeter of the development, which is landscaped to provide a buffer that is seventy-five percent (75%) opaque when adjacent residential uses and one hundred percent (100%) opaque when adjacent commercial and industrial uses from the ground to at least six (6) feet above ground. Earthen mounds may be used as part of the buffering system.
Detached principal structures shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet away from one another.
Private accessory structures and uses shall not be located on common open space and shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet away from all structures other than the principal structure they are associated with.
17
All structures shall be located at least twenty-five (25) feet back from all public and private roads.
No residential structure or cluster of attached buildings shall have more than three hundred (300) linear feet of frontage.
5. Density Requirements
Residential structures shall be allowed in the Planned Residential District at up to eighteen (18) units per acre. This shall be calculated as the total number of dwelling units per the total acreage of the site. Clustering of units may be used; however, in no case shall a portion of the site be substantially higher in density than any other portion on the site.
6. Height Requirements
No residential structure shall be more than three (3) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height whichever is less.
No accessory structure shall be more than one (1) story or fifteen (15) feet in height whichever is less.
No institutional or community service use shall be more than three (3) stories or forty-five (45) feet in height, whichever is less, and excluding any steeple, bell tower, clock tower, or similar appurtenance.
7. Parking
Parking requirements are those set forth in Chapter Six.
8. Signs
Sign requirements are those set forth in Chapter Seven.
SECTION D: PLANNED COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (PCD)
1. Area Requirements
All Planned Commercial Districts shall be a minimum of two (2) acres in size.
2. Permitted Uses
o Business or Professional Offices
o Retail and Service Establishments
o Indoor Entertainment Establishments
o Financial Institutions
o Eating and Drinking Establishments
o Printing and Publishing Establishments
o Wholesale and Warehousing Establishments
o Automotive Service Stations
o Building and Related Trade Establishments
3. Accessory Uses
o Satellite Receiving Stations
18
4. Site Requirements
There shall be a setback of fifty- (50) feet maintained around the total perimeter of the development, which is landscaped to provide the appropriate buffer to the adjacent land uses.
Detached principal structures shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet away from one another.
All structures shall be located at least twenty-five (25) feet back from all public roads.
There shall be one (1) entrance/exit drive per street frontage. On the major street frontage, there may be two (2) entrance/exit drives if the street frontage is more than three hundred (300) feet and the two (2) drives are at least two hundred (200) feet away.
4. Storage and Service Areas
All storage buildings and garbage collections areas shall be at the rear of the site. Loading bays and other service and utility apparatus shall be to the rear of the site and appropriately screened from view with landscaping and/or fencing.
5. Height Requirements
No principal or accessory structure shall be more than thirty-five (35) feet in height unless the Planning Commission determines that the taller structure will not be detrimental to the area. Structures taller than thirty-five (35) feet in height may be permitted as a Conditional Use.
6. Parking
Parking requirements are those set forth in Chapter Six.
7. Signs
Sign requirements are those set forth in Chapter Seven.
SECTION E: PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (PID)
1. Area Requirements
All Planned Industrial Districts shall be a minimum of ten (10) acres in size.
2. Permitted Uses
o Wholesale and Warehousing Establishments
o Building and Related Trade Establishments
o Automobile Service and Repair Establishments
o Industrial and Manufacturing Establishments
o Research and Development Establishments
19
3. Site Requirements
There shall be a setback of one hundred (100) feet maintained around the perimeter of the site. This setback shall be landscaped in a dense planting at least seventy-five percent (75%) opaque from the ground to eight (8) feet above the ground to buffer where the adjacent uses are less intensive. Where the site is adjacent other industrial uses, the Planning Commission may determine that a less dense buffer is required.
Detached principal structures shall be a minimum of thirty- (30) feet away from one another.
All structures shall be located at least twenty-five (25) feet back from all public roads.
Vehicle access points to and from the site shall be at least two hundred fifty (250) feet apart from one another.
4. Storage and Service Areas
Outdoor storage of materials shall be allowed provided such materials are enclosed and secured and in no case shall such materials be stored higher than fifteen (15) feet in height.
All storage and service areas shall be screened from view from the perimeter of the site with landscaping and/or fencing.
5. Parking
Parking requirements are those set forth in Chapter Six.
6. Signs
Sign requirements are those set forth in Chapter Seven.
SECTION F: PLANNED MOBILE HOME PARK DISTRICT (PMHP)
1. Area Requirements
All Planned Mobile Home Park Districts shall be a minimum of ten (10) acres in size.
2. Permitted Uses
Mobile Home Dwellings
3. Accessory Uses
None Permitted
4. Site Requirements
There shall be a setback of one hundred (100) feet maintained around the entire perimeter of the site. This setback shall be landscaped to provide a moderate buffer of seventy-five percent (75%) opaque.
Each individual mobile home site shall have a minimum lot width of sixty- (60) feet.
All mobile home structures shall be a minimum of forty- (40) feet apart of each other.
Private accessory structures and uses shall not be located on common open spaces and shall be a minimum of thirty- (30) feet away from all structures other than the principal structure they are associated with.
Each mobile home must be placed on a permanent stand built to the specifications listed below. Each mobile home site shall be equipped with a concrete slab of adequate thickness and size to support the mobile home load during all seasons.
Each stand shall have two (2) columns of concrete footings placed at eight (8) foot intervals on center and is to be located under each I-beam of the mobile home. Four (4) columns of footings are required for stands designed for doublewide mobile homes. The depth of excavation for footings shall be at least twelve (12) inches into undisturbed soil. Each footing shall be at least thirty-six (36) wide and twelve (12) inches deep. A minimum of three (3), four (4) foot anchors shall be installed on each side of the stand at twenty-five (25) foot intervals beginning at the front of the stand. The remaining area of the stand shall have a base of at least six (6) inches of compacted stone.
Attached structures such as awnings, cabanas, storage buildings, carports, windbreaks or porches, which have a floor area larger than twenty (20) square feet and a roof, shall be considered to be part of the mobile home stand for purposes of all separation requirements.
5. Density
Mobile home structures shall be allowed in the Planned Mobile Park District at up to five (5) units per acre. This will be calculated as the total number of mobile home units per the total acreage of the site.
SECTION G: GENERAL PUD REVIEW CRITERIA
The Planning Commission shall not approve a request for a Planned Unit Development unless specific findings of fact directly based upon the particular evidence presented to the Planning Commission support the conclusions that:
1. The PUD can be substantially completed within the period of time specified in the schedule of development submitted by the developer.
21
2. The site shall be accessible from public roads adequate to carry the traffic that will be imposed on them by the proposed development.
3. The streets on the site of the proposed development shall be adequate to serve both the residents and businesses of the proposed development.
4. The development shall not impose any undue burden on public facilities and service, such as fire, police and education.
5. The development plan contains such proposed covenants, easements and other provisions relating to the proposed development as are reasonably required for the public health, safety and welfare.
6. The location and arrangement of structures, parking areas, walks, lighting and appurtenant facilities shall be compatible with the surrounding land uses.
7. Any part of a PUD not used for structures, parking and loading areas, or access ways shall be landscaped or otherwise improved.
8. Natural features such as watercourses, trees and rock-out crops shall be preserved, to the degree possible, so that they can be incorporated into the layout to enhance the overall design of the planned development.
9. The layout is designed to take advantage of the existing land contours in order to provide satisfactory road gradients and suitable buildings sites and to facilitate the provision of proposed services.
10. The development pattern, to the maximum extent possible, preserves and utilized natural topography and geological features, scenic vistas, trees and other vegetation, and does not cause disruption or natural drainage patterns.
11. The development provides adequately for storm water and sanitary waste disposal.
12. The developer has proposed to install all necessary infrastructure improvements, including streets, sidewalks, storm drainage systems and utilities.
SECTION H: PUD APPLICATION PROCESS
1. Pre-application Conference
Any owner of land for which a PRD, PCD, or PID Zoning District classification is sought shall, prior to filing a formal application for approval of a PUD, attend a pre-application conference with the Planning Commission. The purpose of such a conference is to allow the developer to present a general concept of the proposed development prior to preparation of detailed plans. For this purpose, the presentation shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
22
a. A letter of intent from the developer establishing intentions as to the development of the land;
b. A statement of ownership or option on all land in the proposed project area;
c. A topography survey and location map;
d. Sketch plans and ideas regarding land use, dwelling type and /or other commercial or industrial structures, density, street and lot arrangement and tentative lot sizes; and
e. Tentative proposals regarding water supply, sewage disposal, surface drainage and street improvements.
The Village officials shall advise the developer of the zoning requirements of any Village plans that might affect the proposed development as well as the procedural steps for approval.
2. Preliminary Plan
The preliminary plan of the PUD shall be filed with the Planning Commission for consideration. The required procedure for consideration and approval of the preliminary plan shall be:
a. Submission of the following:
A written application for approval of a planned development, which shall be made in the manner prescribed and approved by the Village.
A preliminary development plan and report, with maps at a scale of one hundred (100) feet or less to the inch, including, as appropriate to the kind of planned development proposed, the following information presented in generalized form:
(1) The proposed land uses and approximate height, bulk and location of principal structures sufficient to permit an understanding of the style of the development. Proposals containing residential units shall specify the number of housing units by size and type proposed within the overall development if the development is not be staged.
(2) Proposed automobile and pedestrian circulation patterns, including streets by type (major, collector or minor), width and ownership (public or private), pedestrian ways and existing or plotted streets proposed to be vacated.
(3) Major off-street parking areas.
23
(4) Proposed parks, playground, pedestrian parkways and other major open spaces as well as the general form of organization proposed to own and maintain any common open space.
(5) The general location of utility installations and easements.
(6) If the development is to be in stages, an indication as to the order and timing of development and a demonstration that each stage, when completed, will complement any stage completed earlier and will form a reasonably independent unit even though succeeding stages are delayed.
(7) Proposals for expediting provision of public facilities, utilities or services where lacking or unlikely to be available when needed for the planned development or for providing suitable private facilities, utilities or services. A report shall be provided, if appropriate in a particular development, containing proposals for improvement and continuing maintenance and management of any private streets.
(8) The substance of covenants, grants and easements or other restrictions proposed to be imposed upon the use of the land, buildings and structures, including proposed easements or grants for public utilities.
b. The Planning Commission shall distribute application materials to the appropriate Village staff. Within sixty- (60) days of receipt of such materials, Village staff shall submit written comments to the Planning Commission. Failure to submit comments shall indicate approval.
c. The Planning Commission shall study materials received and confer with other agencies of government, as appropriate, to determine general acceptability of the proposal as submitted. In the course of such preliminary consideration, the Planning Commission may request and the applicant shall supply additional material needed to make specific determinations.
Following such study, the Planning Commission shall hold a conference or conferences with the applicant to discuss desirable changes in the preliminary development plan and report. Recommendations of the Planning Commission to the applicant shall be in writing. Following any such conference, agreements between the applicant and the Planning Commission as to changes in the preliminary plan and report or other matters to be recorded and acknowledged shall be in writing. On items where not agreement is reached, or where there is specific disagreement, this fact shall be recorded, and the applicant may place in the record their reasons for disagreement.
24
d. The Planning Commission shall schedule a public hearing (in accordance with the Ohio Revised Code) within thirty- (30) days of the Village staff’s approved sign-off date, after which the Planning Commission shall make its recommendations to the Village Council. Such recommendations shall indicate approval, approval with specific reservations or disapproval with reasons. With such recommendations, the Planning Commission shall transmit to the Village Council, within thirty- (30) days, the latest draft of the preliminary plan and report submitted by the applicant, a record of agreements reached and matters on which there was no specific agreement, including any reason recorded by the applicant for such disagreement.
e. The Village Council shall schedule a public hearing for the preliminary plan and the respective planned development zone designation after receiving the proposal from the Planning Commission. Within thirty- (30) days after receipt, the Village Council shall approve the proposal, approve it subject to conditions or deny it. If approved, only in accordance with the uses and densities shown on the planned unit development preliminary plan.
3. Final Plan
The final planned unit development plan shall conform substantially to the preliminary plan as approved and shall be filed within six (6) months after approval of the preliminary plan. If desired by the developer, the final plan may be submitted in stages, with each stage reflecting a portion of the approved preliminary plan, which is proposed to be recorded and developed, provided that such portion conforms to all the requirements of this chapter. The required procedure for approval of a final plan shall be as follows:
a. The final plan and supporting data shall be filed with Village officials who, in turn, shall forward copies to the Planning Commission for certification that the final plan is in conformity with this chapter and in agreement with the approved preliminary plan.
b. Similar modifications of standards contained in other regulations or policies applying generally may be reflected in such maps and reports if the Planning Commission finds and certifies, after consultations with other agencies of government as appropriate in the specific case, that the public purposes of such regulations or policies are as will or better served by specific proposals of the formal plan and reports.
c. A general site and land use plan for the planned development as a whole, indicating sub-areas for phased development, if any; the location and use of structures and portions of structures in relation to building site lines; building sites reserved for future use and uses for which sites are reserved; automotive and pedestrian circulatory networks; principal parking areas; open space not in building sites and the use for which this open space is intended; and such other matters as are required to establish a clear pattern
25
of the relationships that exist between structures, uses, circulation and land shall be filed.
d. After review of the final plan and supporting data, the Planning Commission shall approve or disapprove the plan within thirty- (30) days after submittal by the developer. Disapproval of the final plan shall include a clear statement of the reasons.
e. The Planning Commission shall forward the final plan, together with its recommendations, to the Village Council. The Village Council shall review the recommendations of the Planning Commission at its next regular meeting and shall approve, approve subject to conditions or deny the final application.
4. Recording of Final Plan
a. After approval by the Village Council of the final plan, Village officials shall see that all the requirements of the Village are complied with before the final plan is sent to the Auglaize County Recorder for recording.
b. The purpose of such recording is to designate with particularity the land subdivided into conventional lots, the dimensions of other lands so treated as common open areas and building areas, and to designate each building or structure, as well as the use of land in general.
c. No final plan within the Village shall be so recorded unless it has the approval of the Village Council inscribed thereon.
5. Zoning Compliance Certificate
a. Village officials shall issue no zoning compliance certificate until the final plan has been approved and duly recorded, and the Planning Commission has approved the detailed plans.
b. Before any zoning compliance certificate may be issued in the planned development, all agreements, contracts and deed restrictions shall be submitted in a form acceptable to the Village.
c. No zoning compliance certificate shall be issued for construction in any PUD District until all required public improvements are installed or a performance bond in the amount of one hundred ten percent (110%) of the estimated cost of the public improvements is posted with the Village of Minster.
26
SECTION I: CHANGES IN THE PLANNED DEVELOPMENT
A planned development shall be developed only according to the approved and recorded final plan and all supporting data. The recorded final plan and supporting data, together with all recorded amendments, shall be binding on the applicants, their successors, grantees and assignees and shall limit and control the use of the premises, including the internal use of buildings and structures and the location of structures in the planned development as set forth therein.
1. Major Changes
Changes that alter the concept or intent of the planned development after preliminary approval, including increases in the number of units per acre, changes in the location or amount of non-residential land uses, more than fifteen percent (15%) modification in the proportion of housing types, reductions of proposed open space and significant redesign of roadways, utilities or drainage, may be approved only by submission of a new preliminary plan and supporting data and by following the preliminary approval steps and subsequent amendment of the final plan.
2. Minor Changes
The Planning Commission may approve minor changes in the planned development that do not change the concept or intent of the development. A minor change is defined as any change that is not a major change.
SECTION J: REVOCATION OF PERMIT
A planned unit development permit may be revoked in any case where the conditions of such permit have or are not being complied with and where the developer has not initiated the process outlined in Chapter Five, Section 1, to make approved major and minor changes. In these cases, the Planning Commission shall give the permittee notice of intention to revoke such permit at least ten (10) days prior to review of the permit by the Planning Commission. After conclusion of such review, the Planning Commission may revoke such permit if it finds that a violation in fact exists and has not been prior to such hearing.
In any case where a planned development has not yet been established (substantially under way) within one (1) year from the date of granting thereof, then without further action by the Planning Commission, the planned development authorization thereof shall be null and void. If the development falls more than one (1) year behind the schedule filed with the final plan, the permit may be subject to revocation.
SECTION K: APPLICATION LIMITATION
No application for a planned development, which has been denied wholly or in part by the Planning Commission and Village Council, shall be resubmitted for a period of one (1) year from the date of such order of denial, except on the grounds of new evidence or proof of changes of conditions found to be valid by the Planning Commission and Village Council.
27
CHAPTER SIX: OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING/UNLOADING REGULATIONS
SECTION A: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
1. Required Compliance
No building or structure or use of land shall be erected, substantially altered, or its use changed unless permanently maintained off-street parking spaces are provided in accordance with the provisions of these Regulations.
a. Not Retroactive: The requirements in this section shall not apply to any existing building or structure or use except where there is a change or alteration made.
b. Minor Changes: Whenever a building or structure is changing or enlarged in floor area, number of dwelling units, seating capacity or otherwise to create a need for an increase of at least ten percent (10%) but less than fifty percent (50%) in the number of existing spaces, additional parking spaces shall be provided consistent with these Regulations on the basis of that enlargement or change only.
c. Major Changes: Whenever a building or structure is enlarged to the extent of fifty percent (50%) or more in floor area, number of dwelling units, seating capacity or otherwise, said building or structure shall then and thereafter comply with the full parking requirements set forth herein.
d. Change of Use: Whenever a building or structure undergoes a change of use requiring the addition of more than five (5) off-street parking spaces, the new use shall comply with these Regulations in full. However, a change in use that creates a need for an increase of five (5) or less off-street parking spaces will require no additional parking facilities.
2. Location of Parking
a. On-Site Parking: The off-street parking spaces required by this section shall be provided on the same lot as the principal use the spaces are provided to serve, except for those cases identified.
b. Satellite Parking
(1) If the number of off-street parking spaces required by this section cannot reasonably be provided on the same lot where the principal use associated with these parking spaces is located in the C-1 Central Commercial District, then a satellite parking area may be used. However, the use and the parking must both be in the C-1 District.
28
Where parking is being provided collectively, then spaces may be provided on adjacent or nearby lots in accordance with the provisions of this section. These off-site spaces are referred to in this section as satellite parking spaces.
(2) All such satellite parking spaces shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of a public entrance of a principal building housing the use associated with such parking or within five hundred (500) feet of the lot on which the use associated with such parking is located if the use is not housed within a principal building.
(3) Any developer wishing to take advantage of the provisions of this section shall present satisfactory written evidence that he has the permission of the owner or other person in charge of the satellite parking spaces to use such spaces. The developer shall also sign an acknowledgement that the continuing validity of the permit depends upon his continuing ability to provide the requisite number of parking spaces.
3. Required Setbacks
a. Parking shall be allowed in the required side yard in the Commercial and Industrial Districts provided the adjacent property is zoned as a Commercial or Industrial District.
b. Parking shall be allowed in any side yard driveway for any single family home.
c. Parking shall be allowed in any side yard setback for multi-family residential use provide the following conditions are met:
(1) A solid wood fence shall be constructed between the multi-family
residential use and any adjacent residential use. The wood fence must be a minimum of four (4) feet in height and is intended to serve as a screen or buffer between the uses.
(2) In no instance shall parking areas or driveways of multi-family
residential use activities be permitted to be constructed closer than five (5) feet from any property line.
d. Parking shall be allowed in any front yard setback for multi-family residential use provided the following conditions are met:
(1). A continuous hedge is planted and maintained across the front property line and is maintained at a height of three (3) feet to three (3) feet and six (6) inches. The continuous hedge is intended to
29
serve as a screen or buffer between the use and the public right of way.
(2) In no instance shall parking area or driveways of multi-family residential use activities be permitted to be constructed closer than ten (10) feet from the front property line adjacent to the public right of way.
4. Computation of Required Off-Street Parking Spaces
a. Units. When units of measurement determining the number of required parking spaces result in requirement of a fractional space, any fraction up to and including one-half (1/2 or .500) shall be disregarded and any fraction over one-half (1/2 or .500) shall require one (1) additional parking space.
b. Joint Use. Two (2) or more non-residential uses may jointly provide and use off-street parking spaces when their respective hours of operation do not normally overlap, provided that a written agreement approved by the Zoning Administrator shall be filed with the application for a Zoning Certificate. Uses that do not have the same hours of operation may share in a joint use up to fifty percent (50%) of their respectively required number of off-street parking spaces. Buildings or uses not normally open, used or operated during the principal operating hours of theaters, churches, or school auditoriums include banks and financial institutions, business and professional offices, retail and personal service establishments.
c. Mixed Occupancies and Uses Not Specified. In the case of mixed uses, the total requirement for off-street parking facilities shall be the sum of the requirements for the various uses computed separately. In the case of a use not specifically mentioned, the requirements for off-street parking facilities shall apply for a use, which is so mentioned, and to which such use is similar. Off-street parking facilities for one (1) use shall not be considered as providing required parking facilities for any other use, except as specified for joint use.
d. Collective Provision. Nothing in this section shall be constructed to prevent collective provision of off-street parking facilities for two (2) or more buildings or uses, provided the total of such off-street parking spaces supplied collectively is not less than the sum of the requirements for the various uses computed separately, and provided further that the requirements set forth for satellite parking spaces shall apply to each establishment participating in the collective provision of off-street parking spaces.
30
5. Required Documentation
All applicants for a Zoning Compliance Certificate, Conditional Use Permit or Planned Unit Development approval shall include with their application a plan drawn to scale showing the location and arrangement of any off-street parking areas required by these Regulations. Applications for developments in the R-1 Residential District are exempt from this documentation. In addition, said plan shall show:
a. North Arrow
b. Scale
c. Location, dimensions and labeling of all existing driveways, buildings, paved areas, fences, roof overhangs, streets and alleys, and sidewalks and reference to the nearest street intersections.
d. Location and labeling of all fire hydrants, tress and other objects on public property along the site boundaries.
e. All necessary profiles and elevations to ensure that grades and drainage are adequately handled.
6. Off-Street Parking of Inoperable and Disabled Vehicles
a. No motor vehicle shall be parked or stored for a period in excess of one (1) week when any such motor vehicle:
(1) Does not bear a current registration plate, or
(2) Is not in operating condition.
b. Such motor vehicle may be parked or stored in these Districts if parked or stored entirely within an enclosed buildings.
SECTION B: OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
1. Residential Uses:
Single-Family
2.0 per dwelling unit
Double-Family
2.0 dwelling unit
Multi-Family
2.0 dwelling unit
Rooming/Boarding Houses
1.0 per rentable room not to exceed 5.0 off-street parking spaces
2. Institutional Uses:
31
Churches/Places of Worship
1.0 per 8 seats in principal auditorium or 1.0 per 17 classroom seats, which ever is greater.
Elementary Schools
1.0 per 850 sq. ft. of classroom space plus 1.0 per 100 sq. ft. of office space plus 1.0 per 50 sq. ft. of assembly space
Jr./Sr. High Schools
1.0 per 60 sq. ft. of classroom space plus 1.0 per 100 sq. ft. of office space
Universities, Colleges, Vocational/Technical Schools
1.0 per 100 sq. ft. of classroom space plus 1.0 per 50 sq. ft. of assembly space
Hospitals
1.0 per 80 sq. ft. of sleeping space plus 1.0 per 100 sq. ft. of office space plus 1.0 per 150 sq. ft. of treatment space
Nursing Home/Rest Homes
1.0 per 480 sq. ft. of sleeping space plus 1.0 per 100 sq. ft. of office space
Group Homes
3.0 per facility
3. Recreational Uses:
Public Parks
Spaces are required cumulatively according to facilities included or fraction thereof
Athletic Fields
8.0 per acre
Community Center
10.0 per facility
Tennis Court
5.0 per court
Golf Course
8.0 per hole
4. Commercial Uses:
Business or Professional Office
1.0 per 400 sq. ft. of floor area
Retail or Service Establishments
1.0 per 300 sq. ft. of floor area
Bowling Lanes
2.5 per alley
Theaters or Assembly Halls with fixed seating
1.0 per 4 seats
32
Financial Institutions
1.0 per 200 sq. ft. of floor area
Food Stores
1.0 per 300 sq. ft. of floor area
Eating and Drinking Places
1.0 per 200 sq. ft. of floor area
Printing and Publishing Establishment
1.0 per 300 sq. ft. of floor area
Wholesale and Warehousing
1.0 per 200 sq. ft. of office space plus 1.0 per 400 sq. ft. of manufacturing operations plus 1.0 per 750 sq. ft. of storage space
Drive-In Theaters
1.0 per speaker
Animal Hospitals
3.0 per every treatment room plus 1.0 per 100 sq. ft. of office space
Funeral Homes
1.0 per 100 sq. ft. of floor space in public areas
Hotels and Motels
1.0 per sleeping room, plus 1.0 per 100 sq. ft. of office space and 1.0 per 50 sq. ft. of restaurant and lounge space
Automobile Service and Repair
1.0 per 200 sq. ft. of floor space
Gasoline Service Stations
1.0 per 200 sq. ft. of floor space
Commercial Recreation Baseball Field
8.0 per acre
Golf Driving Ranges
1.0 per tee
Carpenter Shops
1.0 per 300 sq. ft. of floor area
Electrical, Plumbing and Heating Shops
1.0 per 300 sq. ft. of floor area
Furniture Upholstering
1.0 per 300 sq. ft. of floor area
5. Industrial Uses:
Wholesale & Warehousing
1.0 per 200 sq. ft. of office space, plus 1.0 per 400 sq. ft. of manufacturing operations space, plus 1.0 per 750 sq. ft. of storage space
33
Carpenter Shops
1.0 per 300 sq. ft. of floor area
Furniture Upholstering
1.0 per 300 sq. ft. of floor area
Automobile Service & Repair
1.0 per 200 sq. ft. of floor area
Industry & Manufacturing Facilities
1.0 per 200 sq. ft. of office space plus1.0 per 400 sq. ft. of manufacturing operations space plus 1.0 per 750 sq. ft. of storage space.
Research & Development
1.0 per 200 sq. ft. of office space plus 1.0 per 400 sq. ft. of manufacturing operations space plus 1.0 per 750 sq. ft. storage space
SECTION C: DESIGN STANDARDS FOR OFF-STREET PARKING
1. Parking Space Dimensions:
a. Off-street parking spaces for multi-family, commercial and industrial establishments shall conform with the appropriate stall and aisle dimensions as shown in Figure 1. An off-street parking space shall have minimum rectangular dimensions of not less than nine (9) feet in width, nineteen (19) feet in length for ninety (90) degree parking; nine (9) feet in width and twenty-three (23) feet in length for parallel parking; ten (10) feet in width and nineteen (19) feet in length for sixty (60) degree parking; and ten (10) feet in width and nineteen (19) feet in length for forty-five (45) degree parking.
b. All dimensions shall be exclusive of driveway aisles, driveways and other circulation area.
c. Head-in parking shall provide a minimum clear distance of three (3) feet when parking is adjacent a building.
d. Parking spaces shall be provided for handicapped persons in accordance with the provisions of the Ohio Basic Building Code, as applicable and the American’s with Disability Act.
34
FIGURE I: OFF-STREET PARKING MINIMUM DIMENSIONAL TABLE
2. Paving. All open parking spaces shall be graded and provided with, at a minimum, a gravel chip and seal or equivalent surface, and shall be dust free and nuisance free over the entire parking lot.
3. Drainage. All open, off-street parking spaces and areas shall be provided with adequate drainage facilities in order to ensure that storm water does not flow onto adjoining property or adjoining sidewalks in such a way or quantity that adjoining property owners or users of the sidewalks would be detrimentally affected or inconvenienced.
4. Driveways. There shall be adequate provisions for ingress and egress to all off-street parking spaces. Where a lot does not abut a public or private alley or easement of access, there shall be provided an access drive not less than eight (8) feet in width in the case dwelling and not less then eighteen (18) feet in width in all other cases leading to the parking or storage areas of loading or unloading spaces required hereunder in such manner as to secure the most appropriate development of the property in question but such easement of access or access drive shall not be located in any Residential District, except where provided in connection with a use permitted in a Residential District.
Access drives, which are intended to provide access for truck traffic, shall be provided with a radius of twenty-five (25) feet, plus widths of no less than thirty (30) feet so that entry and exit can be made without encroachment beyond the curb land of the abutting street.
5. Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking areas shall be equipped with suitable shielding to prevent glare and illumination of adjoining property in accordance with Chapter Eight.
35
6. Maintenance. The owner of property used for off-street parking shall maintain such area in good condition without holes and free of all dust, trash and other debris.
SECTION D: OFF-STREET LOADING/UNLOADING REQUIREMENTS
1. Required Spaces:
Retail, Service, Office Establishment
One space for the first 5,000 sq. ft. of floor area and one space thereafter for each additional 20,000 sq. ft.
Wholesale Establishments/Warehouses
One space for every 5,000 sq. ft. of floor area.
Industrial Establishments
One space for the first 5,000 sq. ft. of floor area and one space thereafter for each additional 20,000 sq. ft.
Off-street loading requirements for any use not specified in these Regulations shall be the same as that specified for a similar permitted use, as determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
SECTION E: DESIGN STANDARDS FOR OFF-STREET LOADING/UNLOADING AREAS
1. Single-Use Spaces: No area allocated to loading and unloading facilities may be used to satisfy the area requirements for off-street parking, nor shall any portion of any off-street parking area be used to satisfy the area requirements for loading and unloading facilities.
2. Adjacent Residential. No loading/unloading facility shall be located closer than fifty (50) feet from any lot in a Residential District or any residential use unless wholly within a completely enclosed building or unless enclosed on all sides by a wall or uniformly painted board fence not less than six (6) feet in height. An evergreen hedge or planting no less than six (6) feet in height may be substituted for a fence if maintained in good condition.
3. Dimensions. Each loading space shall not be less than ten (10) feet in width, twenty-five (25) feet in length and fourteen (14) feet in height.
4. Paving. All open parking spaces shall be graded and provided with, at a minimum, a gravel chip and seal or equivalent surface, and shall be dust free and nuisance free over the entire parking lot.
5. Location. All required loading spaces shall be off-street and shall be located on the same lot as the specific use to be serviced. No loading space shall be located within a required front or side yard. No permitted or required loading space shall
36
be located within fifty (50) feet of the nearest point of intersection of any two (2) public thoroughfares.
6. Drainage. All loading spaces shall be provided with adequate drainage facilities.
SECTION F: PARKING AND STORING REQUIREMENTS FOR RECREATIONAL AND COMMERCIAL VEHICLES
1. General Requirements. The off-street parking of recreational vehicles, boats and/or boat trailers, pick-up campers or coaches, motorized dwellings, tent trailers, travel trailers or utility trailers in Residential Districts is permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. Yard Parking and Temporary Loading. None of the above-mentioned vehicles shall be parked in the required front or in front of the building setback line in the side yard for more than twenty-four (24) hours, which allows for temporary loading and unloading.
b. Rear Yard Parking. In the rear yards or behind the building setback line in the side yards at each Residential Zoning District, parking of only the following types of vehicles shall be permitted in addition to private passenger automobiles with adequate screening in the form of shrubbery or fencing in accordance with Chapter Nine, Section E, which must be promptly maintained.
(1) Camper trailer, which shall be stored in a collapsed position to a height not more than five (5) feet six (6) inches.
(2) Small travel trailer or utility trailer, thirty (30) feet or less in length.
(3) Small boat, thirty (30) feet or less in length, either mounted on a boat trailer or un-mounted; also boat trailer without boat mounted.
(4) Pick-up camper, thirty (30) feet or less in length.
(5) Motorized home, thirty (30) feet or less in length.
(6) Commercial van used by the property owner on a regular basis, thirty (30) feet or less in length.
c. No Utility Hook-Ups Allowed. No such recreational equipment shall have
permanent connections to electricity, gas, water, or sanitary sewer
facilities, nor shall such equipment be used as a dwelling in any case.
2. Commercial Vehicles, Used Commercially or Not. Commercial vehicles are defined as vehicles having a gross weight of more than 6,000 pounds or having
37
more than two (2) axles, whether used commercially or not. Examples include semi-tractors, straight trucks, step vans, or other vehicles deemed of commercial use.
a. Industrial Districts. Parking both long term and short term of commercial vehicles in an Industrial District or industrial area is permitted. This includes the parking of semi-trailers. If the industrial district or industrial area is adjacent to a residential area or residential use, the commercial vehicles must be screened according to Chapter Nine, Section E.
b. Commercial Districts. Parking of commercial vehicles on a short term basis is permitted in Commercial Districts or commercial areas in accordance with the following:
(1) In a commercial area for a maximum of 48 hours at one time for vehicles that are owned by the property owner or for vehicles where an arrangement has been made between the property owner and the owner of the vehicle.
(2) In a commercial area, the vehicle must be parked behind the front yard setback. If the commercial district or commercial area is adjacent to a residential district or residential use, the vehicle must be screened according to Chapter Nine, Section E, and located a minimum of 15 feet from the rear and side yard property lines.
(3) No long-term parking of commercial vehicles is permitted.
(4) No parking of semi-trailers is permitted in a Commercial District or commercial area.
c. Residential Districts. No parking of commercial vehicles are permitted in Residential Districts or residential areas, except for the following exceptions:
(1) When making pickups or deliveries, but only for a reasonable time and at a point reasonably near the property being so served.
(2) When providing construction services pursuant to a building permit, during the reasonable course of such service.
(3) When making repairs or improvements to property, during the reasonable course of their completion.
(4) When parked at a repair shop receiving service.
(5) When providing emergency services.
38
(6) When parked for less than one hour.
(7) When the engine is not allowed to run idle for more than ten minutes.
39
CHAPTER SEVEN: SIGN REGULATIONS
SECTION A: STATEMENT OF INTENT
It is the intent of these sign regulations to promote and protect the public health, welfare, and safety by regulating existing and proposed outdoor advertising, outdoor advertising signs, and signs of all types. It is intended to protect property values, create a more attractive economic and business climate, enhance and protect the physical appearance of the community, and preserve the scenic and natural beauty of designated areas. It is further intended to reduce sign or advertising distractions and obstructions that may contribute to traffic accidents, reduce hazards that may be caused by signs overhanging or projecting over public right-of-ways, and enhance community development.
SECTION B: GENERAL REGULATIONS
1. Signs erected and maintained pursuant to and as required by law, any governmental function, ordinance or governmental regulation shall be excluded from the regulations of this Chapter.
2. No sign of any type shall be installed, erected, or attached in any form, shape, or manner to a fire escape or any door or window giving access to any fire escape.
3. All signs hung and erected shall be plainly marked with the name of the person, firm or corporation responsible for maintaining the sign.
4. Should any sign be or become unsafe or be in danger of falling, the owner thereof or the person maintaining the same, shall upon receipt of written notice from the Zoning Administrator proceed at once to put such sign in a safe and secure condition or remove the sign.
5. No sign shall be placed in any public right-of-way except publicly owned signs, such as traffic control and directional signs. Signs directing and guiding traffic and parking on private property but bearing no advertising matter shall be permitted on any property. Such directional signs shall be no higher than three (3) feet from the ground and no larger than six (6) square feet per face and be limited to two per entrance and two per exit.
6. Regulation of signs along interstate and primary highways shall conform to the requirements of the Ohio Revised Code, Chapter 5516 and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
7. Measurement of Sign Area: The surface area of a sign shall be computed including the entire area within a regular, geometric form or combinations or regular geometric forms comprising all of the display area of the sign and including all of the elements of the matter displayed. Exposed frames and structural members, excluding support poles, not being advertising matter shall be included in computation of surface area.
40
8. Sign Illumination: Any illuminated sign or lighting device shall employ only light emitting constant intensity, and no sign shall be illuminated by or contain flashing, intermittent, rotating or moving light or lights. In no event shall an illuminated sign or lighting device be placed or directed so as to permit the beams and illumination to be direct or beamed so as to cause glare or reflection that may constitute a traffic hazard or nuisance.
Any sign using an external source of illumination or fixture that is not an integral part of the sign shall be installed to ensure that the illumination is directed upon the sign surface only. The light source shall be shielded so that it is not visible from the adjacent property line. Indirect light shall not exceed ½ foot-candles at the adjacent property line. These fixtures shall only be ground mounted and screened with landscaping material such as shrubs and bushes. The height of the fixture shall not exceed eighteen (18) inches from the ground surface.
9. Non-Conforming Signs: The continuance of an existing sign that does not meet the regulations and requirements of this Chapter shall be deemed a non –conforming sign, which shall terminate by abandonment. A sign shall be considered abandoned when:
a. The sign is associated with an abandoned use.
b. The sign remains after a business has been closed to the public for at least ninety- (90) consecutive days. Seasonal businesses are exempt from this determination.
c. The sign is not maintained and together with all supports, braces, guys, and anchors in a state of disrepair.
Based upon these definitions, abandonment shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator. Upon finding that the signage is abandoned, the right to maintain and use such sign shall terminate immediate.
SECTION C: PERMITTED SIGNS FOR WHICH NO PERMIT IS REQUIRED
The following signs shall be permitted in the Village of Minster subject to the following regulations. No zoning permit shall be required for any sign constructed or erected under the terms of this section.
1. Signs advertising the sale, rental, or lease of the premises upon which the sign is located shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area, except in all Residential Districts where the area of the sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area, and on corner lots such signs shall not be located in the required sight triangle.
2. Professional nameplates not to exceed four (4) square feet in total area.
3. Signs denoting the name and address of the occupants of the premises, not to exceed two (2) square feet in area and which do not include designations as to employment or home occupations.
41
4. Political signs or posters concerning candidates or issues for election shall be posted no more than sixty (60) days before an election and shall be removed within seven (7) days following election day. Such signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area, shall not be illuminated, shall not create a safety or visibility hazard, and shall not be located within a public right-of-way or upon public property.
5. Signs in the nature of cornerstones, commemorative tables, and historical sign are to be limited in size to nine (9) square feet and shall not be illuminated.
6. Signs designating home occupations not to exceed two (2) square feet and mounted on the principal structure.
SECTION D: PERMITTED SIGN FOR WHICH A PERMIT IS REQUIRED
All signs not already specifically excluded shall require a permit. Signs are classified
into two (2) uses: on-premise and off-premise. There are eight (8) structural types:
wall, projected, ground, roof, window, awning, canopy and reader boards.
1. Wall Signs: Wall signs are permitted in all Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts. Wall signs may be erected on a building wall that faces a public street, and such sign may not extend into any required building setback line or above or below the wall surface. Wall signs shall be limited to one per each street for which the structure fronts for single occupant structures and one per Occupant/per Street face for any multiple tenant structure. Letters or numerals, except numerals used to identify the address of the structure, mounted on a building shall be considered as wall signs. Wall signs shall be attached parallel to the building face and extend outward perpendicular from the building face a maximum on one (1) foot. Wall signs shall not exceed a maximum area of thirty-six (36) square feet.
An additional one (1) square foot of wall sign area will be permitted for each additional foot that the structure is located beyond the required setback. However, in no case shall the wall sign be permitted to be larger than sixty-four (64) square feet.
2. Projected Signs: Projected signs are permitted only in the Central Commercial Districts (C-1). One (1) projected sign is permitted per building per street frontage. Projecting sign shall project not more than four (4) feet outward from the wall of the structure, shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet in size and shall be perpendicular to the wall to which they are attached. All projected signs shall be located not less than nine (9) feet above the sidewalk or ground level. Such sign shall be of sturdy construction and shall be erected in such a manner as to protect persons who pass underneath from possible injury. Sign users who place projected signs over the public right-of-way shall sign a statement, furnished by the Village, regarding their sole liability for such sign.
42
3. Ground Signs: Ground signs are permitted in all Zoning Districts provided the requirements below are met:
a. Residential Districts: Ground signs customarily incidental to places of worship, libraries, museums, and schools are permitted in all Residential Districts. These signs shall not exceed fifteen (15) square feet in area and shall be located on the premises of such institution. One (1) ground sign per building per street frontage may be erected. Such signs shall meet the setback requirements of this Chapter.
b. Commercial and Industrial Districts: Ground signs are permitted n Commercial and Industrial Districts. These ground signs shall not exceed:
(1) Twelve (12) feet in height in C-1 Districts.
(2) Fifteen (15) feet in height in C-2 Districts.
(3) Fifteen (15) feet in height in C-3 Districts.
(4) Fifteen (15) feet in height in I-1 Districts.
c. The maximum sign area permitted shall be in accordance with the
following standards:
(1) In C-1 Districts ground signs shall not exceed 32 square feet per face.
(2) In C-2 Districts ground signs shall not exceed 48 square feet per face.
(3) In C-3 Districts ground signs shall not exceed 64 square feet per face.
(4) In I-1 Districts ground signs shall not exceed 64 square feet per face.
One (1) ground sign per building per street frontage may be erected. Such signs shall be located on the premises of the establishment they serve. All ground signs of this type shall meet the setback requirements of the Chapter.
Off-premise ground signs, or billboards are permitted in the Regional Commercial (C-3) and Industrial Districts. A single location in these Districts may have up to two (2) off-premise ground signs. Each sign face intended for viewing from the street shall be considered a sign. No single off-premise ground sign shall exceed sixty-four (64) square feet in area
43
and shall not exceed the height regulations for the Zoning District in which it is located. Off-premise ground signs shall meet the setback requirements for structures of the appropriate district in which they are located.
d. All ground signs shall be placed upon a ground level foundation of block, broken wood or soil. Pole supports for ground signs are expressly repealed.
4. Roof Signs: Roof signs are prohibited in all Zoning Districts.
5. Window Signs: Window signs are permitted in all Commercial and Industrial Districts. No window sign shall occupy more than twenty (20%) percent of the window surface. Window signs shall be limited to ground or first-floor windows except in the Central Commercial District where businesses that do not occupy any ground or first-floor space may have window signs above the ground or first-floor level.
6. Awning Signs: The only signs that will be permitted in any Commercial or Industrial District are those that are attached to an awning that is used to provide shelter from inclement weather for patrons entering or exiting a building. Such signs shall be permitted as long as the maximum height of the lettering or numerals affixed to the awning is no larger than eight (8) inches in height. Awning signs that are lit from the back will not be permitted. This standard for awning signs may also include awnings placed over windows and containing letters or numbers provided they do not exceed eight (8) inches in height.
7. Canopy Signs: Canopy signs are permitted in Commercial and Industrial Districts as long as they are attached to or are an integral part of the canopy. Canopy signs may be erected on a canopy that faces a public street, and such sign may not extend into any required building setback line or above or below the canopy surface. Letters or numerals mounted on a canopy shall be considered a canopy sign. Signs shall be attached parallel to the canopy face and extend outward perpendicular from the canopy face a maximum of eight (8) inches. Canopy signs shall not exceed a maximum area of thirty-six (36) square feet. Canopy signs shall not be illuminated.
8. Reader Boards: Reader boards are those signs that contain provisions or capabilities that allow or enable the text to be readily changed. Such signs are used to promote weekly sales, new product or services, or features. The use of
44
FIGURE II. STRUCTURAL TYPES OF SIGNS
PROJECTING SIGN
WALL SIGN
ROOF SIGN
GROUND SIGN
AWNING SIGN
READER BOARD
WINDOW SIGN
45
such signs shall be permitted provided the reader boards are permanently affixed to the structure or the support system used for any freestanding or pylon sign. The sign area used for the reader board shall be included in the calculated sign area permitted under Section D; elements 1. Wall Signs; and 3. Ground Signs. Reader boards shall not be more than thirty (30%) percent of the allotted sign area.
SECTION E: TEMPORARY SIGNS
1. Temporary signs such as mobile signs, portable signs, and advertising balloons are prohibited. Temporary signs used for more than thirty- (30) days of a three hundred sixty five (365) day period are prohibited.
2. Signs identifying, promoting, or advertising special sales or special occasions may be erected for a maximum of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days per calendar year. Such signs are permitted in all Commercial and Industrial Districts.
3. Banners and pennants are permitted for seven (7) consecutive days, three (3) times per year, when associated with festivals or other similar uses. Such banners and pennants are permitted in both Commercial Districts.
SECTION F: PROHIBITED SIGNS
1. Animated signs that employ flashing lights, blinking lights, or other elements that revolve, rotate, whirl, spin, or otherwise make use of motion to attract attention are prohibited.
2. The above section does not apply to any sign that has at least ninety percent (90%) of the sign face devoted to performing a public service function of indicating time, temperature or some other similar service.
SECTION G: SIGN SETBACK REQUIREMENTS
Except as modified below, on-premise signs where permitted shall be setback a minimum
distance of ten (10) feet from the existing or ultimate right-of-way line, whichever is
greater. No off-premises sign shall be erected in front of the required setback line for any
structure within the appropriate Zoning District. Figure 3 is provided as a graphic
representation of height and setback requirements including the following provisions.
1. An on-premise ground sign may be permitted to be placed closer than the ten (10) foot setback requirement provided the following conditions are met:
46
FIGURE III: HEIGHT AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS
47
a. The maximum height of any ground sign moved closer than the required
setback shall be no higher than five (5) feet.
b. In no instance shall any ground sign be permitted closer than five (5) feet
from the edge of the public right of way. Such sign, if moved to a distance of five (5) feet of the edge of the right of way, shall not exceed five feet in height from the ground surface. No mounding with any materials may be used to alter the base of the ground surface.
c. The Village Zoning Board shall approve any sign proposed for placement
within the required setback as permitted in this Section.
d. The Village reserves the right to reject the placement of any sign closer to
the right of way than the required setback if it is determined that the sign, due to it’s placement, size, style, lighting, or shape; or due to limited right of way widths, may result in unsafe vehicular movement or traffic conditions. The determination and recommendation shall be made by the Village Engineer.
2. An off-premise sign may be permitted to exceed the maximum square footage standard of sixty four (64) square feet provided the following conditions are met:
a. An additional one square foot of sign area may be added for each additional foot the sign is placed behind the required setback as prescribed by the Zoning District in which the sign is permitted or proposed to be located.
b. In no instance shall an off-premise sign be permitted to exceed one hundred twenty eight (128) square feet in area per face.
c. On corner parcels the increase based on additional setback placement shall be dependent on the placement being from the right-of-way line of both streets.
3. Setbacks for Public and Quasi-Public Signs: Signs for public and quasi-public uses such as schools, places of worship, libraries and public facilities, and institutions may be erected ten (10) feet from established right-of-way provided such sign is not within the required sight triangle.
48
CHAPTER EIGHT: OUTDOOR LIGHTING CONTROL REGULATIONS
SECTION A: PURPOSE AND INTENT
The purpose of this section is to regulate the placement, orientation, distribution and fixture type and size of outdoor lighting. The intent of this section is to encourage lighting that provides safety, utility and security, as well as preventing glare on public roadways, and to protect the privacy of adjoining properties.
SECTION B: CONFORMANCE WITH APPLICABLE CODES AND ORDINANCES
All outdoor artificial illuminating devices shall be installed in conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
SECTION C: APPROVED MATERIALS AND METHODS OF INSTALLATION
The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prevent the use of any equipment, material or method of installation not specifically prescribed by this chapter provided the alternative has been approved by the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator may approve any such alternative provided that the proposed design provides the approximate equivalence to the specific requirements of this chapter.
SECTION D: DEFINITIONS
1. Outdoor lighting fixtures: Outdoor artificial illuminating devices, outdoor fixtures, lamps or other devices permanent or portable, used for illumination, direction or advertisement. Such devices shall include, but are not limited to search, spot, or flood lights for:
o Buildings and structures, including canopies and overhangs
o Recreational areas
o Parking lot lighting
o Landscape lighting
o Signs, including billboards
o Display and service areas
2. Installed: The initial installation of outdoor light fixtures defined herein, following the effective date of the Zoning Code, but shall not apply to those outdoor light fixtures installed prior to such date.
3. Shielded Fully: Fixtures that are shielded in such a manner that light emitted by the fixture, either directly from the lamp or indirectly from the fixture, are projected below a horizontal plane running through the lowest point on the fixture where light is emitted. This means that a fully shielded fixture is one used in such a way that it allows no direct or internally reflected light to shine above the light fixture.
4. Footcandle: A quantitative unit of measure referring to the measurement of illumination incident at a single point. One footcandle is equal to one lumen uniformly distributed over an area of one square foot.
49
5. Full Cutoff Angle: The angle formed by a line drawn from the light source and a line perpendicular to the ground from the light source, beyond which no light is emitted.
6. Initial Lumens: The lumens emitted from a lamp, as specified by the manufacturer of the lamp.
7. Lamp: The component of a luminaire that produces light. A lamp is also commonly referred to as a bulb.
8. Lumen: A standard unit of measurement referring to the amount of light energy emitted by a light source, without regard to the effectiveness of its distribution.
9. Luminaire: A complete lighting unit consisting of a lamp or lamps together with the components designed to distribute the light, position and protect the lamps, and to connect the lamps to the power supply. A luminaire is also commonly referred to as a fixture.
10. Outdoor Luminaire: A luminaire which is permanently installed outdoors including, but not limited to, devices used to illuminate a site, structure or sign.
11. Photometric Plan: A point by point plan depicting the intensity and location of lighting on the property.
SECTION E: SHIELDING
All outdoor light fixtures except those exempted by Section G of this Chapter and those regulated by Section F shall be fully shielded as identified in Section F. A fully shielded fixture must be a full cutoff luminaire or a decorative luminaire with full cutoff optics, and is defined as an outdoor lighting that is shielded or constructed so that all light emitted is projected below a horizontal plane running through the lowest part of the fixtures. The light source visibility shall be shielded from the adjoining property.
SECTION F: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL ZONING DISTRICTS
1. Public or Private Recreational Facilities:
a. Primary Playing Areas: Where playing fields or other recreational areas are to be illuminated, lighting fixtures shall be specified in the Lighting Plan, mounted and aimed so that the illumination falls within the primary playing area and immediate surroundings so that no direct light illumination is directed off site.
2. Outdoor Illumination of Building, Landscaping and Signs:
a. The unshielded outdoor illumination of any building or landscaping is prohibited. Lighting fixtures used to illuminate an outdoor advertising sign either shall be by directed ground lighting sign and shall comply with shielding requirements and with requirements found in Chapter 7.
50
b. All outdoor lighting fixtures in Commercial or Industrial zoned districts, including display lighting, shall be turned off after the close of business, unless needed for safety or security, in which case the lighting shall be reduced to the minimum level necessary
3. Gasoline Station/Convenience Store Aprons and Canopies:
a. The lighting fixture bulbs shall be recessed into a canopy ceiling so that the bottom of the fixture is flush with the ceiling so that light is restrained to not more than 85 degrees.
b. As an alternative to recessed ceiling lights, indirect lighting may be used where the light is directed upward and then reflected down from the underside of the canopy. In this case, light fixtures shall be shielded so that direct illumination is focused exclusively on the underside of the canopy.
c. Lights shall not be mounted on the top or sides (fascia) of the canopy, and the sides of the canopy shall not be illuminated.
d. The lighting for new facilities (pump islands under canopies) shall have a minimum 1.0 footcandle at grade, and meet the requirements of Table 2 of this Chapter.
4. All Parking Lots, Loading and Display Areas:
a. The lighting requirement applies to single and multi-family, educational, institutional, public, commercial, motor vehicle related, wholesaling, recreational and industrial use categories as identified within the Zoning Ordinance.
b. Lighting for all parking, display and loading areas shall not exceed an average horizontal illumination level of 2.5 foot-candles. All lighting fixtures serving these areas shall be cut-off fixtures as defined by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA).
5. Spillover light:
Vertical or horizontal, from parking area luminaries onto public roads and property in residential and commercial districts shall not exceed one-half (1/2) foot-candle at the property line.
SECTION G: EXEMPTIONS
1. Nonconforming fixtures:
51
a. Outdoor lighting fixtures installed prior to the effective date of this Chapter are exempt from the provisions of this Chapter, provided, however, that no change in use, replacement, and structural alteration of outdoor light fixtures shall be made unless it thereafter conforms to the provisions of this Chapter.
b. Lighting which is not subject to this Chapter by State or Federal law.
c. Temporary holiday lighting displays, circus, fair, carnival or civic uses.
2. Special Conditions:
The Zoning Administrator may grant an exemption to the requirements of this Section only upon a written finding that there is conditions warranting the exemption and that there are not conforming fixtures that would suffice.
3. Construction and Emergency Lighting:
Lighting necessary for construction or emergencies is exempt from the provisions of this Chapter provided said lighting is temporary and is discontinued immediately upon completion of the construction work or abatement of the emergency necessitating said lighting
4. Public Street Lighting:
SECTION H: APPLICATIONS
1. Any person submitting site plan or applying for a building or sign permit which involves the installation of outdoor lighting fixtures shall as a part of said application submit evidence that the proposed work will comply with this Chapter.
2. The lighting plan application shall include as least the following:
a. A site plan drawn to scale showing building(s), landscaping, parking areas and proposed exterior lighting fixtures.
b. Location of all post, canopy, supports and light fixtures, including the height of each fixture, for any building, structure, parking, display and loading areas.
c. Specifications of the illuminating devices, lamps, supports and other devices, including designation as Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) “cut-off” fixtures. This description may include but is not limited to manufacturers catalog cuts, and drawings including sections where required.
d. Plans shall show locations of all pole mounted and building mounted fixtures and a numerical 25 foot by 25 foot grid of lighting levels, in foot-candles, that the fixtures will produce on the ground (photometric report). The photometric
52
report will indicate the minimum and maximum foot-candle levels within the lighted area of the site. The minimum (lowest number) is usually at the outer edges of the illuminated area or between two fixtures. Adding the foot-candle value of all the points in the grid and dividing by the total number of points determine the average light level. This information is available from the manufacturer of the specified fixture.
3. The above required plans and descriptions shall be sufficiently complete to enable the Zoning Administrator to readily determine whether compliance with the requirements of this Chapter will be secured. If such plans and descriptions cannot enable this ready determination, by reason of nature or configuration of the devices, fixtures or lamps proposed, the applicant shall submit evidence of compliance by certified test reports as performed by a recognized testing lab.
SECTION I: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT FOR LIGHTING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
Prior to issuance of a building or sign permit, which involves the installation of outdoor lighting fixtures, the Zoning Administrator shall determine that the submitted plans and details for said permit are in conformance with this Chapter. The stamping of the plans and the signature of the Zoning Administrator and the date of the signature shall indicate that the plans are in conformance.
SECTION J: AMENDMENT TO PERMIT FOR LIGHTING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
Should the applicant desire to substitute outdoor light fixtures or lamps to be installed on private property after a permit has been issued, the applicant shall submit all changes to the Zoning Administrator for approval, with adequate information to assure compliance with this Chapter.
SECTION K: APPEALS
Except for street lighting within the right-of-way and for temporary exceptions as provided in Section G, any applicant’s appeal of the Zoning Administrator’s decisions shall be made to the Board of Zoning Appeals, and the procedures of the Zoning Ordinance shall apply.
SECTION L: REQUEST FOR TEMPORARY EXEMPTIONS
a. Request: Any person may submit a written request for a temporary exemption to the requirements of this Chapter. The Request for Temporary Exemption shall contain the following information:
o Specific exemptions requested
o Type and use of exterior light involved
o Duration of time for requested exemption
o Type of lamp and calculated lumens
o Total wattage of lamp or lamps
53
o Proposed location of exterior light
o Previous temporary exemptions, if any
o Physical size of exterior light and type of shielding provided
o In addition, the Zoning Administrator may request any additional information, which would enable a reasonable evaluation of the Request for Temporary Exemption.
b. The fee for a temporary exemption shall be as required for variance to the Zoning Ordinance.
c. Appeal: The Zoning Administrator, within five (5) days from the date of the properly completed Request for Temporary Exemption, shall approve or reject in writing the Request. If rejected, the individual making the Request shall have the right to appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals.
TABLE II
Exterior lighting shall be designed at or below the following average maintained foot-candles for the various uses. Uniformity shall not exceed a ratio of 4:1, which is a measure of the maximum lighting achieved within the area to the minimum lighting within the area. The average foot-candles shall be measured at the property line.
Application
Average FC
Application
Average FC
Industrial Building Exterior
20
Loading Docks
20
Commercial Buildings
10
Residential Security and Yard Lighting
0.5
All Parking Areas
2.5
Other Uses
As determined by the Zoning Administrator based on like use, and compatibility with surrounding area.
54
CHAPTER NINE: SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
SECTION A: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS TO REGULATE POTENTIAL HAZARDS AND NUISANCES
The following minimum standards shall apply to all uses within their permitted Zoning Districts.
1. Fire and Explosive Hazards: All activities involving flammable or explosive materials, including storage, shall include the provision of adequate safety devices against the hazard of fire and explosion. All standards enforced by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration shall be adhered to. Burning of waste materials in an open fire is prohibited, as enforced by the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency.
2. Air Pollution: No emission of air pollutants that violate the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1977 shall be permitted, as enforced by the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency.
3. Glare, Heat and Exterior Light: Any operation producing intense light or heat, such as high-temperature processes like combustion, welding or otherwise, shall be performed within an enclosed building and not be visible beyond any lot line bounding the property whereon the use is conducted. No exterior lighting shall be positioned so as to extend light or glare onto adjacent properties or rights-of-way.
4. Dust and Erosion: Dust or silt shall be minimized through landscaping or paving in such a manner as to prevent their transfer by wind or water to points off the lot.
5. Liquid or Solid Wastes: No discharge at any point into any public sewer, private sewage disposal system or stream, or into the ground, of any materials of such nature or temperature as can contaminate any water supply, interfere with bacterial processes in sewage treatment or otherwise cause the emission of dangerous or offensive elements shall be permitted. The standards of the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency shall apply.
6. Vibrations: No uses shall be located and no equipment shall be installed such a way as to produce intense, earth-shaking vibrations, which are discernible without instruments at the property lines of the subject premises.
7. Noises: No use shall be located and no equipment shall be installed in such a way as to produce intense noise above the noise standards established by the Environmental Protection Agency. Those said standards shall be adhered to.
8. Odors: No use shall be operated so as to produce the continuous, frequent or repetitive emission of odors or odor-causing substances in such concentrations as to be readily perceptible at any point at or beyond the lot line of the property on which the use is located. The applicable standards of the Environmental Protection Agency shall be adhered to.
55
9. Toxic Materials: No emission of toxic or noxious matter, which is injurious to human health, comfort or enjoyment of life and property or to animal or plant life, shall be permitted. Where such emissions could be produced as a result of accident or equipment malfunction, adequate safeguards considered suitable for safe operation in the industry involved shall be taken. The standards of the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency shall apply.
10. Chemicals: The storage, utilization and manufacture of solid, liquid and gaseous chemicals and other materials shall be permitted subject to the following conditions.
a. No discharge shall be permitted at any point into any public sewer, private sewage disposal system or stream, or into the ground, of any materials of such nature or temperature as can contaminate any water supply, interfere with bacterial processes in wastewater treatment, or otherwise cause the emission of dangerous or offensive elements, except in accordance with standards approved by the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency, the Village of Minster, or such other governmental agency as shall have jurisdiction of such activities.
b. The storage, utilization or manufacturing of solid combustible materials or products ranging form free or active burning to intense burning may be permitted only if said materials or products are stored, utilized or manufactured within completely enclosed buildings having incombustible exterior walls and protected throughout by an automatic fire extinguishing system. Burning of waste material in open fire is prohibited.
c. All activities involving the use and/or storage and/or disposal of flammable liquids or materials that produce flammable or explosive vapors or gases shall be provided with adequate safety and protective devices against hazards of fire and explosion as well as with adequate fire fighting and suppression equipment and devices standard to the industry involved. All aboveground storage shall be enclosed fireproof vaults.
d. The storage, utilization or manufacture of pyrophoric and explosive powders and dusts, and products that decompose by detonations, and the storage and utilization of flammable liquids or materials that produce flammable or explosive vapors or gases shall be in strict conformance with the applicable regulations set forth in the “Ohio Rules and Regulations of the Division of the State Fire Marshall for the Manufacture, Storage, Handling, Sale and Transportation of Flammable and Combustible Liquids.”
11. Radioactivity: The handling of radioactive materials, the discharge of such materials into air and water, and the disposal of radioactive wastes shall be in
56
strict conformance with the applicable regulations of the United States Department of Energy and of any agency of the State of Ohio.
SECTION B: REGULATION OF ACCESSORY USES
1. In each Zoning District, unless otherwise specifically prohibited, any use, building and/or structure customarily incidental and accessory to a permitted use, structure and /or building in such Zoning District shall be permitted.
2. Without limiting the provision of the above section, the following specific uses, structures and/or buildings shall be deemed accessory:
a. Customary incidental home occupations, subject to the requirements of Section C of this Chapter.
b. Keeping of not more than two (2) roomers and/or boarders by a resident family.
c. Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work while construction is in progress.
d. Private swimming pools, tennis courts and other recreational facilities used for the enjoyment of the occupants of the principal use of the property on which it is located, outlined in this section:
(1) The facilities shall not be located in any yard except the rear yard.
(2) The side yard requirement for an above ground pool is fifteen (15) feet; and the rear yard setback requirement is thirty-five (35) feet.
(3) An in-ground pool facility is required to be at least fifteen (15) feet from all property lines.
(4) The swimming pool or other attractive nuisance, or the entire property on which it is located, shall be walled or fenced to prevent uncontrolled access by children form the street or from adjacent properties. Said fence or wall shall no be less than five (5) feet in height and shall be maintained in good condition with a self-closing gate and lock. Such five (5) foot fence or wall may be the extension of the sidewalls of the swimming pool.
e. Satellite receiving stations and other structures used to transmit or receive radio or television signals to/from earth satellites, provided:
(1) The structures shall not be located in any yard except the rear yard and shall be no closer to the side lot line than the side yard requirement for the Zoning District in which it is located.
57
(2) The structures shall not be roof-mounted in residential districts.
(3) The structures shall contain no graphic message or advertising other than the manufacturer’s name.
(4) Adjacent uses shall be buffered from the structure by fencing or landscaping.
f. Any other use or structure customarily found in conjunction with and required for full utilization and enjoyment of the principal use and which meets the definition of accessory use in Chapter Eleven.
3. An accessory building may be erected as an integral part of a principal building or it may be connected thereto by a breezeway or other similar structure, provided that all applicable yard requirements shall be complied with.
4. An accessory building may be erected detached from the principal building. No detached accessory building shall be erected in any required yard except a rear yard, with the exception that a private detached garage may be erected in a rear or side yard. No detached accessory building shall occupy more than thirty-five percent (35%) of the area of the required side or rear yard, and such building shall be located a minimum of seven and a half (7.5) feet from all lot lines. The exception is a private detached garage located in a side yard, which shall meet the minimum yard requirements for a principal building of the same height and other dimensions as such detached garage. For computing the percentage of occupancy of a side or rear yard, of the detached accessory building is connected to the principal building by a breezeway, the ground area of such breezeway shall be considered as a part of the accessory building and shall be included in computation.
5. Any accessory building, if not located in a side or rear yard, shall be an integral part of, or connected with, the principal building to which it is accessory, and shall be placed as to meet all yard requirements for a principal building of the same height and other dimensions of said accessory building.
6. If located in a rear yard, the height of an accessory building shall not exceed 15 feet and the distance of such buildings from other separate buildings or structures on the same lot shall be at least six (6) feet, except that a breezeway or other similar structure, at least six (6) feet in length, may connect an accessory building with a principal building.
7. Where a corner lot adjoins in the rear with a lot located in a residential district, either directly or across an alley, no part of an accessory building located in a rear yard within twenty-five (25) feet of common lot line or center line of the alley shall be nearer the side street lot line than the least depth of the front yard existing
58
or required along such side street for a building on such adjoining lot; nor, regardless of location on the lot, shall such accessory building project into the side yard required for the principal building to which it is an accessory.
8. Notwithstanding other provisions of these Regulations, a detached accessory building shall be located at least seven and a half (7.5) feet from a side or rear lot line.
SECTION C: REGULATION OF HOME OCCUPATIONS
1. Intent: The intent of the home occupation regulations is to allow for home occupations that are compatible with the neighborhood in which they are located.
2. Definitions:
a. Home Occupation: A home occupation is defined as any business or commercial activity that is conducted or petitioned to be conducted from property that is zoned for residential use.
b. Home Occupation Permit: A home occupation permit is a permit issued for a home occupation that is authorized by this section without a hearing.
c. Home Occupation Conditional Use Permit: A home occupation conditional use permit is a permit authorized by the Board of Zoning Appeals only after a public hearing.
3. Permit Procedures:
a. Home occupations shall not be permitted without the prior issuance of a home occupation permit or home occupation conditional use permit.
b. Home Occupation Permit: A home occupation permit for the following home occupations shall be issued by the Zoning Administrator upon receiving an application and payment of the permit fee, without a hearing, provided that said home occupation is conducted solely and singly by the applicant; who shall reside on the premises; shall not provide for any employment regardless of compensation, outside of family members; and shall not alter the outside appearance of the building other than a sign permitted as in Chapter Seven and shall conform to all the rules and regulations of this section.
o Computer programming.
o Dressmaking, sewing, and tailoring.
o Secretarial service.
o Painting, sculpturing, or writing.
o Day Care Service: Type A.
o Telephone answering.
o The operation of any wholesale or retail business which is conducted entirely by mail
o Tutoring, limited to one student at a time
o Home cooking and preserving.
59
c. Home Occupation Conditional Use Permit: All home occupations not listed in Section 3.b. shall be considered conditional uses and subject to the following: Applications for home occupation conditional use permits shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator, together with a filing fee of ten dollars ($10.00) at least fourteen (14) days prior to the regularly scheduled Board of Zoning Appeals meeting. The application shall be forwarded to the Board of Zoning Appeals for a public hearing. Legal notice of such hearings will be published in a newspaper of local circulation at least five (5) days prior to the public hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Board of Zoning Appeals will make its decision regarding the home occupation conditional use.
d. Home Occupation Conditional Use Permit: Babysitting Service: A home occupation conditional use permits for Type A Day Care Services shall be issued on a one-year basis only. Each permit application must be accompanied by a copy of operation license issued by the Department of Human Services.
4. Performance Standards: All home occupations, whether authorized by permit or conditional use permit, shall conform to the following performance standards:
a. Permitted home occupations shall not be conducted in any building on the premises other than the building that is used by the occupant as the private dwelling, and not more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the floor area of the dwelling unit may be used for such purpose.
b. No person, other than members of the family residing on the premises, shall be engaged in such occupation.
c. The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to the dwelling unit’s use for residential purposes by its occupants.
d. There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building other than a sign as permitted in Chapter Seven of these Regulations.
e. No more than two (2) additional vehicles shall be parked at any one time by clients or customers of the home occupation.
f. No equipment, process or storage associated with the home occupation shall create odors, noise, vibration, glare, electrical interference or other nuisances detectable to normal senses off the lot where the said home occupation is located.
g. No equipment, or process shall create visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers or other audio appliances used off the premises or cause fluctuation in line voltage off the premises.
h. No equipment, process or storage associated within home occupation shall create any fire or explosion hazard or involve the storage or use of hazardous materials in any concentration greater than that which would normally be found in a dwelling unit containing no home occupation.
i. There shall be no garage storage of business equipment, materials, merchandise, and inventory or heavy equipment.
j. The use of mechanical equipment other than what is usual for purely domestic or hobby purposes shall be prohibited.
k. Conditional use permits shall not be granted when it appears to the Board of Zoning Appeals that the proposed home occupations will constitute a fire hazard to neighboring residences, will adversely affect neighboring property values or will constitute a nuisance or otherwise be detrimental to the neighbors because of excessive noise, odors or other circumstances.
l. In order to guarantee that a home occupation, once authorized, will not become a nuisance to the neighbors or otherwise violate these Regulations, the Board of Zoning Appeals may impose reasonable conditions necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
m. An applicant for a home occupation permit or home occupation conditional use permit must reside at the location of the proposed home occupation.
n. Garage sales, yard sales and other activities of this type are permitted without special permits provided they meet the standards outlines in Section F of the Chapter.
5. Inspections: There may be one (1) annual inspection each year by the Zoning Administrator of dwelling units covered by a home occupation permit or home occupation conditional use permit. In addition, the Zoning Administrator shall have the right at any time, upon reasonable request, to enter and inspect the premises covered by said permit for safety and compliance purposes.
6. General Provisions:
a. Conditional use permits granted by this section shall be temporary in nature and shall be granted to a designated person who resides at the residential address. The permits are not transferable from person to person or from address to address.
61
b. Should a home occupation permit holder or home occupation conditional use permit holder die or move to a new location, the exiting permit shall be automatically terminated, except that in the case of death should a surviving spouse or child residing at the same address desire to continue the home occupation, written notice to that effect shall be given to the Zoning Administrator, and the Board of Zoning Appeals may authorize continuation of that permit without further hearing.
c. Home occupation permits and home occupation conditional permits, once granted, may be revoked by the Board of Zoning Appeals for violation of the above-mentioned performance standards after a hearing before the Board.
d. Home occupation permits expire at the deadline established by the Zoning Board. Renewals of this permit must be done sixty- (60) days prior to termination deadline.
7. Penalty: Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, refuses to comply with or resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined according to Chapter Nine, Section C of these Regulations.
SECTION D: REGULATION OF CONDITIONAL USES
1. Statement of Intent:
The purpose of a conditional use is to allow proper integration into the Village of uses that may only be suitable in specific locations within certain Zoning District(s) or only if such uses are designated or laid out in a particular manner on the site.
2. General Procedure:
a. Application:
Application for conditional uses shall be presented to the Zoning Administrator, at least fourteen (14) days prior to the regularly schedule Board of Zoning Appeals meeting. The application will be forwarded to the Board of Zoning Appeals for a public hearing. Legal notice of such hearings will be published in a newspaper of local circulation at least five days prior to the public hearing.
Approval by the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be required for all uses listed as conditionally permitted prior to the issuance of a Zoning Certificate.
b. Criteria: 62
In considering an application for a conditional use, the Board of Zoning Appeals must make an affirmative finding that the proposed conditional use is to be located in a Zoning District wherein such use may be conditionally permitted and all conditions for approval of the conditional use have been met. In doing so, the Board of Zoning Appeals may request proof that the application requirements for the conditional use have been met.
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall give due regard to the nature and condition of all adjacent uses and structures and the consistency therewith of the proposed conditional use and any potential nuisances.
c. Procedure:
A conditional use permit shall be initiated and acted on pursuant to the regulations set forth in Chapter Nine.
3. Permit Revoked:
The Board of Zoning Appeals may revoke a conditional use permit for failure to comply with the conditions of that approval. By certified mail, the Board shall notify the holder of the Board’s intention to revoke approval and of the holder’s right to a hearing before the Board within thirty- (30) days of the receipt of said notice if he/she so requests. In lieu of said certified mail service, service may be made personally by the Zoning Administrator; in which case, the hearing shall be requested within thirty- (30) days after such service. If the holder requests a hearing, the Board shall set a time and place for the hearing and notify the holder. At the hearing, the holder may appear in person or be represented by his/her attorney or other representative, or he/she may present his/her position in writing. He/she may present evidence and may examine witnesses appearing for or against him/her. If no hearing is requested, the Board may revoke approval without a hearing. The authority to revoke approval is in addition to any other means of zoning enforcement provided by law.
4. Required Conditions for Approval:
The following are additional requirements to be met by an applicant for a conditional use. In addition to meeting the subsequent required conditions for conditional uses, all applicants for conditional uses shall be required to fully comply with any and all other applicable provisions of these Regulations.
a. Adult Entertainment Facilities
(1) Conditionally permitted in I-1
(2) Any adult entertainment facility must be located a minimum of one thousand feet from any protected use.
63
b. Automobile Service Stations:
(1) Conditionally permitted in C-1.
(2) There shall be a minimum of two (2) separate driveways providing entrance and exit to and from the property, located not closer than twenty (20) feet from one another, ten (10) feet from an adjacent property line and twenty-five (25) feet from an adjacent residential zoning district. On corner lots, such driveways shall not be located closer than thirty- (30) feet to the intersection of the right-of-way lines of the two (2) streets.
(3) All hydraulic lifts, oil pits and all lubricants, greasing and repair equipment shall be enclosed and operated entirely within the service station or garage building.
(4) The entire lot area, exclusive of the area covered by the building, shall either be paved or landscaped. A six (6) inch high curb shall separate all paved areas from all landscaped areas.
(5) The light from exterior lighting shall be so shaded, shielded or directed that the light intensity or brightness shall not be objectionable to surrounding development. Refer to Chapter Eight for Lighting Standards.
(6) A solid fence, wall or evergreen hedge four (4) to six (6) feet high shall be constructed or planted, maintained in good condition, where the site is located adjacent a Residential District or land use.
(7) Inoperable vehicles shall be kept on the premises no longer than thirty- (30) days.
c. Group Homes:
(1) Conditionally permitted in R-1 and C-2.
(2) Every room occupied for sleeping purposes within the home shall contain a minimum of one hundred (100) square feet of habitable room area for one (1) occupant, and when occupied by more than one (1) individual, shall contain at least eighty (80) square feet habitable room area for each occupant. No such facility shall use living rooms, dining rooms, entryways, closets, and corridors, outside porches or cellars as sleeping rooms.
64
(3) The group home shall provide not less than twenty-five (25) square feet per person of suitable indoor recreation area and not less than seventy-five (75) square feet of outdoor recreation open space per person exclusive of required front and side yards and parking areas, consolidated in a useful configuration and location provided on the site.
(4) No exterior alteration of the structures shall be made that departs from the residential character of the building. All new structures shall be compatible in residential design with the surrounding neighborhood.
(5) All exterior lighting fixtures shall be shaded to avoid casting direct light upon any adjoining property located in a Residential District. Refer to Chapter Eight for Lighting Standards.
(6) No group home shall be located within one-quarter (1/4) mile radius of another such facility.
d. Hospitals:
(1) Conditionally permitted in R-1.
(2) Immediate access to a primary arterial street shall be required.
(3) Setback required for off-street parking shall be fifty- (50) feet.
(4) A six (6) foot solid wall or fence or compact hedge shall be required when located closer than one hundred fifty (150) feet to an existing or platted residential use.
(5) An assessment shall be made of the probable impact of the proposed facility on the prevailing and expected future traffic pattern and indicate that the adjacent major streets and adjacent properties will be able to accommodate traffic.
(6) Exterior lighting shall be shaded wherever necessary to avoid casting direct light upon any adjacent property or upon any public street. Refer to Chapter Eight for Lighting Standards.
e. Multi-Family Dwelling Units:
(1) Conditionally permitted in R-1, C-1, C-2, and I-1.
(2) An assessment of the additional traffic impact will be made to determine whether the use will create negative effects on the
65
community and if the existing streets will be able to accommodate the additional traffic.
(3) Parking areas shall be located in the rear of the structure and shall be screened from adjacent residential properties.
(4) In the C-1, C-2, and I-1 Districts, the conditional use is permitted only to dwellings in existence as of December 15, 1970.
f. Nursing Homes/Rest Homes:
(1) Conditionally permitted in R-1.
(2) Immediate access to a primary or secondary thoroughfare shall be required.
(3) An assessment shall be made of the probably impact of the proposed facility on the prevailing and expected future traffic on the adjacent thoroughfares and if those thoroughfares will be able to accommodate the additional traffic.
(4) Where there is an adjacent existing or platted residential use, a buffer yard shall be required and shall comply with the regulations of Section E of the Chapter.
h. Single-Family Dwelling Units:
(1) Conditionally permitted in C-1, C-2, and I-1.
(2) In the C-1, C-2 and I-1 Districts, conditional use is permitted only to dwellings in existence as of December 15, 1970.
i. Churches and Places of Worship:
(1) Conditionally permitted in R-1.
(2) All structures, including accessory buildings, shall be setback at least fifty (50) feet from the front lot line except signs which shall conform to the regulations set forth in Chapter Seven of these Regulations.
(3) Access to a primary thoroughfare shall be provided. No access shall be provided to secondary residential streets unless it can be shown there will be no impact to the neighborhood.
66
(4) An assessment shall be made of the probable impact of the proposed facility on the prevailing and expected future traffic on the adjacent public street and if the streets will be able to accommodate the additional traffic.
(5) Lots shall be a minimum of one (1) acre.
j. Elementary, Junior High and Senior High Schools:
(1) Conditionally permitted in R-1.
(2) Lots shall be a minimum of three (3) acres.
(3) There shall be a minimum yard requirement of one hundred fifty (150) feet in any yard from which unrestricted exits or entrees to the principal structure are made.
(4) All parking areas and/or areas where vehicles may pick up or deliver passengers shall be screened form view from any adjacent existing or platted residential area. No on-street pick up or delivery of passengers shall be permitted.
k. University, College, Vocational and Technical Schools:
(1) Conditionally permitted in R-1.
(2) Lots shall be a minimum of five (5) acres.
(3) Immediate access to a primary thoroughfare shall be required.
(4) An assessment shall be made of the probable impact of the proposed facility on the prevailing and expected future traffic on the adjacent primary thoroughfare and if the thoroughfare will be able to accommodate the additional traffic.
(5) All parking areas and/or areas where vehicles may pick up or deliver passengers shall be screened from view from any adjacent existing residential development.
(6) Parking and landscaping plans shall be submitted to ensure compatibility with surrounding uses.
l. Commercial Telecommunication Towers:
(1) Conditionally permitted in C-1 and C-2.
67
(2) Non-climbable fences or comparable safety devices shall be installed and maintained in order to make the structure inaccessible to the public.
(3) Portions of properties not used for buildings, parking or related services must be maintained with natural ground cover.
(4) In no instance shall a transmission and/or receiving tower extend higher than the distance between such structure and any lot line of the parcel or tract upon which such structure is located.
m. Upper Story Apartments:
(1) Conditionally permitted in C-1.
(2) Must be located above a permitted C-1 use.
(3) Parking for such dwelling units must be provided off-street at 2.0 parking spaces per dwelling unit.
n. Drive-In Restaurants, Carry-Out Restaurants, and/or Drive-Through Retail Establishments:
(1) Conditionally permitted in C-1 andC-2.
(2) There shall be two separate driveways located along the frontage providing both ingress and egress to and from the property. No such driveway shall be located closer than ten (10) feet to an adjacent property line. On corner lots, such driveways shall not be located closer than twenty-five (25) feet to the intersection of the right-of-way lines of the two (2) streets.
(3) The design of the drive-in or drive-through approach lane shall be such that at least seven (7) vehicles may be in line on the premises and none of these vehicles encroach on a public thoroughfare. A solid wood fence or masonry wall six (6) feet high shall be constructed where the delivery window or drive-through is located adjacent a Residential District or residential use.
(4) The light from the exterior lighting shall be so shaded, shielded, or directed that the light intensity or brightness shall not be objectionable to surrounding areas.
o. Day Care Center:
(1) Conditionally permitted in R-1.
68
(2) All structures and play lots associated with this use shall be located in a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from any other lot in any
R-1 District.
(3) All exterior activity areas and play lots shall be fenced and screened with appropriate landscape materials.
(4) One (1) sign no more than five (5) square feet shall be allowed.
5. Height Requirements: No principal structure shall be more than the maximum height in the respective zoning districts unless the Board of Zoning Appeals determines that a taller structure will not be detrimental to the area. Structures taller than the maximum height for each District may be permitted as a Conditional Use.
SECTION E: REQUIRED FENCING, SCREENING, BUFFERING AND LANDSCAPING
1. Statement of Intent:
The intent of this section is to provide for orderly transition between land uses, to protect and screen private property, to inhibit access to industrial and commercial sites, to provide security and privacy to residents, to provide a physical and visual barrier, to reduce wind and modify climate, to define property lines, to identify and emphasize entrances, to create and define outdoor living space, and to generally improve the aesthetic appearance of a site.
2. Design Standards:
a. No fence, wall or screen may be located in any front yard except as provided below:
(1) Hedges not exceeding six (6) feet in height may be located in any front yard, but they shall be subject to any traffic visibility requirements imposed by the Zoning Inspector.
(2) A fence or wall may be located in any front yard as follows:
a. The height does not exceed four (4) feet above the ground at any point. Front yard fences are not permitted to be solid fences (unable to see through).
b. Shall not be located closer than three (3) feet to the front lot lines, including both lot lines on a corner lot.
69
c. If located on corner lot shall be subject to any traffic visibility requirements imposed by the Zoning Inspector.
d. All support structures to face to the inside.
e. Shall be located within the property line at a location where the property owner can maintain both sides.
f. All fence or wall installation or modification requires a Zoning Permit.
b. A fence, wall or screen may be located in any rear or side yard, provided that:
(1) The height shall not exceed six (6) feet above ground.
(2) Shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height surrounding tennis courts in any rear yard.
(3) In the I-1 Industrial District, may be constructed higher than the six (6) foot limit with Board of Zoning Appeals approval.
(5) All support structures to face to the inside.
(6) Shall be located within the property at a location where the property owner can maintain both sides.
(7) All fence or wall installation or modification requires a Zoning Permit.
c. A fence, wall or screen shall be located between land uses according to the following:
(1) Whenever a business or industrial use is located on a lot that adjoins a residential use, an effective buffer or screen consisting of a solid wall or fence, landscaped earth mound, or view-obscuring dense planting or various combinations thereof shall be provided at the lot lines adjoining residential uses. Such masonry wall, wooden fence or earth mound shall not be less than five (5) nor more than six (6) feet in height, or may be higher if necessary to be maintained in good condition by the owner. The proposed fencing, screening and/or landscaping shall be subject to the approval of the Zoning Administrator.
(2) Any premise used or intended to be used as permitted by these Regulations, for auto wrecking or dismantling or for the open
70
storage of auto bodies, or other metal, glass, bottles, rags, cans, sacks, rubber, paper or other articles commonly known as junk, or for any articles known as secondhand goods, wares or merchandise, must be enclosed with a masonry wall or tight board or similar fence not less than six (6) feet high, painted a neutral color, and continuously maintained in good sightly condition. The fence is to be constructed of an opaque material.
(3) When any open off-street parking or loading area used for any non-residential purpose containing more than two (2) spaces is not separated from a residential use by a public street, an effective buffer or screen, consisting of a solid wall, fence, landscaped earth mound or view-obscuring dense planting of evergreen shrubs, hedge tree line, mass tree planting or various combinations thereof, shall be provided at the lot lines adjoining said residential district. Such wall, fence, or earth mound shall be not less than four (4) feet nor more than six (6) feet in height, or may be higher if necessary to provide visual privacy for the adjacent residential property owner, and shall be maintained in good condition by the owner. Exception to this height requirement occurs at the “sight triangle” from the parking or loading/unloading area.
(4) All open off-street parking or loading/unloading areas that are unusable, either for parking or for traffic, shall be landscaped with plantings of grass, flowers, shrubs and/or trees, which shall be maintained in good condition by the owner.
(5) All commercial, industrial, multiple-family residential and office uses that provide trash and/or garbage collection areas shall enclose such areas on at least three (3) sides by a solid wall or fence at least six (6) feet in height if such area is not within an enclosed building or structure. Provisions for adequate vehicular access to and from such area or areas for collection of trash and/or garbage, as determined by the Zoning Administrator, shall be required. (Figure 4)
(6) Retaining walls shall not project more than one (1) foot above the surface of the ground supported by such walls, unless such projection exceeding one (1) foot complies with the applicable requirements in this section.
(7) Electrified fences shall be prohibited in all districts.
(8) Any and all plants required by these Regulations, which become diseased or dead shall be removed and replaced with healthy specimens by and at the expense of the property owner.
71
(9) All fences, screens and landscaping required by the provisions of this section shall meet with approval of the Zoning Administrator.
72
FIGURE IV 73
SECTION F: REGULATIONS OF TEMPORARY USES
1. Statement of Intent:
The use of a structure on premises for a temporary purpose that does not require the erection of a substantial structure shall be permitted subject to conditions that will safeguard the public health, safety, and general welfare and are based on the following requirements.
2. Permitted Temporary Use:
a. Retail Outdoor Display:
Orderly display at an automotive service station building of canned fluids, lubricants and/or tires not required for immediate servicing of automobiles and display of other products normally sold at service stations. Such display shall be set back not less than ten (10) feet from the front lot line and not less than five (5) feet from any side or rear lot line, and in any case shall not be placed in the required yard.
Promotional activities of retail merchants, located in any business district, involving the display of goods and merchandise may be conducted outside of enclosed buildings for a time period of not more than fourteen (14) days in any three (3) month period. Goods and merchandise that will be used in the promotional activity, which are also for sale within the building, may be displayed subject to the following conditions:
(1) No portion of the display shall be on or over publicly owned property, except for sidewalk sales. Public access shall be maintained throughout such sales.
(2) No food or drink shall be dispensed outside the building except in accordance with standards and prior written approval of the Auglaize County Health Department.
b. Garage Sales:
Garage sales, yard sales and rummage sales shall be permitted at individual dwellings in the residential districts, not to exceed two (2) times in seventy-two (72) hours each per calendar year. No more than four (4) signs, not to exceed four (4) square feet each, per sale shall be permitted. Such signs shall be removed within twenty-four (24) hours after the end of the garage sale.
c. Real Estate Offices:
Real estate offices (containing no sleeping or cooking accommodations unless located in a model dwelling unit) incidental to a new residential development, and to continue only until the sale or lease of all dwelling units within the development has taken place.
74
d. Christmas Tree Sales:
Christmas tree sales in the commercial and industrial districts for a time period not to exceed forty-five (45) days. Display of Christmas trees need not to comply with the yard and setback requirements of these Regulations provided that no tree shall be displayed with thirty- (30) feet of the intersection of the curb line of any two (2) streets.
e. Carnivals and Circuses:
Open-air carnivals or tent circuses, only in the commercial and industrial districts and then only for a time period that does not exceed seven (7) days. Structures or equipment that might block the view of operators of motor vehicles or adjacent public streets shall not be located within thirty (30) feet of the intersection of the curb line of any two (2) streets.
3. Temporary Zoning Certificates:
All of the above described retail, office and entertainment functions and operations shall be conducted and all merchandise displayed in and orderly and safe manner, free form injurious or offensive effects to the occupants of adjacent premises and to the public in general, and shall be effectively screened from adjoining residential properties where required by the Zoning Administrator.
All of the uses specified in this section shall require a temporary zoning certificate.
Each application for a temporary zoning certificate shall contain the following information:
a. Name, address and telephone number of the applicant;
b. A description of the property where the temporary use is to occur, including the location of the property and existing and/or proposed uses;
c. A statement explaining the need for the temporary use;
d. The date on which the temporary use will commence and the anticipated duration of such use; and
e. Such other information as may be required by the Zoning Administrator.
The Zoning Administrator shall either approve or disapprove such application within fourteen (14) days of receipt and shall notify the applicant of the decision. If the application is disapproved, the Zoning Administrator shall explain in writing the reasons for disapproval.
Failure to obtain a temporary zoning certificate prior to the location, erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, use or conduct of any function or
75
operation herein permitted as a temporary use shall be deemed a violation of these Regulations and punishable according to the provisions contained in Chapter Nine.
4. Exceptions:
All the uses specified in this section shall not require a temporary zoning certificate.
a. Contractor’s Office:
Contractor’s office, trailer and equipment shed (containing no sleeping or cooking accommodations) accessory to a construction project, and to continue only during the duration of such project and will be removed within thirty (30) days after the completion of the construction project.
SECTION G: YARD MODIFICATIONS
1. Supplementary Yard Requirements:
a. Irregular - Side Yards:
Side yard width may be varied where the sidewall of an existing building is not parallel with one (1) side lot line or is broken or otherwise irregular. In such case, the average width of the side yard shall be not less than the otherwise required least width. Such side yard, however, shall not be narrower at any point than one-half (1/2) the otherwise required least width, or narrower than three (3) feet in any case. This requirement notwithstanding, no new addition to any building shall encroach upon the minimum required side yard.
b. Corner Lots:
Lots formed at the intersection of two (2) streets shall not be required to provide two (2) front yard setbacks. The side abutting the street with the least amount of frontage shall be considered the front yard and the side abutting the street with the most amount of frontage shall be considered the side yard and, as such, shall meet the minimum front and side yard requirements specified for the Zoning District in which such lot is located.
c. Average Front Yard Setbacks:
No front yard setback depth shall be required to exceed the average minimum depths of the existing front yards on the lots adjacent each side if each of such lots are within the same block and within one hundred (100) feet.
2. Projections Into Yards:
There may be projections into required yard areas as follows:
76
a. Architectural features: Such as awnings, cornices, eaves and other similar features may project a distance of not more than two (2) feet, six (6) inches.
b. Outside stairs and landings: Without cover may project a distance not more than six (6) feet in front or rear yards, but in no case shall any such outside stair or landing extend above the entrance.
c. Fire escapes: May project not more than four (4) feet, six (6) inches.
d. Patios and open porches with no Roof: May be located in side and rear yards provided they are not closer than six (6) feet to any adjacent property line. If located closer than eight (8) feet, they shall be screened by an evergreen hedge or fence not less than four (4) feet in height and maintained in good condition. Open porches with no roof are permitted to project into the front yard a distance not to exceed six (6) feet, provided it is open on three (3) sides, except for railings or banisters. In case of a corner lot, no patios or porches shall be closer to the side street lot line than the least depth required for such side yard.
e. Bay windows, balconies, Oriel windows and chimneys: May project into a yard for distance not to exceed three (3) feet, provided, however, that the aggregate width of such projection does not exceed one-third (1/3) of the length of the wall upon which it is located.
SECTION H: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL, ACCESSORY, AND CONDITIONAL USES
The following Table 3 provides a listing as to the permitted uses within each zoning district. The use permeability for Planned Unit Developments shall be decided on a case-by-case basis. In the following table the letter designates the type of permitted use. No letter designates that the use is not permitted.
a. The letter “P” means it is a Principally permitted use.
b. The letter “C” means it is a Conditionally permitted use.
c. The letter “A” means it is an Accessory permitted use.
TABLE III
ZONING DISTRICTS
USES
R-1
R-2
C-1
C-2
C-3
I-1
Single family dwellings
P
P
Two-family dwellings
P
C
C
Three-family dwellings
P
C
C
Multi-family dwellings
P
C
C
Row Houses
77
Zero lot line dwellings
Day Care Centers (Type A)
C
C
Nursing Homes
C
C
C
Elementary schools
C
C
C
C
Churches
C
C
C
C
Community centers
C
C
Golf courses
C
Parks
P
P
P
P
P
P
Home occupations
C
C
C
C
Garages and sheds
A
A
Swimming pool
A
A
Consumer retail
P
P
P
Personal services
P
P
P
Commercial entertainment
P
P
P
Gasoline Filling Station with or without repair services
C
C
C
C
Banks and Lending Institutions
P
P
P
Banks with drive-through service
C
C
C
Theaters and Assembly Halls
C
C
P
Convenience Food stores without gasoline dispensing
P
P
P
Convenience Food stores with gasoline dispensing
C
C
C
Veterinary offices
C
P
P
Funeral Homes
C
P
P
Hotels and Motels
Bed and Breakfast facilities
C
Medical clinics
P
P
Medical and Dental offices
P
P
P
Professional and Business offices
P
P
P
Business retail
P
P
P
Bars and Taverns
P
P
P
Restaurants with table service or carry out only
P
P
P
Restaurants with drive-in or drive-through service
C
C
C
C
Light Industry
P
Heavy Industry
C
Research and Development Laboratories
C
Lock and Store Facilities (Mini-Warehouses)
C
C
Wholesale business
C
C
P
General Industry
P
Professional and Business offices associated with an industrial activity
P
Commercial telecommunication towers
C
Agri-business related uses
C
C
P
Auto sales and service, new and used
C
C
P
Truck sales and service, new and used
C
C
P
Farm implement sales and service
C
C
P
C
78
Adult Entertainment Facilities
C
2. Where a specific use is proposed that is not listed or provided for in this Zoning Code, the Board may make a determination, upon appeal, that the proposed use is substantially similar to a specific use that is listed or provided for in this Zoning Code. If the Board finds that a use is substantially similar to a specific use listed in this Zoning Code, the substantially similar use is deemed to be a substantially similar permitted use in those districts where the specific use is a permitted use.
In formulating a determination that a proposed use is substantially similar use, the Board shall follow the procedures relating to appeals and variances as specified in this Zoning Code. Upon making a determination that a proposed use is substantially similar, the Board shall notify the Council of its decision and shall include in its written findings the reasoning upon which the decision is based. Unless the decision is rejected within 30 days of its receipt by the Council, such substantially similar use determination by the Board shall become effective.
If the Board determines that a proposed use is not substantially similar, such determination shall not be appealed to the Council, but remedy may be sought by the appellant through the submission of an application for amendment of the zoning code.
The following standards shall be considered by the Board when making a determination that a use is substantially similar to a permitted use within a specific district:
a. The compatibility of the proposed use with the general use classification system as specified in this Zoning Code.
b. The nature, predominant characteristics, and intensity of the proposed use in relation to those uses specified by this Zoning Code as being permitted, in that district.
c. The size, dimensional requirements, parking requirements, traffic generation potential, and other regulatory consideration normally associated with uses as specified in this Zoning Code.
Should a use determined to be substantially similar to a specific permitted use provided for in this Zoning Code, it shall then be permitted in the same manner and under the same conditions and procedures as the use is permitted to which it has been found to be substantially similar.
The Zoning Administrator shall maintain as a public record a listing of all uses that have been determined to be substantially similar. For each such use the record shall include the use as listed in the Zoning Code, the use listed in the Zoning Code about which the determination of substantial similarity was made, 79
and the dates of any actions thereupon by the Board of Zoning Appeals. This record shall also contain the same information for all uses that have been determined not to be substantially similar. The Zoning Administrator shall consult this record in the process of issuing future permits.
80
CHAPTER TEN: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION A: ADMINISTRATIVE ENTITIES
1. General Provisions:
The formulation, administration and enforcement of these Regulations is hereby vested in the following offices in the Village of Minster:
o The Zoning Administrator
o The Planning Commission
o The Board of Zoning Appeals
o The Village Council
All departments, officials and public employees of the Village of Minster vested with the duty or authority to issue permits, certificated or licenses shall conform to the provisions of these Regulations and shall issue no permit, certificate or license for any use, building, structure or purpose which is in conflict with the provisions of these Regulations. Any permit, certificate or license issued in conflict with the provisions of these Regulations shall be deemed null and void.
2. Zoning Administrator:
a. Authority:
The Mayor, with the approval of the Village Council, shall appoint an administrative officer named the Zoning Administrator, as prescribed in the Ohio Revised Code, Section 713.11, and this office and/or person(s) designated by this section shall administer and enforce these Regulations.
b. Duties and Responsibilities:
It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to:
(1) Enforce the provisions of these Regulations.
(2) Interpret the Zoning Regulations text and Official Zoning District Map.
(3) Issue Zoning Compliance Certificates in accordance with these Regulations and maintain a complete record of all Zoning Compliance Certificates issued.
(4) Act upon all applications within ten (10) days of their date of filing. A Zoning Compliance Certificate or written notification and explanation of refusal shall be issued to the applicant within said ten (10) days. Failure to notify the applicant of such refusal within this period shall entitle the applicant to submit his/her request to the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(5) Advise the Planning Commission, the Board of Zoning Appeals and the Village Council of all matters pertaining to issues that they
81
need to act on and to provide all documents, maps and any other related information that the Zoning Administrator deems necessary or that the Planning Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals or Village Council Requests.
(6) Determine whether various uses of land within the area of the Village are in compliance with these Regulations. Where violations exist, the Zoning Administrator shall notify in writing the person(s) responsible, specify the exact nature of the violation and maintain a complete record of such notices.
(7) Maintain and keep permanent records required by these Regulations, including but not limited to the Official Zoning District Map, Zoning Certificates, inspections and all official zoning actions of the Village Council, Planning Commission and the Board of Zoning Appeals. Such records shall be made available for use by the Village Council, Planning Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals and the public.
3. Planning Commission:
a. Authority:
The Planning Commission shall be constituted and carry out duties and responsibilities as prescribed in the Ohio Revised Code, Chapter 713.
b. Duties and Responsibilities:
It shall be the duty of the Planning Commission to:
(1) Prepare the Zoning Regulations recommended for the Village of Minster at the request of the Village Council.
(2) Review and make recommendations of the proposed Zoning Regulations, including text, official Zoning District Map and all proposed zone changes, and then forward the zoning or rezoning changes along with the Planning Commission’s recommendation to the Village Council.
(3) Review development plans within the Planned Unit Development Districts (PRD, PMHP, PCD, and PID) and make recommendations regarding such plans to the Village Council.
(4) Employ or contract with such planning consultants and other assistants as the Planning commission deems necessary, within the limits of the funds appropriated by the Village Council for that purpose.
82
4. Board of Zoning Appeals (BZA):
a. Authority: The Board of Zoning Appeals shall be constituted and carry out its duties and responsibilities as prescribed in the Ohio Revised Code, Section 713.11.
The BZA shall consist of five (5) members, appointed by the Mayor and approved by the Village Council, for terms of five (5) years. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner for the unexpired term.
b. Duties and Responsibilities: It shall be the duty of the Board of Zoning Appeals to:
(1) Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Zoning Administrator in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of these Regulations.
(2) Authorize upon appeal by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, shape, topographic conditions, or other extraordinary situation or condition of a lot, a variance from strict application of the provisions of these Regulations for both zoning lots and sign regulations to relieve exceptional difficulties or undue hardship, provided said relief can be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and does not substantially impair the intent of these Regulations.
(3) Authorize the issuance of conditional use permits to petitioners who specifically meet the requirements for such permit listed in these Regulations.
(4) Upon appeal from a decision by the Zoning Administrator, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the power to decide any questions involving the interpretation of the Zoning Test or Map.
(5) The Board of Zoning Appeals may, in conformity with this section, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. Appeals from here go to a court of law.
(6) Adopt rules and regulations consistent with this Ordinance. Regular meetings of the BZA shall be held at such times as the BZA may determine, and shall be specified in the rules and regulations of the BZA. The BZA shall appoint a chairperson,
83
vice-chair person, and a secretary. Special meetings may be called by the chairperson or, in his absence, by the vice-chairperson. There shall be a fixed place of meeting and all meetings shall be open to the public.
The BZA shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing action of the BZA and vote of each member upon each questions, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of all its official actions, all of which shall be filed promptly in the office of the Clerk and may be called by the chairman or, in his absence, by the vice-chairperson. There shall be a fixed place of meetings and all meetings shall be open to the public. The presence of three (3) members of said BZA shall be necessary to reserve an order, requirement, decision, or determination of the Zoning Administrator or the Planning Commission. The BZA shall act by Resolution, and a copy of each Resolution duly adopted shall be filed in the office of the Mayor.
5. Village Council:
a. Authority: The Village Council shall carry out its duties and responsibilities relative to these Regulations as prescribed by the Ohio Revised Code, Section 713.12.
b. Duties and Responsibilities: It shall be the duty of the Village Council to:
(1) Approve a Zoning Administrator to administer and enforce the provisions of these Regulations.
(2) Approve the five (5) members of the Planning Commission.
(3) Act upon suggested amendments to the Zoning Regulations’ text or Official Zoning District Map following receipt of recommendations of the Planning Commission.
(4) Act upon suggested development plans for Planned Unit Development (PUD) Districts following receipt of recommendations of the Planning Commission.
SECTION B: ADMINISTRTIVE PROCEDURES
1. Zoning Compliance Certificate:
a. No person shall locate, erect, construct, reconstruct, enlarge, or structurally alter any building or structure within the Village of Minster without obtaining a Zoning Compliance Certificate. No Zoning Compliance Certificate shall be issued unless the plans for the proposed
84
building or structure fully comply with all the provisions of these Regulations.
b. Zoning Compliance Certificate (Change of Use): No change of use shall be made in any building or part thereof now or hereafter located, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, or structurally altered without a Zoning Compliance Certificate being issued by the Village Zoning Administrator. No Zoning Compliance Certificate shall be issued to make a change in use unless the changes are made in conformity with the provisions of these Zoning Regulations, or unless a variance or conditional use certificate has been granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
c. Application: Application for a Zoning Compliance Certificate shall be made in writing fourteen (14) days prior to approval to the Village Zoning Administrator. Each written application shall include the following:
(1) Two (2) copies of a scale drawing on a maximum sheet size of 11” x 14” showing the actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon or to be changed in its use, in whole or in part.
(2) The location of the lot, existing zoning and land use, including the immediately surrounding area.
(3) A site plan, which clearly depicts the location, size, and height of any building or structure to be erected or altered. The site plane should clearly designate the required setback lines for all structures.
(4) The existing or intended use of each building, structure, or use of land where no buildings are included.
(5) The number of families or dwelling units each building is designed to accommodate, if applicable.
(6) In every case where the lot is not provided or is not proposed to be provided with public water supply and/or the disposal of sanitary wastes by means of public sewers, the application shall be accompanied by a Certificate of Approval by the Health Officer of Auglaize County of the proposed method of water supply and/or disposal of sanitary wastes.
(7) The location and size of off-street parking areas and loading/unloading facilities, if applicable.
(8) Each site plan should provide the names of adjacent property owners and identify structures and setbacks on adjacent properties.
85
d. Non-Conforming Uses: Nothing in these Regulations shall prevent the continuance of non-conforming uses as heretofore authorized unless discontinuance is necessary for the safety of life or property.
e. Records: A record of all Zoning Compliance Certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the Village Clerk, and copies shall be furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building affected.
f. Time Limit: If a Zoning Compliance Certificate is issued for the purpose of constructing a new building or structure and such construction is not begun within a six (6) month time period, or such construction does not appear to have been substantially completed within twelve (12) month time period, then said Zoning Compliance Certificate shall be null and void.
g. The Zoning Compliance Certificate may consist of one or several of the following:
(1) A stamp being places upon the applicant’s drawings or correspondence, which depicts or describes the purposes or need for the certificate. The use of a stamp shall provide for indicating approval or the approval with conditions; a line for posting the date of approval; a line for the signature of the Village Administrator with the date of signature.
(3) A letter, dated and signed, issued by the Village Administrator on the Village’s letterhead indicating the Village’s approval or approval with conditions. The letter shall set out the nature of the applicant’s request, the date of approval and any conditions put forth by the Village.
h. Failure to Obtain a Zoning Compliance Certificate: Failure to obtain a Zoning Compliance Certificate shall be a punishable violation of this Zoning Code.
i. Construction and Use to be as Provided in Applications, Plans, and Permit: Zoning Compliance Certificates issues on the basis of plans and applications approved by the Zoning Administrator authorize only the use and arrangement, set forth in such approved plans and applications or amendments thereto, and no other use, arrangement, or construction. Use, arrangement, or construction contrary to that authorized shall be deemed a punishable violation of this Zoning Code.
86
j. Complaints Regarding Violations: Whenever a violation of this Zoning Code occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint (Exhibit “G”). Such complaint stating fully the causes and basis thereof shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall record properly such complaint, immediately investigate it, and take action thereon as provided by this Zoning Code.
k. Entry and Inspection of Property: The Zoning Administrator is authorized to make inspections of properties and structures in order to examine and survey the same, at any reasonable hour, for the purposes of enforcing the provisions of the Zoning Code. Prior to seeking entry to any property or structure for such examination or survey, the Zoning Administrator shall attempt to obtain the permission of the owner or occupant to inspect. If such permission is denied or cannot be obtained, the Zoning Administrator shall request the assistance of the Village Solicitor in securing a valid search warrant prior to entry.
l. Stop Work Order: Subsequent to his determination that work is being done contrary to this Zoning Code, the Zoning Administrator shall write a stop work order (Exhibit “E”) and post it on the premises involved. Removal of a stop work order, except by the order of the Zoning Administrator, shall constitute a punishable violation of this Zoning Code.
m. Zoning Compliance Certificate Revocation: The Zoning Administrator may issue a revocation notice (Exhibit “F) to revoke a permit or administrative approval, which was issued contrary to this Zoning Code or based upon false information or misrepresentation in this application.
n. Notice of Violation: Whenever the Zoning Administrator or the Office’s agent determines that there is a violation of any provision of this Zoning Code, a warning shall be issued and shall serve as a notice of violation (Exhibit “H”). Such order shall:
A) Be in writing.
B) Identify the violation.
C) Include a statement of the reason or reasons why it is being issued and refer to the sections of this Zoning Code that are being violated.
D) State the time by which the violation shall be corrected.
Service of notice of violation shall be as follows:
87
A) By personal delivery to the person or persons responsible, or by leaving the notice at the usual place of residence of the owner with a person of suitable age and discretion; or
B) By certified mail deposited in the United State Post Office addressed to the person or persons responsible at a last know address. If a certified mail envelope is returned with endorsements showing that the envelope is unclaimed, then service shall be sent by ordinary mail, and the mailing shall be evidenced by a certificate of mailing that shall be filed by the Zoning Administrator. Service shall be deemed complete when the fact of mailing is entered on record, provided that the ordinary mail envelope is not returned by the postal authorities with an endorsement showing failure of delivery; or
C) By posting a copy of the notice form in a conspicuous place on the premises found to be in violation.
2. Text Amendments and Changes of Zoning Districts:
a. Amendments or supplements to the Zoning Regulations may be initiated by motion of the Village Planning Commission, by the passage of a resolution by the Village Council or by the filing of an application by one (1) or more of the owners or lessees of property within the area proposed to be changed or affected by the proposed amendment or supplement with the Planning Commission. The Village Council shall favorably consider an application for a text amendment, whether to the Zoning Regulations Text or the Official Zoning District Map, only if the request for a change meets the following conditions:
(1) Manifest error in the original Zoning Regulations Text and/or designations on the Official Zoning District Map.
(2) Accordance with, or more appropriate conformance to, any existing Land Use Plans for the area under consideration.
(3) Substantial change in area conditions.
(4) Legitimate requirement for additional land area for the particular Zoning District.
b. Applications: All applications (Exhibit “I” and Exhibit “J”) filed by the owner(s) or lessees of the property within the area proposed to be changed or affected by the proposed amendment of supplement shall include the following:
88
(1) A description or statement of the present and proposed provisions of this Zoning Resolution or the proposed change of the district boundaries of the Official Zoning Map.
(2) A description by map of the property to be affected by the proposed change or amendment and a description in text of the property by legal metes and bounds.
(3) A statement of the proposed change or amendment to the general health, safety, aesthetics, and welfare of the public in terms of need or appropriateness of the change within the area by reason of changed or changing conditions and the relation to appropriate plans for the area.
(4) A list of the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of owners of property within, contiguous to and directly across the street from such area proposed to be rezoned. Such list is to be in accordance with the Auglaize County Auditor’s current tax list.
c. Planning Commission Action:
(1) Public Hearing: Upon the certification of such resolution by the Village Council, the adoption of such motion by the Planning Commission or the filing of such application for a proposed change or amendment of the text of this Zoning Resolution or the Official Zoning District Map, the Planning Commission and the Zoning Administrator may set a date for a public hearing within fourteen (14) days from the date of the resolution, motion, or application.
(2) Notice of Hearing: Notice setting forth the time and the place of such hearing and the nature of the proposed change or amendment shall be given by the Village Clerk for one (1) publication in one (1) or more newspapers of general circulation in Auglaize County at least fifteen (15) days before the date of such public hearing.
(3) If the proposed change or amendment intends to affect (rezone or redistrict) ten (10) or less parcels of land, as listed on the tax duplicate, written notice of the public hearing shall be mailed by the Planning Commission, by the first class mail, at least twenty (20) days before the date of the public hearing to all owners of property within, contiguous to and directly across the street from such area affected by the proposed change or amendment. Such notice is to be mailed to the address of such owners appearing on the County Auditor’s current tax list or the County Treasurers’ mailing list.
89
(4) Notice to Village Planning Commission: One (1) copy of the proposed change or amendment, together with text and map pertaining thereto, shall be forwarded to the Village Planning Commission within five (5) days from the date of the resolution, motion, or application by the Zoning Administrator.
(5) Staff Review: The Zoning Administrator, together with the Village’s designated engineer, the County Board of Health, and other appropriate agencies or bodies, may present to the Village Planning Commission a written report and map(s), where appropriate, including all apparent facts, implication, and conclusions concerning the proposed change or amendment.
(6) Action by the Village Planning Commission: The Village Planning Commission shall consider the proposed change or amendment at the scheduled public hearing, and at such other meetings deemed necessary, and make formal recommendations concerning the approval, denial, or some modification thereof to be considered by the Village Council.
(7) Recommendations: Within ten (10) days after the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall submit to the Village Council a recommendation of approval, denial, or some modification of the proposed change or amendment, including a statement of reasons for such recommendation, together with such resolution or application, the text, and map pertaining thereto.
d. Village Council Action:
(1) Action by the Village Council: Upon receipt of such recommendation concerning a change or amendment of the Official Zoning District Map or Regulations, the Village Council shall, by resolution, set a time for public hearing of the proposed change or amendment.
(2) Hearing Date: The date for public hearing shall be set not more than thirty (30) days from the date of resolution of Council fixing the time for such hearing and after the receipt of the recommendation of the Village of Minster Planning Commission.
(3) Notice of Hearing: Upon the adoption of a resolution setting a date for public hearing, the Clerk of the Village of Minster shall issue a public notice of the time and place of such hearing, together with a summary of the proposed change or amendment in either the Zoning Regulations or the Official Zoning District Map to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in Auglaize
90
County two (2) times, the date of publication to be at least thirty (30) days before the date of such hearing.
(4) Notification: In addition thereto, if the proposed amendment or change in the Zoning Regulations or the Official Zoning District Map shall intend to rezone or redistrict ten (10) or less parcels of land as shown and listed upon the tax duplicate, the Village Clerk shall cause a written notice of such hearing to be mailed to the owners of such property within, contiguous to and directly across the street from the parcel or parcels intended to rezoned or redistricted, to the owners of such parcels and to the addresses of such owners then appearing on the Auglaize County Auditor’s or Auglaize County Treasurer’s current tax list, unless the legislative authority shall, as part of the resolution to fix the time and place, designate another public record from which to secure such addresses. The failure of delivery of such notice shall not invalidate any subsequent ordinance, measure, or regulation enacted as a result thereof.
In addition to such notice, the Village Clerk shall cause to be prepared and placed on file in the Village offices at least fifteen (15) days prior to such public hearing a copy of any ordinance proposed to be enacted in the event the recommendation of the Planning Commission was followed, together with a copy of any map or plans referred to in such ordinance or included as a part of the application for such redistricting or rezoning, as submitted by any applicant and recommended by the Planning Commission. These documents shall be open for public inspection, and copies thereof may be obtained upon payment to the Village of a fee of five cents ($0.05) per page or the actual costs incurred by the Village for reproducing larger sheets, maps, drawing, or plans.
(5) Public Hearing: The public hearing mentioned in the foregoing section shall be held at such a place within the Village of Minster as shall be designated by the Village Council in its resolution setting the hearing date.
Council may set a common hour for all hearings when more than one such hearing is scheduled on the same date, and in such event, applications shall be heard in their numerical sequence as set forth in the notice of hearing.
Within thirty (30) days after the public hearing, the Village Council shall either adopt or deny the recommendation of the Planning Commission in accordance with the provisions of the Ohio Revised Code, Section 713.12.
91
If the Planning Commission’s recommendation was to disapprove the proposed change or amendment, redistricting or rezoning, the Village Council shall have at least three-fourths (3/4) approval of the proposed change or amendment, redistricting or rezoning to overrule such disapproval.
e. Date of Effect: Any ordinance changing or amending the Zoning Regulations or the Official Zoning District Map of the Village of Minster, or redistricting or rezoning any portion of land within the Village of Minster, shall become effective fifteen (15) days from the date of its adoption by the Village Council during which time the same shall be posted or published as required by law with respect to posting and publishing ordinances; unless within such fifteen (15) day period a petition is presented to the Village Council requesting that such change or amendment, redistrict, or rezoning be submitted to a referendum and such petition complies with the Ohio Revised Code respecting referendum petitions.
3. Variance:
a. On a particular property extraordinary circumstances may exist making a strict enforcement of the applicable lot size, bulk, and parking requirements of the Zoning Regulations unreasonable, and; therefore, the procedure for variance from these requirement is to provide the flexibility necessary to adapt to changed or unusual conditions, both foreseen and unforeseen, under circumstances which do not ordinarily involve a change of the primary use of the land or structure permitted. No variance shall be granted unless the Board of Zoning Appeals finds that all of the following conditions exist:
(1) The special circumstances applying to the building or land in question are peculiar to such lot or property and do not result from the actions of the applicant and do not apply generally to other land or buildings in the vicinity.
(2) That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by these Zoning Regulations to other lands or structures in the same Zoning District.
(3) That granting the variance will not adversely affect the health or safety of persons residing or working in the vicinity of the proposed development is materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to private property or public improvements in the vicinity.
92
b. Application: Two (2) copies of a provided application (Exhibit “D”) accompanied by a copy of the denied Zoning Compliance Certificate and a statement of the reason for denial shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator not more than twenty (20) days from the date such denial of the Zoning Compliance Certificate is issued. The application shall include the following:
(1) The nature of the variance, including the specific provisions of the Zoning Regulations upon which the variance is requested.
(2) A legal description of the property.
(3) A statement of the special circumstances or conditions applying to the land or structure and not applying generally throughout the Zoning District.
(4) A statement showing that the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant.
(5) A statement showing that the granting of the application is necessary to the preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights.
(6) Three (3) copies of a plot plan drawn to an appropriate scale showing the following:
a. The boundaries and dimensions of the lot.
b. The nature of the special conditions or
circumstances giving rise to the application for approval.
c. The proposed use of all parts of the lot and structures, including access ways, walks, off-street parking and loading spaces, and landscaping.
d. The relationship of the requested variance to the lot size, bulk, and parking requirements.
e. The use of land and location of structures on adjacent property.
(7) Such other information regarding the application for appeal as may be pertinent or required for appropriate action by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
93
c. Board of Zoning Appeals’ Action: The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hold a public hearing and either approve or deny the application for a variance based on the criteria stated in these Regulations. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall submit a written record of the reasons for its action to the applicant upon request.
d. Time Limit: The Zoning Administrator shall issue a Zoning Compliance Certificate to applicants who have approval from the Board of Zoning Appeals for their applications within one (1) year of the date of the final approval.
e. Zoning Compliance Certificate: A Zoning Certificate may be obtained only for the development in accordance with approved plot plan.
4. Conditional Use Permit:
a. A conditional use permit shall be issued when a use specifically mentioned in these Regulations, in Districts that specifically allow that use and only when such use is in compliance with these Regulations required of it in Chapter Nine, Section D of these Regulations, as determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
b. All uses not specifically mentioned as permitted or conditional uses in these Regulations shall be determined conditional uses in these Regulations. Uses shall be allowed in Zoning Districts that are determined appropriate by the Board of Zoning Appeals, with those conditions placed on the use that are necessary to protect the general health, safety, welfare, and aesthetics of the Village of Minster, as determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
c. Application: Two (2) copies of a provided application (Exhibit “B”) form shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator. The application shall include the following:
1. A legal description of the property.
2. The proposed used of the property.
3. A statement of the necessity or desirability of the proposed use to the neighborhood or community.
4. A statement of the relationship of the proposed use to adjacent property and land use.
5. Three (3) copies of a plot plan, drawn to an appropriate scale, clearly showing the following:
94
a. The boundaries and dimensions of the lot.
b. The size and location of existing and proposed structures.
c. The proposed use of all parts of the lot and structures, including access walks, off-street parking and loading spaces, and landscaping.
d. Such other information regarding the property, proposed use, or surrounding area as may be pertinent to the application as required for appropriate action by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
d. Board of Zoning Appeals Action: The Board of Zoning Appeals may hold a public hearing and either approve, modify, or deny the application for a conditional use based on the criteria stated in these Regulations. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall submit a written record of the reasons for its actions to the applicant upon request.
e. Time Limit: The Zoning Administrator shall issued a Zoning Compliance Certificate to applicants who have approval from the Board of Zoning Appeals for their application only within one (1) year of the date of final approval.
f. Zoning Compliance Certificate: A Zoning Compliance Certificate may be obtained only for development in accordance with the approved plot plan.
5. Planned Unit Development District Approval:
A Planned Unit Development District shall be approved only through the process specifically stated in Chapter Five of these Regulations and only when it is keeping with the intent of these Regulations and when such approval will not endanger the general health, welfare and aesthetics of the Village of Minster, as determine by the Planning Commission and the Village Council.
6. Interpretation of Text and Map:
Upon appeal from a decision by the Zoning Administrator, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the power to decide any questions involving the interpretation of the Zoning Text or Official Zoning District Map as set forth in these Regulations.
Decision of the Board: In exercising the above-mentioned powers, the Board of Zoning Appeals may in conformity with these Regulations, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken.
95
Public Information: All communications to members of the Board of Zoning Appeals, written or oral, shall be reduced to writing pertaining to any matter before the Board of Zoning Appeals and shall be made part of the record. The record of the Board of Zoning Appeals’ proceeding in any matter shall be kept on file in the office of the Village Clerk and available for inspection by the public.
Record: For any hearing at which the applicant desires a record to be made, the applicant shall provide a court reporter to make such record at the applicant’s expense. In all hearings wherein no request has been made for a record, the minutes shall serve as the transcript of such hearing.
7. Appeal of Administrative Decisions:
a. Administrative Appeals:
Appeals to the Board of Zoning Appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer of the Village affected by any decision of the Zoning Administrator.
b. Notice of Appeal:
Such appeal shall be taken within twenty (20) days after the decision by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the Board of Zoning Appeals a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall transmit to the Board of Zoning Appeals all the papers constituting the record upon which the action was taken.
8. Temporary Zoning Certificates:
All of the uses requiring a temporary zoning certificate as directed in Chapter Nine, Section F, shall be conducted and all merchandise displayed in an orderly and safe manner, free from injurious or offensive effects to the occupants of adjacent premises and to the public in general, and shall be effectively screened from adjoining residential property where required by the Zoning Administrator.
Each application for a Temporary Zoning Certificate (Exhibit “K”) shall contain the following information:
a. Name, address and telephone number of the applicant
b. A description of the property where the temporary use is to occur, including the location of the property and existing and/or proposed uses.
c. A statement explaining the need for the temporary use.
d. The date on which the temporary use will commence and the anticipated duration of such use.
96
e. Such other information as may be required by the Zoning Administrator.
The Zoning Administrator shall either approve or disapprove such application within fourteen (14) days of receipt and shall notify the applicant of the decision. In the event that the application is disapproved, the Zoning Administrator shall explain in writing the reasons for disapproval.
Failure to obtain a Temporary Zoning Certificate prior to the location, erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, use or conduct of any function or operation herein permitted as a temporary use shall be deemed a violation of these Regulations and punishable according to these Regulations.
9. Sign Permits:
All signs erected within the corporate limits, except those specifically excluded in Chapter Seven, shall require a permit before being erected.
a. Applications for sign permits (Exhibit “C”) shall contain the following information:
1. The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and owner of the premises.
2. The location of the building, structure or lot to which or upon which the sign or other advertising structure is to be attached or erected.
3. The position of the sign or other advertising structure in relation to nearby buildings or structures and a site plan for ground signs.
4. Two scale drawings including: graphics, colors, plans and specifications, the method of construction and attachment to the building or the method of installation in the ground and the height of in-ground signs, using a scale of one (1) inch equaling one (1) foot or some other standard architectural scale; scale drawings should be prepared on paper no greater than eleven by fourteen (11 x 14) inches and no less than eight-and-a-half by eleven (8 ½ x 11) inches in dimensions.
5. The name of the person erecting the structure.
6. Written consent of the owner of the building, structure or land to which or on which the structure is to be erected.
7. The product, use or service to be advertised.
97
8. Such other information as the Zoning Administrator shall require to show full compliance with this and all other ordinances of the Village.
b. Applications for sign permits shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator or a designee.
c. The Zoning Administrator or his designee shall have a minimum of fourteen (14) days and a maximum of thirty (30) days upon receipt of the completed application to approve or disapprove requests for permanent signs.
SECTION C: ENFORCEMENT
No person shall erect, construct, alter, repair or maintain any building or structure or use any land in violation of these Regulations pursuant to Sections 713.06 to 713.12, inclusive, of the Ohio Revised Code or Section 3 or Article XVII, Ohio Constitution. In the event of any such violation, or imminent threat thereof, the Village of Minster, or the owner of an contiguous or neighboring property who would be especially damaged by such violation, in addition to any other remedies provided by law, may institute a suit for injunction to prevent or terminate such violations (Ohio Revised Code, Section 713.13).
1. Assessment of Fees:
The Zoning Administrator shall collect fees, according to the following schedule of fees, from all applicants requesting the following:
a. Zoning Compliance Certificates $25.00
b. Text Amendments or Changes of Zoning Districts $50.00
c. Variances $25.00
d. Conditional Use Permits $25.00
e. Planned Unit Development Review $100.00
f. Appeal Decisions $50.00
g. Temporary Certificates $25.00
h. Permanent Sign Permits $25.00
i. Temporary Sign Permits $25.00
Except where the applicant is requesting action on property that has been annexed to the Village not more than sixty (60) days previous to the date of the applicant’s request, the Zoning Administrator may waive the above-mentioned fee.
2. Enforcement:
These Regulations shall be enforced by the Zoning Administrator, or his designee as designated by the Village Council.
3. Violation:
In case any building is, or is proposed to be located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, changed, maintained or used, or any land is proposed to
98
be used in violation of these Regulations or any amendment or supplement thereto, the Village Council, the Village Solicitor, the Zoning Administrator or any adjacent or neighboring property owner who would be specifically damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies provided by law, may institute injunction, mandamus, abatement or any other appropriate action, actions or proceedings by notice in writing to be delivered upon said premises to the owner of the premises, and by any other required notice, to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove such unlawful location, erection, construction, reconstruction, enlargement, change, maintenance, or use.
4. Penalty for Violation:
Any person or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this Ordinance or fail to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall build or alter any building in violation of any detailed statement or plan submitted and approved there under, shall for each and every violation or non-compliance be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500) or imprisoned for not to exceed thirty (30) days, or both, and each day such violation shall be permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. The owner or owners of any building or premises or part thereof where anything in violation of this Ordinance shall be placed or shall exist, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, person or corporation employed in connection therewith and who may have assisted in the commission of any violation, shall be guilty of a separate offense and upon conviction thereof shall be imprisoned as herein provided.
5. Revocation of Zoning Certificate:
Any Zoning Certificate issued upon a false statement shall be void, and such false statement shall be deemed a violation of these Regulations. Zoning certificates issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the Zoning Administrator authorize only the use and arrangement set forth in such approved plans and applications, and construction at variance with that use authorized shall be deemed a violation of these Regulations. In such a case, the Zoning Certificate shall be revoked by notice in writing to be delivered to the holder of the void certificate upon the premises concerned. Any person who shall proceed thereafter with such work or use without having obtained a new Zoning Certificate, in accordance with these Regulations, shall be deemed guilty of a separate violation thereof. Violations shall be punishable as provided in these Regulations.
99
CHAPTER ELEVEN: DEFINITIONS:
Adult Entertainment Facility: A facility with a business defined as follows:
a. Adult Book Store, Adult Novelty Store, Adult Video Store means a commercial establishment which devotes a significant portion of its interior business or advertising (25% or more of its retail floor space) to the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, or any one or more of the following:
(1) Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other visual representations which are characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” as defined herein.
(2) Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for sadomasochistic use or abuse.
b. Adult Cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served, which regularly features persons who appear nude or semi-nude; live performance which are characterized by the exposure of “specified anatomical area” or by “specific sexual activities”, or films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other pornographic reproductions which are characterized by the exposure of “specified anatomical area” or by “specified sexual activities”.
c. Adult Motel means a motel, hotel or similar commercial establishment which offers public accommodation, for any form or consideration, which provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other pornographic reproductions which are characterized by the exposure of “specified anatomical area” or by “specified sexual activities”.
d. Adult Motion Picture Theater means a commercial establishment where films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other similar photographic reproductions which are characterized by the exposure of “specified anatomical area” or by “specified sexual activities” are shown for any form of consideration.
e. Adult Theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which for any form of consideration, regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances
100
which are characterized by the exposure of “specified anatomical areas” or by “specified sexual activities”.
f. Escort Agency means a person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes for any form of consideration.
g. Massage Parlor means any place where, for any form of consideration, massage, alcohol rub, administration of fomentations, electric or magnetic treatments, or any other treatment manipulation of the human body which occurs as part of or in connection with “specified sexual activities”, or where any person providing such treatment, manipulations, or service related thereto, exposes his or her “specified anatomical areas”. This definition shall not include the practice of massage in any licensed hospital, not by any licensed hospital, licensed physician, chiropractor, or physician, osteopath; nor by any trainers for amateur, semiprofessional or professional athlete or athletic team or school athletic program not by any License Massage Therapist licensed in the State of Ohio pursuant to ORC 4731.15.
h. Nude Model Studio means any place where a person, who regularly appears in a state of nudity or displays “specified anatomical areas” is provided for any form of consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted.
i. Sexual Encounter Establishment means a commercial establishment that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration, a place where people may congregate, associate, or consort for the purpose of “sexually specified activities” or the exposure of “specified anatomical areas” or activities where one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity. This definition shall not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychiatrist, or similar professional persons licensed by the state engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy.
Accessory Use: A use, object, or structure constructed or installed on, above, or below the surface of a parcel, which is located on the same lot as a principal use, object, or structure, and which is subordinate to or serves the principal use, object, or structure, is subordinate in the area to the principal use, object, or structure, and is customarily incidental to the principal use, object, or structure. Among other things, “accessory use” includes anything of a subordinate nature attached to or not attached to a principal structure or use, such as fences, antennas, walls, sheds, detached garages, decks, poles, patios, carports if not attached. Except as otherwise required in this Zoning Code an “accessory use” shall be a permitted use.
Aesthetics: The outward visual appearance that is pleasing and sensitive to the senses.
101
Alterations, Structurally: Any change in the supporting members of the building, such as walls, floors, columns, beams, or girders.
Apartment: Two (2) or more rooms, designed for, arranged for, intended for or occupied as a residence by one family.
Apartment House: Any building housing three (3) or more apartment units providing said units are the principal use of the building.
Automobile Service and Repair: Any building used for the supply of gasoline, oil or other fuel for motor vehicle propulsion, which can include space and facilities for washing, polishing, greasing, repairing and servicing motor vehicles.
Basement: A story all or partly underground, but having at least one-half or its height below the average level of the adjoining ground. (Exhibit “L”).
Beginning of Construction: “Beginning of Construction” means the utilization of labor, equipment, and materials for the purpose of erecting or altering a structure.
Billboard: Any structure or portion thereof on which lettered, figured or pictorial matter is displayed for advertising purposes of goods or services not offered on the premises, and other than those signs specifically mentioned.
Board: The Board of Zoning Appeals of the Village of Minster, Ohio.
Boarding House, Rooming House, Lodging House or Dormitory: A building or part thereof, other than a hotel or restaurant, where meals and or lodging are provided for compensation for three or more persons and where no cooking or dining facilities are provided in individual rooms.
Buffer yards: A landscaped area adjoining or surrounding a land use and unoccupied in its entirety by any building or structure.
Building: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, used or intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or property.
Building, Height of: The vertical distance from the average contact with ground level at the front wall of the building to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the ridge for gable, hip or gambrel roofs.
Building; Principal: A building in which conducted is the main or principal use of the lot on which such building is situated. Where a substantial part of the wall of an accessory building is a part of the wall of the principal building, or where an accessory building is attached to the main building in a substantial manner, as by a roof, such accessory building shall be counted as a part of the principal building. (Exhibit “M”).
102
Conditional Use: A use that is permitted, but only by application to the Board in each specific instance, and after determination by the Board that all regulations and standards of this Zoning Code applying to the specific use in the particular location will be met, along with such additional conditions or safeguards as the Board may prescribe in the specific case and circumstances, in order to prevent harm or injury to adjacent uses and the neighborhood, and/or in order to improve the public health, safety, morals, convenience, order prosperity, and general welfare.
Condominium: A building or group of buildings in which units are individually owned, but the structure, common areas, and facilities are owned on a proportional, undivided basis by all of the owners.
Coverage: The percentage of the lot area covered by any building or part thereof.
Day Care Service – Type A: Seven to twelve children (or four to twelve children, if four children are under two years of age) cared for in the provider’s personal residence. The provider’s own children under six years of age must be included in the total count. Type A homes must be licensed by the Ohio Department of Job and Family Services.
Disabled Vehicle: A motor vehicle that, due to mechanical failure or other reason, is temporarily not in operable condition.
District: A portion of the incorporated area of the Village within which certain regulations and requirements or various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this Zoning Code.
Dwelling: Any building or portion thereof designed or used as the residence of one or more persons, but not including a tent, cabin, trailer or trailer coach, mobile home, tree house or a room in a hotel or motel.
Dwelling, Multi-Family: A dwelling consisting of three or more dwelling units including condominiums with varying arrangements of entrances and party walls.
Dwelling, Single-Family: A dwelling consisting of a single dwelling unit only, separated from other dwelling units by open space.
Dwelling, Two-Family: A dwelling consisting of two dwelling units which may be either attached side by side or one above the other, and each unit having a separate or combined entrance or entrances.
Dwelling, Accessory: A second dwelling on a lot, located to the rear of the principal building.
Dwelling Unit: One room or a suite of two or more rooms designed for or used by one family for living and sleeping purposes and having only one kitchen or kitchenette.
103
Easement: Authorization by a property owner for the use by another, and for a specified purpose, of any designated part of his property.
Erected: Includes the terms built or constructed, altered, or reconstructed. “Erected” also includes moving of a building or structure onto a lot or any physical operations on the premises, which are required for construction. Excavation, fill drainage, and the like shall be considered an operation of erection.
Family: A person living alone, or two or more persons living together as a single housekeeping unit, in a dwelling unit, as distinguished from a group occupying in a boarding house, lodging house, dormitory, motel and hotel.
Fence: Any structure, other than part of a building, of sufficient strength and dimension to prevent straying from within or intrusion from without.
Floor Area of a Residential Building: The sum of the gross horizontal area of all floors of a residential building, excluding garages, basement floor areas, roofed porches, and roofed terraces. All dimensions shall be measured between exterior faces of walls.
Floor Area of a Non-Residential Building: (to be used in calculating parking requirements). The floor area of the specified use excluding stairs, washrooms, elevator shafts, maintenance shafts and rooms, storage spaces, display windows, fitting rooms, and similar areas.
Garage, Private: A detached accessory building or a portion of the principal building used only for the storage of vehicles and incidental personal property.
Garage, Public: A building or portion thereof, other than a private garage or filing station, used for equipping, servicing, repairing, hiring, selling or storing vehicles, or similar equipment.
Gasoline Service Station: See Automobile Service Repair.
Group Home: A residential facility that provides residential services to individuals who are mentally retarded, developmentally disabled, physically handicapped, who cannot otherwise care for themselves or who are convalescing or undergoing rehabilitation and/or treatment. These individuals are provided services to meet their individual needs. They must not have been previously convicted of a felony or required institutional care or treatment. This category is licensed by and/or has accountability to a governmental agency for the clientele served. This category does not include hospitals, as defined herein, or facilities that administer treatment as their primary function to inpatients, outpatients or on a day-care basis.
Home Occupation: An accessory use which is an activity, profession, occupation, service, craft, or revenue-enhancing hobby which is clearly incidental and subordinate to the use of the premises as a dwelling, and is conducted entirely within the dwelling unit,
104
or elsewhere on the premises by a Conditional Use Permit, without any significant adverse effect upon the surrounding neighborhood and which conforms to all the regulations of Chapter Nine, Section C.
Hospital: An establishment for the medical, surgical or psychiatric care of bed patients for a continuous period longer than twenty-four (24) hours each day for emergency care, has a minimum of ten (10) patient beds and an average of two thousand (2,000) patient days per annum and has on duty a registered nurse twenty-four (24) hours each day.
Hotel: A building occupied primarily as the temporary abiding place of individuals who lodged with or without meals, and in which there are more than twelve (12) sleeping rooms or apartments.
Industry, Light: An industrial establishment that provides as its primary activity space for the processing, assembling, or manufacturing of goods and materials which have a minimum impact upon the surrounding environment in areas that are suitable; activities that can be operated in a clean and quiet manner. Further, it is anticipated that development, which will occur in a light industrial district, will be in an industrial park-like atmosphere.
Industry, Heavy: Industrial and other high intensity uses that by virtue of their external effects such as noise, glare, fumes, smoke, dust, odor, truck and/or rail traffic should be isolated from residential uses.
Inoperable Vehicle: A motor vehicle that, due to mechanical failure, structural deterioration or other reason, is not in operable condition.
Junk Yard: A place where waste, discarded or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, baled, packed, disassembled or handled, including auto wrecking yards, house wrecking yards, used lumber yards and places or yards for storage of salvaged house wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment; but not including such places where such uses are conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building, and not including pawn shops and establishments for the sale, purchase or storage of used furniture and household equipment, used cars in operable condition, or salvaged material incidental to manufacturing operations.
Loading Space: A loading space is an off-street space on the same lot with a building or group of buildings, used for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials.
Lot: A piece, parcel or tract of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal building or a group of such buildings and accessory buildings or utilized for a principal use and uses accessory thereto, together with such open spaces as required by this Ordinance, and having frontage on a public street and may consist of a single lot of record.
105
Lot Coverage: The percentage of a lot which, when viewed directly from above, would be covered by a structure or structures including accessory buildings or any part thereof, excluding projecting roof eaves.
Lot Corner: A lot at the juncture of and fronting on two or more intersecting streets.
Lot Area: The computed area contained within the lot lines.
Lot Depth: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
Lot Lines (Exhibit “M”):
A) Front: A street right-of-way forming the boundary of a lot.
B) Rear: The lot line that is most distant from, and is, or is most parallel with, the front lot line.
C) Lot Line, Side: Any lot other than a front or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot form a street is called a side street lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is called an interior side lot line.
Lot Measurements: A lot shall measure as follows:
A) Depth: The distance between the midpoints of straight lines connecting the foremost points of the side lot lines in front and the rearmost points of the side lot lines in the rear.
B) Width: The distance between straight lines connecting front and rear lot lines at each side of the lot, measured at the front building setback line.
Lot, Minimum Area of: The total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot that is computed exclusive of any portion of the right-of-way any public or private street.
Lot of Record: A lot that is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the County Recorder, or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded.
Lot Types (Exhibit “N”): Terminology used in this Zoning Code with reference to corner lots, interior lots, and through lots as follows:
A) Corner Lot: A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets.
B) Interior Lot: A lot with only one front yard on a street.
106
C) Through Lot: A lot other than a corner lot with a front yard on more than one street. Through lots abutting two streets may be referred to as double frontage lots.
Mobile Home: Any non-self-propelled vehicle so designed for transportation after fabrication on streets, highways, land, air or water, and arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling unit complete and ready for occupancy after location on the site whether by wheels, jacks, or permanent foundations, and connection to utilities and the like. Not including camp or travel trailers.
Modular Housing: An assembly of materials or products comprising all or part of a total residential structure that, when constructed, is self-sufficient, or substantially self-sufficient, containing plumbing, wiring and heating at the point of manufacture, and which when installed, constitutes a dwelling unit, except for necessary on-site preparations for its placement.
Motel or Tourist Court: A building, or group of buildings, compromising individual sleeping or living units for the accommodation of transient guests, not containing individual cooking or kitchen facilities.
Non-Conforming Use: A building, structure or premises legally existing or used at the time of adoption of this Ordinance, and which does not conform with the use regulations prescribed by this Ordinance for the district in which located.
Nudity or State of Nudity: The showing, representation, or depiction of human male or female genitals, pubic areas, or buttocks with less than a full, opaque covering; or of a female breast with less than a full, opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top of the nipple, or of covered male genitals in a discernible turgid state.
Off-Street Parking: The provision of parking facilities for a specified use, to be provided on the same lot or lots as the use they are intended to serve, and not on any public street or public right-of-way.
Open Space: That part of a lot, including courts or yards, which is open and unobstructed by structures from its lowest level to the sky, accessible to all tenants upon the lot.
Opaque: Not allowing visibility through (e.g., a dense, compact row of vegetation).
Parking Lot: An area providing vehicular parking spaces along with adequate drives and aisles, for maneuvering, so as to provide access for entrances and exit for the parking of more than five vehicles.
Parking Space: The area required for parking one automobile, which in this Ordinance is held to be an area not less than nine (9) feet wide and nineteen (19) feet long, either within a structure or in the open. For commercial and industrial uses, space shall be computed exclusive of driveways or access drives.
107
Preexisting Use: An existing use of the type listed as a special use in the zoning district that was lawfully established on the effective date of this Zoning Code.
Principal Use: The primary or predominant use of any land or improvement on it.
Protected Use: Uses listed and defined as the following : 1) Religious Institution is any church or synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities; 2) School is any public or private education facility, including but not limited to child day care facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, primary schools, vocational schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior colleges, and universities; 3) Recreational areas is any park, golf course, swimming pool, walking trail, bike path, or commercial establishment where its primary business is recreation.
Reconstructed: Any change, addition, or modification in construction or type of occupancy; any change in the structural members of a building, such as walls or partitions, columns, beams, or girders; the consummated act of which may be referred to herein as “altered”.
Recreational Vehicles: As used in these Regulations, these are defined as and shall include the following: 1) a “travel trailer” is a vehicular portable structure built on chassis, designed to be used as temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation uses, permanently identified “travel trailer” by the manufacturer; 2) a “pick-up camper” is a structure designed primarily to be mounted on a pick-up chassis and with sufficient equipment to render it suitable for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation use; 3) a “motorized home” is a portable dwelling designed and constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle; 4) a “fold-tent trailer” is a canvas-folding structure, mounted on wheels and designed for travel and vacation use; and 5) “boats” and “boat trailers” shall include boats, floats and rafts, plus the normal equipment to transport the same on the highway.
Right-of-Way: A strip of land taken or dedicated for use as a public way. In addition to the roadway, it normally incorporates the curbs, lawn strips, sidewalks, lighting and drainage facilities and may include special separation, landscaped areas, viaducts and bridges, unless otherwise noted. East/West street right-of-ways- 50 feet; North/South street right-of-ways- 66 feet.
Ultimate Right-of-Way: The maximum right-of-way planned or anticipated to be needed for highway and roadway improvements. The ultimate right-of-way width shall be published in a locally adopted Thoroughfare Plan; Local, County, or State Transportation Improvement Program (T.I.P.); or the Local or County Engineer’s published Engineering Standards for the Functional Classification of Roadways.
108
Screening: The placement of landscaping or fencing on a lot in a manner to reduce any negative effects resulting from the location or two or more dissimilar uses next to one another.
Setback Line: A line established by the Zoning Code, generally parallel with and measured from the lot line, defining the limits of a yard in which no portion of any principal structure, other than accessory building, may be located except as may be provided in said Zoning Code.
Sign: A name, identification, description, display, or illustration that is affixed, painted, or represented, directly or indirectly, upon a building structure, parcel, or lot and which directs attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization, or business.
Site Triangle: The triangular area of a corner lot bound by the property lines and a line connecting the two points on the property lines twenty (20) feet from the intersection of the property lines.
Specified Anatomical Areas: Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or human male genitals in a discernable turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
Specified Sexual Activities: 1) The fondling or other intentional touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; or 2) Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; or 3) Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 4) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
Story: The portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. (Exhibit “L”)
Structure: Anything constructed or a moveable structure not on wheels, the use of which his located within a Zoning District and is which is located on the ground or attached to something having permanent location on the ground.
Swimming Pool: A structure constructed or placed below ground or above ground, which contains water in excess of 18 inches in depth and is suitable or utilized for swimming or wading.
Temporary Use of Building: The temporary use of land or a building permitted by the Zoning Inspector during periods of construction, or for special events.
109
110
Tourist Home: A building or part thereof, other than a hotel, boarding house, lodging hours or motel, where lodging is provided by a resident family in its home for compensation, mainly for transients.
Tourist Court: See Motel.
Use: The purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed, or intended, or for which land or building is or may be occupied or maintained.
Variance: A modification of the strict terms of this Zoning Code where such modification will not be contrary to the public interest and where owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the action of the applicant, a literal enforcement of this Zoning Code which would result in unnecessary and undue hardship.
Yard: An open space on the same lot with a main building, unoccupied, and unobstructed by structures from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in this Zoning Code.
A) Front Yard: An open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum permitted horizontal distance between the front lot line and the nearest point of the main building. For corner lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered Front Yard.
B) Rear Yard: An open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum permitted horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the nearest point of the main building
C) Side Yard: An open space between a main building and the side lot line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard, the width of which is the horizontal distance from the nearest point of the side lot line to the nearest point of the main building.
Zone: Zone means the same as district.
Zoning Administrator: The person authorized to issue building and zoning permits and to enforce the zoning code of the Village of Minster, Ohio, as designated by the Mayor.
Zoning Compliance Certificate: A permit issued by the Zoning Administrator for the construction of any building or structure. 
 
 
 




 


