Table of Contents
Chapters 1 & 2...................... Enactment Clause & Title
Chapter 3.............................. Districts & Zoning Map
Chapter 4.............................. "A" Agricultural District
Chapter 5.............................. "R-1" Residence District
Chapter 6.............................. "R-2" Residence District
Chapter 7.............................. "R-3" Residence District
Chapter 8.............................. Reserved for Future Use
Chapter 9.............................. "O-1" Professional Office District
Chapter 10............................. "B-1" Neighborhood Business District
Chapter 11............................. "B-2" General Business District
Chapter 12............................. "I" Planned Industrial Park
Chapter 13............................. "T" Mobile Home Park District
Chapter 14............................. "H" Resort District
Chapter 15............................. "R-PUD" Residential Planned Unit Development
Chapter 16............................. "MU" Mixed Use, Institutional District
Chapter 17............................. SR 28 Urban Village PUD
Chapter 18............................. Reserved for Future Use
Chapter 19............................. Planned Business Development Overlay District
Chapter 20............................. Sexually Oriented Businesses
Chapter 21............................. Temporary Use
Chapter 22............................. Wireless Communications Tower
Chapter 23............................. Off Street Parking and Loading Regulations
Chapter 24............................. Signs
Chapter 25............................. General Provisions
Chapter 26............................. Miamiville Overlay District
Chapter 27............................. Site Plan Review
Chapter 28............................. Definitions
Chapter 29............................. Township Board of Zoning Appeals
Chapter 30............................. Enforcement
Chapter 31............................. Boundaries and Districts
Chapter 32............................. Interpretation, Purpose and Conflict
Chapter 33............................. Amendments
Chapter 34............................. Repeal
Chapter 35............................. Applicable Provisions
Chapter 36............................. Validity
Chapter 37............................. When Effective
MIAMI TOWNSHIP ZONING RESOLUTION
1-1
ZONING RESOLUTION FOR THE UNINCORPORATED TERRITORY OF
MIAMI TOWNSHIP, CLERMONT COUNTY, OHIO
A RESOLUTION, for the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, morals,
comfort and general welfare; to conserve and protect property and property values; to
secure the most appropriate use of land; and to facilitate adequate, but economical
provisions of public improvements, all in accordance with a comprehensive plan, the
Board of Trustees of this Township find it necessary and advisable to regulate the
location, size and use of buildings and other structures; percentages of lot area which may
be occupied; setback building lines; size of yards, courts, and other open spaces; and the
use of land for trade, industry, residence, recreation or other purposes and for such
purposes divides the unincorporated area of the Township into districts or zones.
BE IT RESOLVED BY THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF MIAMI TOWNSHIP,
CLERMONT COUNTY, STATE OF OHIO:
CHAPTER 1
ENACTMENT CLAUSE
That the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, comfort, and general welfare;
conserving the values of property throughout the Township; to facilitate the provisions of
water, sewage, schools, and other public requirements; and lessening or avoiding
congestion in public streets and highways; it is hereby provided as follows:
CHAPTER 2
TITLE
This resolution shall be known as the Zoning Resolution of Miami Township, Clermont
County, Ohio.
3-1
Chapter 3
DISTRICTS AND ZONING MAP
3.01 DISTRICTS:
In order to accomplish the enumerated purposes set forth in Chapter 519 of the Ohio
Revised Code including but not limited to the regulation and restriction of the location
and use of buildings and land for trade, industry, residence and other purposes; the height
and size of buildings hereinafter erected or structurally altered; the size of yards and other
open spaces; the amount of parking spaces and the density of populations, Miami
Township, Clermont County, Ohio is hereby divided into districts, of which there shall be
thirteen (13) in number, known as:
“A” Agricultural District
“R-1” Residence District
“R-2” Residence District
“R-3” Residence District
“R-4” Planned Multiple Residence District
“O-1” Professional Office District
“B-1” Neighborhood Business District
“B-2” General Business District
“I” Planned Industrial Park District
“R-PUD” Residential Planned Unit Development
“MU” Mixed Use, Institutional District
“T” Mobile Home Park District
“H” Resort District
3.02 DISTRICT MAP:
The boundaries of the districts are shown upon the map, which is made a part of this
resolution, which map is designated as the “District Map”. The District Map and all the
notations, references, and other information shown thereon are a part of this resolution
and have the same force and effect as if the District Map and all the notations, references
and other information shown thereon were fully set forth or described therein, the original
of which district map is property attested and is on file with the Township Clerk.
Certified copies of the District map may be obtained from the Township Zoning
Inspector for a reasonable fee and have the same force and effect as the original district
map.
3.03 DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
A. Where the district boundary lies on said map are intended to follow either streets or
alleys or lot lines; and where the districts designated on the map are bounded
approximately by such street, alley or lot lines, the street or alley or lot shall be
construed to be the boundary of the district, unless such boundary is otherwise
3-2
indicated on the map. In the case of unsubdivided property, the district boundary
lines shall be determined by the use of a scale appearing on the Zoning District Map
or by dimensions.
B. Where the boundary of a district follows a railroad line, such boundary shall be
deemed to be located midway between the main tracks of said railroad line.
3.04 VACATION OF STREET ALLEY OR OTHER PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action, the zoning
district adjoining each side of such street, alley or other public way shall be automatically
extended to the center of such vacation and all area included in the vacation shall then
and henceforth be subject to all appropriate regulations of the extended districts.
4-1
Chapter 4
“A” AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
4.01 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
A. Farms
B. Single Family Dwellings
C. Cultivation of plants and plantings, including nurseries, when not involving retail
sales, or advertising of sales, on the premises.
D. Specialized raising: poultry, pigeon, rabbit, and other similar animals.
E. Dog kennels and veterinary establishments, but not nearer than two hundred (200)
feet to any zoned residential district, or dwelling other than the dwelling of the
lessee or owner of the site.
F. Public and private forests and wild life reservations.
G. Churches and other places of worship and Sunday school buildings, located not less
than 40 feet from any other lot in any residential district.
H. Schools and colleges for academic instruction, located not less than 40 feet and
public buildings including libraries, museums and art galleries, located not less than
20 feet from any other lot in a Residential District.
I. Public parks, playgrounds, recreational and community center buildings and
grounds, provided that any principal building used therefore shall be located not
less than 40 feet from any other lot in a residence district.
J. Hospitals and institutions of an educational, religious, charitable, or philanthropic
nature, provided, however, that such buildings shall not be located upon sites
containing an area of less than five acres, may occupy not over ten percent of the
total area of the lot, that the building shall be setback from all yard lines a distance
not less than two feet for each foot of building height.
4.02 CONDITIONAL USES REQUIRING BOARD AUTHORIZATION
A. Airport or aircraft landing area
B. Roadside stands offering the sale only agricultural products grown on the premises
from any of the uses specified in Section 4.01 above. Roadside stands shall be
removed during any season or period when they are not being used.
4-2
C. Country clubs, golf courses and other private non-commercial recreational areas
and facilities or recreation centers, including swimming pools, provided that any
principal building or swimming pool shall be located not less than 100 feet from any
other lot in any residence district.
D. Static transformer stations, and other utility station, provided there is no yard or
garage for service or storage.
E. Removal of dirt, top soil, except that such removal shall be limited to areas not less
than 200 feet from street or highway right-of-way lines and not less than 50 feet
from property lines, provided that any building housing power driven or power
producing machinery or equipment shall be located at least 400 feet from any lot in
any residence district.
F. Cemetery including crematorium.
4.03 ACCESSORY USES
A. Accessory uses, buildings, or other structures customarily incidental to any aforesaid
permitted use, including barns, stables, and garages under conditions specified
herein, provided that such accessory uses shall not involve the conduct of business,
trade, or industry, or any private way or walk giving access to such activity.
B. Customary professional activities carried on by a member of the immediate family,
residing on the premises.
C. The maximum size of an accessory structure shall be in accordance with the table
below:
Description Size
Lots less than one acre 900 square feet
Lots one acre up to five acres 1,200 square feet
Lots five acres or greater 1,800 square feet
D. Accessory structures shall not occupy more than 30% of the rear yard
4-3
4.04 HEIGHT REGULATIONS
A. No building shall exceed two and one-half stories or 35 feet in height except as
provided below.
B. Public, semi-public or public service buildings, hospitals (except as otherwise
provided), institutions, or schools, when permitted in a District may be erected to a
height not exceeding 60 feet, and Churches and Temples may be erected to a
height not exceeding 75 feet if the building setback from each required yard line at
least one foot of each additional building height above the height limit otherwise
provided in the District in which the building is built.
C. Church spires, domes, flagpoles, aerials, windmills, chimneys, cooling towers,
elevator bulkheads, fire towers, belfries, monuments, stacks derricks, conveyors,
state towers or scenery lofts, tanks, water towers, silos, farm buildings, or
necessary mechanical appurtenances, may be erected to any lawful and safe
height.
4.05 FRONT YARD AREA REGULATIONS
A. There shall be a front yard 50 feet in depth measured from the right-of-way line.
The right-of-way of any street shall be deemed to be 50 feet.
B. Unless a greater width is proposed in the official highway map of Clermont
County. In that case, the front yard shall be measured from the property rightof-
way as shown in said map. However, no alignment setback or front yard
depth shall be required to exceed the average of the minimum depths of the
existing front yards on the lots adjacent on each side, if such lots are within 100
feet.
C. Where lots have a double frontage, the required front yard shall be provided on
both streets.
D. Where a lot is located at the intersection of two or more streets, there shall be a
front yard on each street side of a corner lot, except that the buildable width of
such lot shall not be reduced to less than 40 feet. No accessory building shall
project beyond the front yard line on either street.
4-4
4.06 SIDE YARD AREA REQUIREMENTS
There shall be a side yard on each side of a building, which yard shall have a width of not less
than 20 feet.
4.07 REAR YARD AREA REGULATIONS
There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 40 feet.
4.08 PROJECTIONS INTO REQUIRED YARDS
Terraces, uncovered porches, platforms and ornamental features which do not extend more
than three feet above the floor level of the ground (first) story may project into a required yard,
provided these projections be distant at least two feet from the adjacent side lot line.
A. Open or lattice-enclosed fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways and balconies
opening upon fire towers projecting into a yard not more than five (5) feet, and
the ordinary projections of chimney and flues are permitted.
B. An open unenclosed or screened porch, or paved terrace may project into a
front yard for a distance not exceeding five feet.
4.09 INTENSITY OF USE
Every lot or tract of land shall have a minimum width of 150 feet at the building line and an area
of not less than 40,000 square feet.
4-5
LOT AREA, BULK YARD AND SCREENING REQUIREMENTS IN THE “A” DISTRICT
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
REQUIREMENTS "A" DISTRICT
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
A. LOT REQUIREMENTS:
1. Minimum Lot Area
(Single Family Dwelling) 40,000 square feet
2. Minimum Lot Width 150 Feet
B. MAXIMUM HEIGHT:
1. Principal Building
a. Stories 2 1/2
b. Height 35 feet
Whichever is less
2. Accessory Structures (note 1)
a. 900 square foot building or less 15 feet
b. 901 to 1,200 square foot building 18 feet
c. 1,201 to 1,800 square feet 22 feet
C. MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS:
1. Principal Building
a. Front 50 feet
b. Side 20 feet
c. Rear 40 feet (note 2)
2. Accessory Structure (Minimum setback from side and rear yards)
a. 900 square foot building or less 10 feet
b. 901 to 1,200 square foot building 10 feet (note 3)
c. 1,201 to 1,800 square feet 10 feet (note 3)
(Note1) Except when the accessory use is for agricultural purposes then the maximum height
shall be 35 feet.
(Note 2) For double frontage lots, the required front yard shall be provided on both streets.
(Note 3) An Accessory Building in excess of 15 feet in height must be setback an additional foot
for each additional foot in height.
Revised 1.29.2018
5-1
Chapter 5
"R-1" RESIDENCE DISTRICT
5.01 PURPOSE:
The purpose of the "R-1” Residence District is to provide land for low-density single-family detached
housing units.
5.02 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES:
A. Single family detached dwellings such that there shall be a restriction of one single-family
unit per lot, and lot area shall be a minimum of 20,000 square feet.
B. Public and private forests and wildlife reservations or including the usual buildings similar
conservation projects.
5.03 CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES:
The following may be permitted subject to the approval of the Board of Zoning Appeals:
A. Community and Recreation Centers; Libraries and Museums; Churches and other places of
worship, Sunday School Buildings and Parish Houses; Public Offices and Buildings. Except for
recreation and community centers serving a specific neighborhood development and under
control of a homeowner's association the following conditions shall apply:
1. Minimum Lot Area: Five acres.
2. Access: All sites shall have access from an arterial or collector street or shall
provide access in a manner that is compatible with the traffic patterns and traffic
volumes customarily found in residential neighborhoods.
3. Setbacks: All structures and active outdoor recreation uses shall be set back a
minimum of fifty feet from any residential property, however, any outdoor
recreation area with night lighting shall be set back one hundred feet from any
residential property.
4. Height: Height shall not exceed sixty feet and churches and towers not to exceed
seventy-five feet, provided that the building is set back from each required yard line
at least one foot of each additional building height above the height limit otherwise
provided in the District in which the building is built.
5. Limitation on Use: Such uses shall not be conducted as a for-profit commercial
operation.
6. Site Plan: A site plan is required in accordance with Chapter 27.
5-2
B. Day Care Centers and Nursery Schools.
The following shall be permitted:
1. Type B Family Day Care Homes subject to these conditions:
a. Home childcare is considered a home occupation.
b. There shall be a safe and secure outdoor play area.
c. All requirements of Revised Code Section 5104.01 et seq. apply and must be
met.
C. Elementary, Junior High and High Schools or Private Schools.
The following conditions shall apply:
1. Minimum Lot Area five acres.
2. Location: No elementary, junior high or high school may be located within 500 feet
of an industrial or commercial entertainment use.
3. Access: All schools shall have access to an arterial or collector street or access shall
be provided in a manner that is compatible with the traffic patterns and traffic
volumes customarily found in a residential neighborhood. Primary access should not
be through residential subdivision streets and/or local streets.
4. Site Plan: A site plan is required in accordance with Chapter 27.
D. Cemeteries Including Mausoleums
1. Minimum Lot Area: Any new cemetery shall contain an area of 20 acres or more.
Extensions to existing cemeteries shall be permitted, providing that they meet the
requirements set forth in this section.
2. Setbacks: Mausoleums shall be located no closer than 200 feet from a street rightof-
way and the adjoining lots in Residence Districts.
3. Access: Cemeteries shall have access to an arterial or collector street.
4. Site Plan: A site plan is required in accordance with Chapter 27.
E. Membership Sports, Recreation Clubs and Golf Courses (excluding miniature courses and
practice driving tees operated for commercial purposes).
Except for recreation and community centers serving a specific neighborhood development
and under control of a homeowner's association, the following conditions shall apply:
1. Minimum Lot Area: Ten acres.
5-3
2. Use Limitations: membership sports and recreation clubs excluding skeet, target,
primitive weapons and any other shooting clubs shall be used only for the
enjoyment of members and their families and guests of members of the association
or club under whose ownership or jurisdiction the facilities is operated. All buildings,
structures and uses necessary for their operation shall be permitted, except when
the chief activity is a service customarily carried on as a business.
3. Setbacks: All structures and active outdoor recreation areas shall be set back a
minimum of 50 feet from any residential property; however, any outdoor recreation
use with night lighting shall be set back 100 feet from any adjacent residential
property.
4. Accessory Restaurants: Accessory facilities such as snack bars, restaurants and bars
may be permitted only if they occupy integral parts of a main structure and there is
no display of goods or advertising visible from off the premises.
5. Equipment Performance Standards: Loud speakers, juke boxes, public address
systems and electric amplifiers shall be permitted in outdoor pool or recreation
areas only if their use is solely for the members of the facility and does not create a
public nuisance for nearby persons or properties.
6. Required Fencing/Screening: the entire outdoor pool area, including the area used
by bathers, shall be walled or fenced with a security fence or wall at least six (6) feet
in height and maintained in good condition to prevent uncontrolled access by
children.
7. Illumination: Exterior lighting shall be shaded whenever necessary to avoid casting
direct light upon any adjacent property or upon any adjacent public street.
8. Access and Traffic Impact: Access to a membership sports or recreation club shall
be from-an arterial or collector street.
9. Site Plan: A site plan is required in accordance with Chapter 27.
F. Public Outdoor Recreation.
The following conditions shall apply:
1. Setbacks: No building, playing field or active outdoor recreation area shall be
located closer than 50 feet to any residential property, except that if an outdoor
recreation area is lit at night, such area shall be set back at least 100 feet from any
residential property.
2. Screening: When any softball, baseball, soccer or football field, tennis court,
structured play area or parking area is located less than one 150 feet from any
residential property, a continuous planting screen not less than six feet in height
shall be provided.
5-4
3. Access and Traffic Impact: Access to outdoor public recreation areas shall be from
an arterial or collector street.
5.04 ACCESSORY USES:
A. Accessory uses customarily incidental to a principal permitted use on the same lot
therewith.
B. Accessory buildings shall be permitted in the rear and side yards provided the accessory
building is behind the front line of the house. On corner lots the accessory building must be
behind the front and side line of the house. On lots of two acres or greater, a maximum of
two accessory buildings may be located forward of the house, provided that no front
accessory building is placed closer than 100 feet to any front property line and 25 feet to
any side property line.
C. Attached and/or detached private garages or parking areas.
D. Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which buildings shall be
removed upon the completion or abandonment of the construction work.
E. Inground and above ground pools which have a depth of over 18 inches, or pools of water
intended for swimming or wading by members of the family and their guests if located to
the rear of the front line of the house and if located not closer than 15 feet to any lot line,
and if closer than 300 feet to any lot line shall be guarded against entry by small children by
the following manner:
1. It shall be completely surrounded by a fence having a minimum height of 48 inches
and maximum interstice cross-section of six inches; and,
2. All passages through this fence shall be protected by a gate of equal tightness,
which is secured in a closed position by means of a fastener which cannot be
released by small children.
F. The maximum size of an accessory structure shall be in accordance with the table below:
Description Size
Lots less than one acre 900 square feet
Lots one acre up to five acres 1,200 square feet
Lots five acres or greater 1,800 square feet
G. Accessory structures shall not occupy more than 30% of the rear yard
5.05 HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building shall exceed two and one-half (2-1/2) stores or as hereinafter thirty-five (35) feet in height,
except provided in Section 5.08 of this Chapter.
5-5
5.06 AREA REGULATIONS:
A. Front Yard: There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than fifty (50) feet from the
street right-of-way line.
B. Side Yard: There shall be a side yard on each side of the building having a width of not less
than ten feet except as hereinafter provided in Section 5.08 of this Chapter.
C. Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 35 feet except as
hereinafter provided in Section 5.08 of this Chapter.
D. Double Frontage: Where lots have a double frontage, the required front yard shall be
provided on both streets.
E. Corner Lots: Where a lot is located at the intersection of two or more streets, there shall be
a front yard on each street side of a corner lot. No accessory building shall project beyond
the front yard line on either street.
5.07 INTENSITY OF USE:
Every lot or tract of land shall have a minimum of 100 feet at the building line and an area of not less
than 20,000 square feet except that all corner lots shall have 30,000 square feet with a minimum
dimension on either side facing either street of 150 feet.
5.08 OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS:
A. Single family dwellings may be increased in height by not more than ten feet when the side
and rear yard are increased over the yard requirements of the District in which they are
located by not less than ten feet, but they shall not exceed three stories in height.
B. Church spires, domes, flagpoles, aerials, chimneys, belfries, monuments, water towers, or
necessary mechanical appurtenances may be erected to a lawful and safe height.
C. Accessory structures not otherwise specifically regulated herein shall be limited to the rear
yard area.
D. Accessory buildings which are to be used for storage purposes only may be erected upon a
lot concurrent with the construction of the main building.
E. Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky unobstructed, except for accessory
building in a rear yard, and except for the ordinary projections of chimneys, skylights, sills,
belt courses cornices and ornamental features projecting not to exceed 30 inches.
F. Terraces, porches, platforms and ornamental features which do not extend more than three
feet above the floor level of the ground (first) story may project into the front required yard
no more than five feet, provided these projections be distant at least three feet from the
adjacent side lot line.
5-6
G. The parking of one transportable structure or vehicle other than a motor vehicle is
permitted which meets the following requirements:
1. For recreation only and not for hire or gain;
2. For use off of the property;
3. Not to be inhabited while on the property;
4. Owned legally by the occupant of the property;
5. Not to be parked forward of the front house line;
6. Not to be parked within 10 feet of a property line; and
7. Must be re-licensed within 90 days of expiration of previous licenses.
H. No outdoor storage of any material (usable or waste) shall be permitted in this zone except
within enclosed containers.
I. All roadway, street, parking lot, and walkway lights shall be shielded so that substantially all
the directly emitted light falls within the property line.
J. When 40% or more of the frontage on the same side of the street within the same block,
but not exceeding 200 feet in distance, is improved with buildings that have observed a
front yard line having a variation in depth of not more than six feet, no building shall project
beyond the average front yard so established, but this regulation shall not be interpreted to
require a front yard of more than 50 feet nor to permit a front yard of less than ten feet.
5-7
LOT AREA, BULK YARD AND SCREENING REQUIREMENTS IN THE “R-1” DISTRICT
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
REQUIREMENTS "R-1" DISTRICT
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
A. LOT REQUIREMENTS:
1. Minimum Lot Area
(Single Family Dwelling) 20,000 square feet
2. Minimum Lot Width 100 Feet
B. MAXIMUM HEIGHT:
1. Principal Building
a. Stories 2 1/2
b. Height 35 feet
whichever is less
2. Accessory Structures (note 3)
a. Stories 1
b. Height 15 feet whichever is less
a. 900 square foot building or less 15 feet
b. 901 to 1,200 square foot building 18 feet
c. 1,201 to 1,800 square feet 22 feet
C. MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS:
Principal Building
a. Front 50 feet (note 1)
b. Side 10 feet
c. Rear 35 feet (note 2)
1. Accessory Structure (minimum setback from side and rear yards, except for forward placed
accessory buildings under Section 5.04A)
2.
a. 900 square foot building or less 10 feet
b. 901 to 1,200 square foot building 10 feet (Note 4)
c. 1,201 to 1,800 square feet 10 feet (Note 4)
_____________________________________________________________________________
(Note 1) All corner lots shall have an area of 30,000 square feet with a minimum dimension on either
side facing either street of 150 feet.
(Note 2) For double frontage lots, the required front yard shall be provided on both streets.
(Note 3) Except when the accessory use is for agricultural purposes then the maximum height shall be
35 feet.
(Note 4) An Accessory Building in excess of 15 feet in height must be setback an additional foot for each
additional foot in height.
6-1
Chapter 6
“R-2” RESIDENCE DISTRICT
6.01 APPLICABILITY
All the provisions set forth in the “R-1” Zone District shall apply to the “R-2” Residence
District.
6.02 CONDITIONAL USES:
A. Purpose and Objectives: To encourage imaginative and creative subdivision
design, the Township may allow a reduction in lot size for detached single
family dwelling units as a conditional use requiring Board of Appeals’
approval if the Board determines a proposed residential project will satisfy the
following design objectives:
B. The development of the site reflects a concept of visual and functional
organization wherein the elements of the site are harmoniously and efficiently
arranged with respect to natural site features, the size and shape of the plot
and the character of adjoining property. More specifically:
1. The design of the vehicular movement system should: mesh with the
existing and future street system; contribute to the coherence and order
of the site plan; maximize safety and, be adopted to the topography;
2. The desirable physical features of the site should be: minimally
disrupted; used to organize housing groups; used to enhance privacy
areas and provide for interesting vistas;
3. Lots and the structures located thereon should be oriented to maximize
both privacy and social interaction and should not directly abut arterial
streets;
4. The elements of the site plan should be arranged to provide a diverse
but coherent visual environment, and;
5. The site plan shall satisfy the Clermont County Subdivision
Regulations.
6-2
C. Specific Design Requirements:
1. the gross density shall not exceed 2.6 units per acre nor shall the
typical lot size comprise less than the 12,800 square feet of lot area
and a typical lot width at the building line of eighty feet.
2. unless otherwise approved the set backs will be as follows:
front yard…………………………………… 50 feet from R/W
side yard …………………………………… 10 feet
rear yard …………………………………… 35 feet
D. Review:
The applicant shall submit an application for Conditional Use to Miami
Township Community Development Department with an accompanying site plan
that satisfies the following requirements:
1. The applicant shall comply with Section 27.03 Site Plan Review Procedures
and Requirements.
2. The site plan shall satisfy the requirements for a Concept Plan under the
Section 6.02 E.
3. The application form must address all the objectives listed in Section 6.02 B.
The Community Development Director shall review the application and determine if the
application meets all the requirements of the Conditional Use. As part of the review the
Director shall solicit comments from the County Engineer and the County Department of
Community Planning and Development.
E. Concept plan Requirements:
The concept plan shall provide the following information:
a. For sites less than 25 acres the concept plan shall be drawn to a scale not less
than one inch equals one hundred (100) feet. For sites larger than 25 acres an
appropriate scale shall be used.
b. Show all property lines, shape and dimensions for all lots.
c. Show all proposed street right-of-way
d. Show and identify any and all open space.
e. Show existing topography.
f. Show any and all existing or proposed easements and identify the purpose of
each.
6-3
g. Show the total lot area for the subject property
h. Show the present zoning of the subject property and the adjoining properties.
i. Show a vicinity map locating the subject property in Miami Township.
j. Show a north arrow with north being oriented toward the top of the page.
k. Show the name of the development, name and address of the owner of record,
name and address of the person preparing the plan.
F. Time limit on start of construction:
If substantial construction, including construction of roadway, curb, gutter and utilities,
has not been started within two (2) years of granting the conditional use then the
conditional use shall be deemed null and void. The Community Development Director
may extend the construction period if sufficient evidence can be demonstrated that the
construction was delayed due to circumstances beyond the control of the applicant, and
that the prevailing conditions have not changed appreciably to render the approved plan
obsolete.
G. Side yard area regulations:
There shall be a side yard on each side of a building, which yard shall have a width of not
less than ten (10) feet.
H. Rear yard area regulations:
There shall be area yard having a depth of not less than thirty (30) feet.
I. Intensity of use:
Every lot or tract of land shall have a minimum width of eighty (80) feet at the building
line and an area of not less than twelve thousand eight hundred (12,800) square feet.
7-1
Chapter 7
"R-3" RESIDENCE DISTRICT
7.01 PURPOSE
The purpose of the "R-3" Residence District is to provide land for low-density single-family
detached housing units and multi-family housing units.
7.02 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
A. Any use permitted in Chapter 5.
B. Two family dwellings such that there shall be a restriction of one two-family unit per
lot, and lot area shall be a minimum of 13,500 square feet per family for a minimum
total of 27,000 square feet of lot area per two family unit.
C. Multiple family dwellings as regulated herein.
D. Public and private forests similar conservation projects, and wildlife reservations and
including the usual buildings therefore.
7.03 CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES
The following may be permitted subject to the approval of the Board of Zoning Appeals:
A. Community and Recreation Centers; Libraries and Museums; Churches and other
Places of Worship, Sunday School Buildings and Parish Houses; Public Offices and
Buildings.
B. Except for recreation and community centers serving a specific neighborhood
development and under control of a Homeowner's Association, the following
conditions shall apply:
1. Minimum Lot Area: Five acres.
2. Access: All sites shall have access from an arterial or collector street or shall
provide access in a manner that is compatible with the traffic patterns and
traffic volumes customarily found in residential neighborhoods.
3. Setbacks: All structures and active outdoor recreation uses shall be set back
a minimum of 50 feet from any residential property; however, any outdoor
recreation area with night lighting shall be set back 100 feet from any
residential property.
4. Height: Height shall not exceed 60 feet and churches and towers not to
exceed 75 feet, provided that the building is set back from each required yard
7-2
line at least one foot of each additional building height above the height limit
otherwise provided in the District in which the building is built.
5. Limitation on Use: Such uses shall not commercial operation be conducted as
a for-profit
6. Site Plan: A site plan is required in accordance with Chapter 27.
C. Day care centers and Nursery Schools
Type A and Type B Family day care homes are permitted subject to these conditions:
1. Home child care is considered a home occupation.
2. There shall be a safe and secure outdoor play area.
3. Required Access and Loading/Unloading:
a. An on-site drop-off area shall be provided at the main entrance to the
facility sufficient to accommodate four automobiles for facilities with
20 or fewer children plus one additional vehicle for each additional
ten children served.
b. Access to an arterial or collector street is required or access shall be
provided in a manner that is compatible with the traffic patterns and
traffic volumes customarily found in residential neighborhoods.
4. All requirements of Revised Code Section 5104.01 et seq. apply and must be
combined with.
5. Site Plan: A site plan is required in accordance with Chapter 27.
D. Elementary, Junior High and High Schools or Private Schools.
The following conditions shall apply:
1. Minimum Lot Area: Five acres.
2. Location: No elementary, junior high or high school may be located within
500 feet of an industrial or commercial entertainment use.
3. Access: All schools shall have access to an arterial or collector street or access
shall be provided in a manner that is compatible with the traffic patterns and
traffic volumes customarily found in a residential neighborhood. Primary
access should not be through residential subdivision streets and/or local
streets.
7-3
4. Site Plan: A site plan is required in accordance with Chapter 27.
E. Cemeteries Including Mausoleums.
1. Minimum Lot Area: Any new cemetery shall contain an area of 20 acres or
more. Extensions to existing cemeteries shall be permitted, providing that
they meet the requirements set forth in this section.
2. Setbacks: Mausoleums shall be located no closer than two hundred (200)
feet from a street right-of-way and the adjoining lots in Residence Districts.
3. Access: Cemeteries shall have access to an arterial or collector street.
4. Site Plan: A site plan is required in accordance with Chapter 27.
F. Membership Sports, Recreation Clubs and Golf Courses (excluding miniature
courses and practice driving tees operated for commercial purposes).
Except for community and recreation centers serving a specific neighborhood
development and under control of a Homeowner's Association, the following
conditions shall apply:
1. Minimum Lot Area: Ten acres.
2. Use Limitations: Membership sports and recreation clubs excluding skeet,
target, primitive weapons and any other shooting clubs shall be used only
for the enjoyment of members and their families and guests of members of
the association or club under whose ownership or jurisdiction the facilities is
operated. All buildings, structures and uses necessary for their operation
shall be permitted, except when the chief activity is a service customarily
carried on as a business.
3. Setbacks: All structures and active outdoor recreation areas shall be set back
a minimum of 50 feet from any residential property; however, any outdoor
recreation use with night lighting shall be set back 100 feet from any adjacent
residential property.
4. Accessory Restaurants: Accessory facilities such as snack bars, restaurants
and bars may be permitted only if they occupy integral parts of a main
structure and there is no display of goods or advertising visible from off the
premises.
5. Equipment Performance Standards: Loud speakers, jute boxes, public
address systems and electric amplifiers shall be permitted in outdoor pool or
recreation areas only if their use is solely for the members of the facility and
does not create a public nuisance for nearby persons or properties.
7-4
6. Required fencing/Screening: The entire outdoor pool area, including the area
used by bathers, shall be walled or fenced with a security fence or wall at
least six feet in height and maintained in good condition to prevent
uncontrolled access by children.
7. Illumination: Exterior lighting shall be shaded whenever necessary to avoid
casting direct light upon any adjacent property or upon any adjacent public
street.
8. Access and Traffic Impact: Access to a membership sports or recreation club
shall be from an arterial or collector street.
9. Site Plan: A site plan is required in accordance with Chapter 27.
G. Public Outdoor Recreation
The following conditions shall apply:
1. Setbacks: No building, playing field or active outdoor recreation area shall be
located closer than 50 feet to any residential property, except that if an
outdoor recreation area is lit at night, such area shall be set back at least 100
feet from any residential property.
2. Screening: When any softball, baseball, soccer or football field, tennis court,
structured play area or parking area is located less than 150 feet from any
residential property, a continuous planting screen not less than six feet in
height shall be provided.
3. Access and Traffic Impact: Access to outdoor public recreation areas shall
be from an arterial or collector street.
7.04 ACCESSORY USES
A. Accessory uses customarily incidental to a principal permitted use on the same lot
therewith and accessory buildings as regulated in Chapter 5.
B. Attached and/or detached private garages or parking areas.
C. Inground or above ground swimming pools which have a depth of over 18 inches, or
pools of water intended for swimming or wading by members of the family and their
guests if located to the rear of the front line of the house and if located not closer
than 15 feet to any lot line, and if closer than 300 feet to any lot line shall be guarded
against entry by small children by the following manner:
1. It shall be completely surrounded by a fence having a minimum height of
forty-eight inches and maximum interstice cross-section of six inches; and
7-5
2. All passages through this fence shall be protected by a gate of equal
tightness, which is secured in a closed position by means of a fastener which
cannot be released by small children.
7.05 HEIGHT REGULATIONS
A. No single family or two family building shall exceed two and one-half (2-1/2) stories
or 35 feet in height.
B. No multi-family building shall exceed three stories or 45 feet in height.
7.06 AREA REGULATIONS
A. Front Yard: There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than 50 feet from
the street right-of-way line.
B. Side Yard: There shall be a side yard on each side of the building having a width of not
less than ten feet except for lots abutting "R-1" Residential. For multi-family lots
abutting "R-1" Residential, side yards shall be 35 feet.
C. Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 35 feet.
D. Double Frontage: Where lots have a double frontage, the required front yard shall
be provided on both streets.
E. Corner Lots: Where a lot is located at the intersection of two or more streets, there
shall be a front yard on each street side of a corner lot.
7.07 INTENSITY OF USE
A. Every lot or tract of land which is used for a single family dwelling shall have a
minimum lot width of 100 feet at the building line and an area of not less than 20,000
square feet.
B. Every lot or tract of land which is used for a two family or multiple family dwelling
shall have a minimum 100 feet at the building line and an area of not less than 20,000
square feet for the first dwelling unit and an additional 7,000 square feet for each
additional family dwelling unit thereafter.
C. No building shall contain more than 24 dwelling units
7.08 OTHER DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
A. Single family dwellings may be increased in height by not more than ten feet when
the side and rear yard are increased over the yard requirements of the District in
which they are located by not less than ten feet, but they shall not exceed three
stories in height.
7-6
B. Church spires, domes, flagpoles, aerials, chimneys, belfries, monuments, water
towers, or necessary mechanical appurtenances may be erected to a lawful and safe
height.
C. Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky unobstructed, except for
accessory building in a rear yard, and except for the ordinary projections of chimneys,
skylights, sills, belt courses, cornices and ornamental features projecting not to
exceed 30 inches.
D. Terraces, porches, platforms and ornamental features which do not extend more
than three feet above the floor level of the ground (first) story may project into the
front required yard no more than five feet, provided these projections be distant at
least three feet from the adjacent side lot line.
E. The parking of one transportable structure or vehicle other than a motor vehicle is
permitted which meets the following requirements:
1. For recreation only and not for hire or gain;
2. For use off of the property;
3. Not to be inhabited while on the property;
4. Owned legally by the occupant of the property;
5. Not to be parked forward of the front house line;
6. Not to be parked within 10 feet of a property line; and
7. Must be relicensed within nine days of expiration of previous license.
F. No outdoor storage of any material (usable or waste) shall be permitted in this zone
except within enclosed containers.
G. All roadway street, parking lot and walkway lights shall be shielded so that
substantially all the directly emitted light falls within the property line.
H. When 40% or more of the frontage on the same side of the street within the same
block, but not exceeding 200 feet in distance, is improved with buildings that have
observed a front yard line having a variation in depth of not more than six feet, no
building shall project beyond the average front yard so established, but this
regulation shall not be interpreted to require a front yard of more than 50 feet nor
to permit a front yard of less than ten feet.
7-7
LOT AREA, BULK YARD AND SCREENING REQUIREMENTS IN THE “R-3” DISTRICT
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
REQUIREMENTS "R-3" DISTRICT
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
A. LOT REQUIREMENTS:
1. Minimum Lot Area
(Single Family Dwelling) 20,000 square feet
2. Minimum Lot Width
(Two Family Dwelling) 27,000 Square Feet
3. Minimum Lot Area
(Multi-Family Dwelling) 20,000 Square Feet - for first
dwelling unit and 7,000 Square Feet
for each additional dwelling unit
4. Minimum Lot Width 100 Feet
MAXIMUM HEIGHT:
1. Principal Building
a. Stories 2 1/2
or whichever is less
b. Height 35 feet
MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS:
1. Front 50 feet (note 1)
2. Side 10 feet
3. Rear 35 feet (note 2)
(Note 1) For double frontage lots, the required front yard shall be provided on both streets.
(Note 2) For multi-family lots abutting “R-1” residential side yards shall be 35 feet.
7-8
LOT AREA, BULK YARD AND SCREENING REQUIREMENTS IN THE “R-3” DISTRICT
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
REQUIREMENTS "R-3" DISTRICT
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
A. LOT REQUIREMENTS:
1. Minimum Lot Area
(Single Family Dwelling) 20,000 square feet
2. Minimum Lot Width
(Two Family Dwelling) 27,000 Square Feet
3. Minimum Lot Area
(Multi-Family Dwelling) 20,000 Square Feet - for first
dwelling unit and 7,000 Square Feet
for each additional dwelling unit
4. Minimum Lot Width 100 Feet
MAXIMUM HEIGHT:
1. Principal Building
a. Stories 2 1/2
or whichever is less
b. Height 35 feet
MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS:
1. Front 50 feet (note 1)
2. Side 10 feet
3. Rear 35 feet (note 2)
(Note 1) For double frontage lots, the required front yard shall be provided on both streets.
(Note 2) For multi-family lots abutting “R-1” residential side yards shall be 35 feet.
8-1
Chapter 8
RESIDENTIAL FENCES AND DECKS
8.01 FENCES AND DECKS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
A. This Chapter regulates fences and decks in residential zoning districts (A, R-1, R-2, R-3, H,
SRUV, T), in R-PUD districts if not otherwise regulated by an approved plan, for residential
uses in the MPBD Overlay district, and for nonconforming residential uses located in
commercial districts.
B. Fence restrictions for all lots:
1. Fences along the same fence line must be of uniform height, material and design.
a. However, in locations within a lot where a 6-foot tall solid construction fence is
authorized (see below), such privacy fence may be installed along the same
fence line together with one other fence type, in exception to the general
restriction of uniform height, material and design.
i. For example, along a 100-foot side property line, 25 feet of 6-foot tall
privacy fence may be constructed to screen a rear porch area, and then
attach to 75 feet of Kentucky three-board fencing running along the
balance of the same property line.
2. Fences are not permitted within the public right-of-way.
3. Fence gates cannot swing open onto adjacent property or onto the public right-of-way.
4. No fence shall be constructed so that any unfinished portion faces or is visible from an
adjacent property or street.
5. No fence shall be permitted within the required sight distance triangle.
6. Lots less than five acres in a platted subdivision shall not have a gate across the
driveway.
7. Fence height shall be measured from grade adjoining the fence.
a. For raised platforms attached to a single-family dwelling or swimming pool,
fence height may be measured from the floor of the platform. For example, if
in an allowed privacy fence location, a six-foot tall privacy fence may be placed
on a three-foot tall deck, for a total height of nine feet from grade.
b. In cases of a fence placed on a platform or otherwise not along a property line,
the finished side of the fence must face the nearest neighboring property line.
c. A fence placed on a platform may not exceed six feet in height from the
platform base, including on lots 40,000 square feet or larger.
d. Railings installed on a platform consistent with the state building code, and that
are 48 inches in height or less, will not be considered a fence.
e. All other fence rules apply to fences placed on platforms.
C. Supplemental fence regulations based on lot size and type:
1. For interior lots less than 40,000 square feet:
8-2
a. Fences are permitted in the rear and side yards.
b. Fences can be no more than six feet above grade.
c. Fences in the rear and side yards may be solid in construction.
2. For interior lots 40,000 square feet or larger:
a. Fences are permitted in the front, rear and side yards.
b. Fences in the rear and side yards can be no more than six feet above grade, except
for privacy fences, which may be no more than eight feet above grade.
c. Fences in the front yard shall be no more than four feet above grade and shall
have an open face area of no less than 50%.
d. Fences in the rear and side yards may be solid in construction.
3. For corner lots less than 40,000 square feet:
a. Fences are permitted in the rear, side and corner side yards
b. Fences in the rear and side yard can be no more than six feet above grade.
c. Fences in the corner side yard can extend halfway between the building or the
corner side yard setback and the public right of way.
d. Fences in the corner side yard can be no more than four feet above grade and
shall have an open face of no less than 50%.
e. If a house on a corner lot has a side entry garage, the fence located in the corner
side yard cannot extend beyond the rear corner of the house.
f. Fences in the rear yard may be solid in construction.
4. For corner lots 40,000 square feet or larger:
a. Fences are permitted in the front, rear, side and corner side yards.
b. Fences in the rear and side yards can be no more than six feet above grade, except
for privacy fences, which may be no more than eight feet above grade.
c. Fences in the front and corner side yard shall be no more than four feet above
grade and shall have an open face area of no less than 50%.
d. If a house on a corner lot has a side entry garage, the fence located in the corner
side yard cannot extend beyond the rear corner of the house.
e. Fences in the rear and side yards may be solid in construction.
D. Decks: Residential housing units are permitted to have uncovered decks which extend into
the rear yard setback, up to a maximum of 16 feet from the rear of the house. The deck
must still maintain the minimum side yard setback distance.
9-1
Chapter 9
"O-1" PROFESSIONAL OFFICE DISTRICT
9.01 PURPOSE
The purpose of the "O-1" Professional Office District is to provide for planned office districts at
appropriate locations throughout the Township.
9.02 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
A. Financial institutions including banks, savings and loans, financial companies or
other similar offices;
B. Professional offices,
C. Medical or dental clinics;
D. Police and fire stations;
E. Post offices,
F. Real estate offices;
G. General offices of federal, state or local governments:
H. Individuals or corporations devoted to office use and not used for manufacturing,
storage and warehousing, and
I. Libraries and Museums.
9.03 CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES
The following uses may be permitted subject to the approval of the Board of Zoning Appeals.
A. Buildings in excess of forty (40) feet in height if the following conditions are
met satisfactorily:
1. The increased building height will not adversely affect the adjacent
properties,
2. The increased building height is compatible with the existing and future
development character and pattern, and
3. The site plan shows that proper mitigation measures have been pro- posed
to address conditions 1 and 2 above
9.04 ACCESSORY USES
A. Any accessory uses or structures customary and incidental to any principal
permitted use:
B. Signs as regulated in Chapter 24 of this Zoning Resolution.
C. Uses as listed below included within and entered from within any office building as a
convenience to the occupants thereof, and their patients, clients, or customers
providing that the accessory uses shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the gross
9-2
floor area of the permitted uses in the building and no exterior advertising displays
for any accessory uses shall be visible from outside the building.
1. Barber shop,
2. Coffee shop and refreshment stand,
3. Beauty shop,
4. Eating and drinking places,
5. Laboratories, medical and dental,
6. News and confectionery stand
7. Prescription pharmacy, and
8. Florist shop, and
D. Nursery and child care facilities when conducted in connection with a principal
permitted use for the convenience of the occupants thereof.
9.05 HEIGHT REGULATIONS
No building shall exceed Forty (40) feet in height or three (3) stories except as provided in
Section 9.03, A of this Chapter.
9.06 AREA REGULATIONS
A. Main Buildings: Multiple main buildings are permitted provided all such main buildings
have a unified architectural design and site plan;
B. Front Yard. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than fifty (50) feet
from the street right-of-way line,
C. Side Yard.- There shall be a side yard on each side of the building, which yard shall
have a width of not less than fifteen (15) feet,
D. Rear Yard.- There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than thirty-five (35)
feet from the adjacent property line, and
E. Intensity of Use: Every lot or tract of land in the "O-1 " Professional Office District shall
have a minimum width at the building setback line of one hundred (100) feet. The
minimum lot area shall be twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. Every lot or tract in
the "O-1" District shall be developed with a maximum floor area ratio of .25.
9.07 GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. Off-street parking and loading and/or unloading shall be provided in accordance with
Chapter 23 of this Zoning Resolution;
9-3
B. No outdoor storage of any material (usable or waste) shall be permitted in this zone
except within enclosed containers;
C. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any dedicated
street, or into any adjacent property,
D. No motor vehicle which is inoperable or trailer which is usable or unusable shall be
stored or used for storage of any items therein on any lot or parcel of ground in this
zone unless it is within a completely enclosed building:
E. No use producing objectionable odors, or dust shall be permitted
F. All business activities permitted within this zone shall be conducted within a
completely enclosed building, with the exception of off-street parking and loading
and/or unloading areas; and
G. A site plan as regulated by Chapter 27 of this Zoning Resolution shall be required for
any use permitted or conditionally permitted in this zone, and shall be approved by
the Zoning Commission prior to the issuing of a zoning and building permit.
9-4
Lot area, bulk yard and screening Requirements in the “O-1” Professional Office District
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
REQUIREMENTS "O-1" DISTRICT
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
LOT REQUIREMENTS:
1. Minimum Lot Area 20,000 square feet
2. Minimum Lot Width 100 feet
MAXIMUM HEIGHT:
1. Principal Building
a. Stories 3
or whichever is less
b. Height 40 feet
2. Accessory Structures
a. Stories 1
or whichever is less
b. Height 15 feet
MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS:
1. Front 50 feet
2. Side 10 feet (note 1)
3. Rear 35 feet (note 1)
MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA .25
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note 1) Where any yard of any use permitted in this zone abuts a residential zone, a minimum
yard requirement of fifty (50) feet for each side and/or rear yard which abuts said zone shall be
provided.
10-1
Chapter 10
B-1 NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT
PURPOSE:
The purpose of the B-1 Neighborhood Business District is to establish areas of commercial
activity that offer small scale retail goods and personal services that are located in proximity to
the residential areas they are intended to serve. These commercial areas shall be located and
designed as to encourage the clustering and integration of groups of businesses, to minimize the
creation of undue traffic congestion and to minimize impact on adjoining residential.
10.01 USES PERMITTED:
A. Retail Business
B. Financial Institutions,
C. Offices
D. Personal Services
E. Restaurants
F. Bars, Taverns, Cocktail Lounges provided such use is conducted within a
completely enclosed building and is located at least one hundred (100) feet
from any Residential District.
G. Medical and Dental Clinics
H. Government Buildings and Utilities
I. Car wash
J. Automotive Service Stations, Repair Shops, Quik Lubes or similar use
provided all the following are met:
1. Any and all repairs are performed within a wholly enclosed building.
2. Any vehicle parked and/or stored must either being awaiting repair or
has been repaired and is awaiting removal. No vehicle may be parked
or stored for parts. Under no circumstances may a vehicle be parked
or stored for more than thirty (30) days. All vehicles must have
current license plates.
3. There can be no outside display or storage of materials or goods.
K. Specialty Goods and Services, including photography studio, art gallery,
antique store, copy/printing center, plant shop.
L. Residential provided it is an integral part of the business development project
and provided the entire project is part of a Planned Business Development
Overlay.
1. This provision will allow for mixed-use projects as well as mixed use buildings
in a traditional village setting similar to the Branch Hill and Miamiville
neighborhoods of Miami Township.
a. Mixed-use buildings will be permitted with first floor retail, service
and/or office and upper floor residential.
b. Mixed-use projects will be permitted provided the project is compatible
with the surrounding development and zoning; the project is fully
integrated into the existing street system and a pedestrian pathway
10-2
system is constructed providing access to every building within the
development.
c. The gross residential density shall not exceed 6 units per acre.
d. All projects are subject to the site plan review requirements of Chapter
27.
M. Religious Institutions
10.02 CONDITIONAL USES:
The purpose of a conditional use is to permit a use that would not be appropriate generally, but
may be allowed with appropriate restrictions upon a finding that 1) the proposed use meets the
required conditions as stated in the zoning resolution, and 2) the use or development will not
have an adverse impact on adjoining properties.
A. Indoor Commercial Recreation facilities, including arcades:
1. Access to the property must be from an arterial or collector roadway.
2. The site must be designed to minimize glare emanating from the building.
3. The site design and building design must comply with sections 10.05 and 10.06
of this chapter.
4. All projects are subject to the site plan review requirements of Chapter 27.
B. Nursing/Convalescent Homes providing access to the Home is from an arterial or
collector street.
1. Access to the property must be from an arterial or collector roadway.
2. The site design and building design must comply with sections 10.05 and 10.06
of this chapter.
3. All projects are subject to the site plan review requirements of Chapter 27.
C. Day Care Centers
1. All outdoor play areas shall be located only in the rear and side yards and shall
be a minimum of 50 feet from any adjoining residential zoning district.
2. A landscape screen must be provided to screen the outdoor play areas from
adjoining residential districts.
3. A traffic circulation plan shall be submitted to evaluate adverse impacts on the
roadway system and to ensure a safe drop-off and pick-up area.
4. Access to the property must be from an arterial or collector roadway.
5. The site design and building design must comply with sections 10.05 and 10.06
of this chapter.
6. All projects are subject to the site plan review requirements of Chapter 27.
10.03 ACCESSORY USES
A. Signs as regulated in Chapter 24 of this Zoning Resolution
B. Outdoor Dining Area - Outdoor dining areas on private property are permitted as
accessory uses provided they are located a minimum of 75 feet from a residential
zoning district; are screened with the use of landscaping and/or fencing; provide a
minimum four (4) foot wide sidewalk clearance; any fencing or other barricade cannot
block the entrance to the restaurant. In a multi-tenant center, any outdoor dining area
10-3
must be a minimum of 25 feet from the entrance door to any adjoining tenant space
Site Plan Review will be required for all outdoor dining areas.
C. Any accessory uses or structures customary and incidental to any principal permitted
use.
10.04 INTENSITY OF USE
A. The intensity of use, setback requirements, and height requirements are shown on the
Table titled Lot Area, Bulk and Yard Requirements in the B-1 Neighborhood Business
District.
10.05 SITE PLAN AND BUILDING DESIGN STANDARDS
A. Building Elevations – Architectural design, building materials, color, roof style and
detailing should all work together to express harmonious and consistent design. All
building facades (exterior walls) shall be designed to reduce scale and add visual
interest. There shall be no uninterrupted lengths of blank wall longer than 100 feet.
Walls shall be differentiated with recesses, offsets, building height, variations in roofline,
windows, awnings, and changes in color or material.
B. Exterior Building Materials - Exterior building material shall be brick, decorative
block, wood, stone, tile or other high quality building material. Tilt-up concrete panels
or prefabricated metal panels will not be permitted. Smooth faced concrete block may
be permitted only on the service side of a building. The block must be painted to match
the prominent sides of the building. The service side of the building is typically not
accessed by the general public, has no parking other than limited employee parking and
is used primarily for deliveries to tenant businesses. A consistent architectural style
shall be applied to all sides of a building except to the service side of a building where
the service side is not visible to the general public. Awnings, canopies, recesses and
offsets should be incorporated to help enhance the service side of the building.
C. No single structure shall contain more than 50,000 square feet.
D. Rooftop Equipment – All rooftop equipment shall be screened from view on all sides
visible to the general public, by building parapet walls or other building elements that
appear as integral elements of the overall building.
E. Gasoline Canopies – Canopies, such as those associated with convenience stores with
gasoline sales, must be designed in a manner to create a strong association with the
primary building. Columns must be primarily masonry. A strong impression of threedimensional
roofs and supporting columns must be incorporated into the design.
F. Customer Entryways – Entryways shall be clearly articulated and shall be pedestrian
scale. Projected or recessed entryways, arches, higher rooflines, change in building
material or color, canopies and signage shall be used to identify entryways.
G. Pedestrian Walkways – Sidewalk shall be provided along all sides of a lot that front a
public street or private right-of-way. A continuous pedestrian walkway shall be
provided from the public sidewalk to the customer entryway to the building. A
minimum 6-foot wide sidewalk shall be provided along all sides of any building where
10-4
the façade features a customer entryway. The sidewalk shall be raised above the grade
creating a curb at the edge of the sidewalk at the parking lot. This sidewalk shall be
located at least five feet from the façade of the building to allow space for foundation
plantings unless the sidewalk is covered by a canopy, awning, or similar structure.
10.06 GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. All new development and redevelopment shall be subject to the site plan review
requirements of Chapter 27.
B. There shall be no minimum lot size or lot width required, however, the minimum area
required for consideration of rezoning to the B-1 Neighborhood Business District shall
be five (5) acres unless the request is for an extension of an existing B-1 District, then a
smaller area will be considered.
C. Except where otherwise indicated in this chapter, all business activities permitted
within this District shall be conducted within a fully enclosed building.
D. The dispensing of gasoline, parking, loading and unloading are permitted activities
outside of a fully enclosed building.
E. No outdoor storage of any material (usable or waste) shall be permitted within this
District except in enclosed containers. The containers must be completely screened
from the public right-of-way and from adjacent property by means of a wall that
matches the building materials and colors. The enclosure must be located in the rear
yard and shall be setback a minimum of 25 feet from any residentially zoned property.
F. All walkway, parking lot, or driveway lights shall be shielded so that substantially all the
directly emitted light falls within the property lines.
G. No motor vehicle, which is inoperable, or trailer, which is usable or unusable, shall be
stored or used for storage of any items, unless it is located within a fully enclosed
building.
H. All uses permitted in this zoning district shall be conducted in such a manner so that no
odor, smoke, glare, vibrations, or other impacts are evident from beyond the property
line.
10-5
Lot Area, Bulk and Yard Requirements in the B-1 Neighborhood Business District.
Requirements B-1 District
_______________________________________________________________________
A. Lot Requirements
1. Minimum Area for Rezoning 5 Acres
2. Minimum Lot Area (Note 1)
3. Minimum Lot Width (Note 1)
B. Maximum Height
1. Principal Building 3 stories or 45 feet
2. Accessory Structure 15 feet
C. Minimum Yard Requirements
1. Front – Primary & Secondary Arterial 110 feet from centerline
2. Front – Collector 90 feet from centerline
3. Front - Local Street 50 feet from r-o-w
4. Side 10 feet (Note 2 & 4)
5. Rear 10 feet (Note 2 & 4)
Accessory Structure
1. Front (Note 3)
2. Side 10 feet (Note 4)
3. Rear 10 feet (Note 4)
________________________________________________________________________
Note 1. There shall be no minimum lot area or lot width required, however, the minimum area
required for consideration of rezoning to the B-1 Neighborhood Business District is five (5) acres.
Note 2. There shall be a 10 foot minimum side and rear yard setback for properties in this
district except when abutting a residential district, then the minimum side and rear yard
setbacks shall be 35 feet. A landscape buffer shall be provided by the developer/owner that
may include fencing and/or mounding dependent on the intensity of the use. The Township
must approve the screening during the site plan review process.
Note 3. Accessory uses must be located in the rear yard of the principal structure.
Note 4. A twenty five (25) foot setback is required when adjoining a Residence District.
11-1
Chapter 11
B-2 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
11.01 PURPOSE
The purpose of the B-2 General Business District is to establish areas of commercial activity that
offer a wide variety of retail goods and personal services to the residents of the community.
These commercial areas shall be located on primary arterials, and shall be designed as to
encourage the clustering and integration of groups of businesses, to minimize the creation of
undue traffic congestion and to minimize impact on adjoining residential.
11.02 USES PERMITTED:
A. Retail Business
B. Hotels and Motels
C. Vehicle sales, including automobile, truck, trailer, recreational and farm equipment
D. Financial Institutions
E. Offices
F. Personal Services
G. Funeral Homes and Mortuaries
H. Restaurants
I. Medical and Dental Clinics
J. Government Buildings and Utilities
K. Day Care Facilities
L. Trade or Business School
M. Bars, Taverns, Cocktail Lounges, night clubs provided such use is conducted within a
completely enclosed building and is located at least one hundred (100) feet from
any Residential District.
N. Lumber yard and Building Materials
O. Indoor Commercial Recreation including, bowling alleys, skating rinks, theaters,
provided the use is at least one hundred (100) feet from any Residence District
P. Veterinary Clinic, Animal Hospital, Kennel provided any structure used for such
purpose is at least two hundred (200) feet from any Residential District
Q. Car Wash
R. Automotive Service Stations, Repair Shops, Quick Lubes or similar use provided any
and all repairs are performed within a wholly enclosed building and there can be no
outside display or storage of materials or goods. All vehicles awaiting service must
have current license plates.
S. Specialty Shops and Services, including photography studio, art gallery, antique
shop, copy/printing center, plant shop
T. Residential provided it is an integral part of a mixed use, business development
project and provided the entire project is part of a Planned Business Development
Overlay.
1. This provision will allow for mixed-use projects as well as mixed use
buildings in a traditional village setting similar to the Branch Hill and
Miamiville neighborhoods of Miami Township.
11-2
a. Mixed-use buildings will be permitted with first floor retail,
service and/or office and upper floor residential.
b. Mixed-use projects will be permitted provided the project is
compatible with the surrounding development and zoning; the
project is fully integrated into the existing street system and a
pedestrian pathway system is constructed providing access to
every building within the development.
c. The gross residential density shall not exceed 6 units per acre.
d. All projects are subject to the site plan review requirements of
Chapter 27.
U. Religious Institution
11.03 CONDITIONAL USE
The purpose of a conditional use is to permit a use that would not be appropriate generally, but
may be allowed with appropriate restrictions upon a finding that 1) the proposed use or
development meets the required conditions as stated in the zoning resolution, and 2) the use or
development will not have an adverse impact on adjoining properties.
A. Flea Markets or other outdoor sales where vendors rent, lease or acquire space to
display and/or market merchandise goods or services, provided the following conditions
are met:
1. An off-street parking plan in compliance with the rules and requirements of
Chapter 23 is submitted for approval and implemented by the applicant.
2. All entrances and exits shall be limited to those as approved in the required
parking plan. Ingress and egress to parking areas shall be limited to not
more than one curb cut for every 200 feet of road frontage.
3. All signs, structures, tables, displays, goods, and merchandise or any
vehicles used for display purposes shall be setback a minimum of 50 feet
from any right-of-way and 200 feet from any Agricultural, Residential or
PUD District.
4. Adequate sanitation facilities shall be provided and approved by the Ohio
EPA or County Board of Health.
B. Outdoor Commercial Recreation, including swimming pools, golf courses driving ranges
and ball fields:
1. All buildings and uses must be located at least two hundred (200) feet from
any residential zoning district
2. A 20 foot landscape screen will be provided along all property lines that
border a residential zoning district.
3. Access to the property must be from an arterial or collector roadway.
4. The site design and building design must comply with sections 11.05 and
11.06 of this chapter.
5. All projects are subject to the site plan review requirements of Chapter 27.
C. Printing, publishing and lithographic shops:
11-3
1. The outside storage area shall be located at least seventy-five 75 feet from
and residential zoning district. The setback when adjoining a commercial or
industrial district shall be the same as the building setback.
2. The outside storage area shall be completely screened from view by a solid
fence or wall at least six (6) feet high. Landscaping shall be placed along the
outside of the fence to provide for visual breaks. A chain link fence with
vinyl slats will not be permitted.
3. The site design and building design must comply with sections 11.05 and
11.06 of this chapter.
4. All projects are subject to the site plan review requirements of Chapter 27
D. Self Storage Facilities:
1. All buildings, drives, and parking must be located at least fifty (50) feet from
any residential zoning district and shall be completely screened from view
by a solid fence or wall at least six (6) feet high with landscaping placed
along the outside of the fence to provide for visual breaks. A chain link fence
with vinyl slats will not be permitted.
2. No outside storage will be permitted.
3. The site design and building design must comply with sections 11.05 and
11.06 of this chapter.
4. All projects are subject to the site plan review requirements of Chapter 27.
E. Eating or Drinking Establishments with outside gardens or similar outside facilities or
activities:
1. All outside activity must be located at least two hundred (200) feet from any
residential zoning district.
2. The site design and building design must comply with sections 11.05 and
11.06 of this chapter.
3. All projects are subject to the site plan review requirements of Chapter 27.
F. Nursing/Convalescent Homes:
1. Access to the property must be from an arterial or collector roadway.
2. The site design and building design must comply with sections 11.05 and
11.06 of this chapter.
3. All projects are subject to the site plan review requirements of Chapter 27.
11.04 ACCESSORY USES
A. Signs as regulated in Chapter 24 of this Zoning Resolution.
B. Outdoor Dining Area - Outdoor dining areas on private property are permitted as
accessory uses provided they are located a minimum of 75 feet from a residential zoning
district; are screened with the use of landscaping and/or fencing; provide a minimum
four (4) foot wide sidewalk clearance; any fencing or other barricade cannot block the
entrance to the restaurant. In a multi-tenant center any outdoor dining area must be a
minimum of 25 feet from the entrance door to any adjoining tenant space. Site Plan
Review will be required for all outdoor dining areas.
C. Any accessory uses or structures customarily and incidental to any
principal permitted use.
11-4
11.05 INTENSITY OF USE
A. The intensity of use, setback requirements, and height requirements are shown on the
Table titled Lot Area, Bulk and Yard Requirements in the B-2 General Business District.
11.06 SITE PLAN AND BUILDING DESIGN STANDARDS
A. Building Elevations – Architectural design, building materials, color, roof style and
detailing should all work together to express harmonious and consistent design. All
building facades (exterior walls) shall be designed to reduce scale and add visual
interest. There shall be no uninterrupted lengths of blank wall longer than 100 feet.
Walls shall be differentiated with recesses, offsets, building height, variations in
roofline, windows, awnings, and changes in color or material.
B. Exterior Building Materials - Exterior building material shall be brick, decorative
block, wood, stone, tile or other high quality building material. Tilt-up concrete panels
or prefabricated metal panels will not be permitted. Smooth faced concrete block may
be permitted only on the service side of a building. The block must be painted to match
the prominent sides of the building. The service side of the building is typically not
accessed by the general public, has no parking other than limited employee parking
and is used primarily for deliveries to tenant businesses. A consistent architectural style
shall be applied to all sides of a building except to the service side of a building where
the service side is not visible to the general public. Awnings, canopies, recesses and
offsets should be incorporated to help enhance the service side of the building.
C. Rooftop Equipment – All rooftop equipment shall be screened from view on all sides
visible to the general public, by building parapet walls or other building elements that
appear as integral elements of the overall building.
D. Gasoline Canopies – Canopies, such as those associated with convenience stores with
gasoline sales, must be designed in a manner to create a strong association with the
primary building. Columns must be primarily masonry. A strong impression of threedimensional
roofs and supporting columns must be incorporated into the design.
E. Customer Entryways – Entryways shall be clearly articulated and shall be pedestrian
scale. Projected or recessed entryways, arches, higher rooflines, changes in building
material or color, canopies and signage shall be used to identify entryways.
F. Pedestrian Walkways – Sidewalk shall be provided along all sides of a lot that front a
public street or private right-of-way. A continuous pedestrian walkway shall be
provided from the public sidewalk to the customer entryway to the building. A
minimum 6-foot wide sidewalk shall be provided along all sides of any building where
the façade features a customer entryway. The sidewalk shall be raised above the grade
creating a curb at the edge of the sidewalk at the parking lot. This sidewalk shall be
located at least five feet from the façade of the building to allow space for foundation
plantings unless the sidewalk is covered by a canopy, awning, or similar structure.
11-5
11.07 GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. All new development and redevelopment shall be subject to the site plan review
requirements of Chapter 27.
B. There shall be no minimum lot size or lot width required, however, the minimum area
required for consideration of rezoning to the B-2 General Business District shall be ten
(10) acres.
C. Except where otherwise indicated in this chapter, all business activities permitted within
this District shall be conducted within a fully enclosed building.
D. The dispensing of gasoline, parking, loading and unloading are permitted activities
outside of a fully enclosed building.
E. No outdoor storage of any material (usable or waste) shall be permitted within this
District except in enclosed containers. The containers must be completely screened
from the public right-of-way and from adjacent property by means of a wall that
matches the building materials and colors. A chain link fence with vinyl slats will not be
permitted. The enclosure must be located in the rear yard and shall be setback a
minimum of 25 feet from any residentially zoned property.
F. All walkway, parking lot, or driveway lights shall be shielded so that substantially all the
directly emitted light falls within the property lines.
G. No motor vehicle that is inoperable or trailer, which is usable or unusable, shall be
stored or used for storage of any items, unless it is located within a fully enclosed
building.
H. All uses permitted in this zoning district shall be conducted in such a manner so that no
odor, smoke, glare, vibrations, or other impacts are evident from beyond the property
line.
11-6
Area, Bulk and Yard Requirements in the B-2 General Business District.
Requirements B-2 District
A. Lot Requirements
1. Minimum Area for Rezoning 10 Acres
2. Minimum Lot Area (Note 1)
3. Minimum Lot Width (Note 1)
B. Maximum Height
1. Principal Building (Note 2) 6 stories or 75 feet
2. Accessory Structure 15 feet
C. Minimum Yard Requirements
1. Front – Primary & Secondary Arterial 110 feet from centerline
2. Front – Collectors 90 feet from centerline
3. Front - Local Street 50 feet from r-o-w
4. Side 10 feet (Note 3 & 5)
5. Rear 10 feet (Note 3 & 5)
Accessory Structure
6. Front (Note 4)
7. Side 10 feet (Note 5)
8. Rear 10 feet (Note 5)
________________________________________________________________________
Note 1. There shall be no minimum lot area or lot width required, however, the minimum area
required for consideration of rezoning to the B-2 General Business District is ten (10) acres.
Note 2. A building shall not exceed 3 stories or 45 feet when adjoining a Residence District
unless it is setback one (1) foot from all properties lines for each two (2) feet of height above 45
feet.
Note 3. There shall be a 10 foot minimum side and rear yard setback for properties in this
district except when abutting a residential district, then the minimum side and rear yard
setbacks shall be 35 feet. A landscape buffer shall be provided by the developer/owner that
may include fencing and/or mounding dependent on the intensity of the use. The Township
must approve the screening during the site plan review process.
Note 4. Accessory uses must be located in the rear yard of the principal structure.
Note 5. A twenty five (25) foot setback is required when adjoining a Residence District.
12-1
Chapter 12
“I” PLANNED INDUSTRIAL PARK DISTRICT
12.01 PURPOSE
This Chapter amends the existing I-A and I-B Chapters of the Zoning Resolution to combine them
into a unified Zoning District.
The purpose of the “I” Planned Industrial Park District is to provide sites for industrial,
manufacturing and warehousing uses at appropriate locations in relation to existing and
potential developments of surrounding areas, and to arrange the location of buildings, parking
areas, access, screening, and lighting to protect values and to harmonize the development
with surrounding areas. The provisions in this District are designed to provide for the
establishment and generation of low intensity industrial uses in a manner that minimizes
conflict between industrial uses and nearby residential areas.
12.02 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
The permitted uses shall be as approved by the Zoning Commission and specified as the
approved site plan. All required conditions and restrictions as regulated in the “I” district shall
apply except as approved on the development:
A. Business or professional offices:
B. Research and development establishments;
C. Manufacturing establishments;
D. Warehouse and wholesale establishments;
E. Contractor Shops and Storage Yards
F. Building materials sales and storage yards
G. Private, non-commercial recreation areas and establishments:
H. Recycling Centers.
I. All uses permitted in Chapters 10 and 11 excluding residential uses.
12.03 CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES
The following may be permitted subject to the approval of the Board of Zoning Appeals:
A. Buildings in excess of forty (40) feet in height if the following conditions are met
satisfactorily:
1. For each foot of height increase in excess of forty (40) feet, buildings must be set
back at least an additional two (2) feet from the required minimum setback
requirements; and
2. The increased building height will not adversely affect the adjacent properties, and
3. The increased building height is compatible with the existing and future
development character and pattern; and
12-2
4. The site plan shows that proper mitigation measures have been proposed to
address conditions 2 and 3 above.
5. In cases where the property is located adjacent to Federal Highways, the setback
requirements of Section 12.03 (A) (1) will not apply.
B. Training facilities; restaurants; hotel/motel; and retail uses, provided the applicant
clearly demonstrates to the Board of Zoning Appeals that:
1. The proposed use is primarily intended for the benefit of the tenants of the
Industrial Park and compliments the Planned Industrial Park, and
2. The use shall not exceed ten (10) percent of total allowable floor area within the
Planned Industrial Park: and
3. The use is compatible with and will not adversely impact surrounding land uses.
12.04 ACCESSORY USE
A. Customary accessory buildings and uses, including operations required to maintain or
support any use permitted in this zone an the same lot as the permitted use, such as
maintenance shops, power plants, and machine shops;
B. Signs, as regulated by Chapter 24 of this Zoning resolution; and
C. Uses, as listed below, including within and entered from within any use permitted in
this zone as a convenience to the occupants thereof, and their customers providing
such accessory uses shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the gross floor area of the
permitted uses in the building and no exterior advertising displays shall be visible from
outside the building:
1. Cafeterias,
2. Coffee shops or refreshment stands, and
3. Soda or dairy bars.
12.05 HEIGHT REGULATIONS
No building shall exceed three (3) stories or forty (40) feet in height except as provided in
Section 12.03 of this Chapter.
12.06 AREA REGULATIONS
A. Front yard: As defined in Clermont County’s or Miami Township’s Thoroughfare Plan,
there shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than seventy-five (75) feet from
the street right-of-way line when abutting a major arterial and fifty (50) feet from the
street right-of-way on internal roads.
B. Side Yard. For buildings abutting districts other than residential districts, there shall
be a side yard on each side of the building, which yard shall have a width of not less
than twenty-five (25) feet. There shall be no side yard required for a building abutting
12-3
an “I” District or a building adjacent to another building within a Planned Industrial
Park District.
C. Where any yard of any use permitted in this zone abuts a residential zone, a minimum
yard requirement of seventy-five (75) feet for each side and/or rear yard which abuts
said zone shall be provided, ten (10) feet of which shall be maintained by a screening
area, of solid wood fence, masonry wall, hedge or combination of appropriate height
so as to effectively screen the view from adjacent residential properties.
D. Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than forty (40) feet.
12.07 INTENSITY OF USE
A. Minimum Tract for Planned Industrial Park: Five (5) acres. However, development of a
smaller tract adjacent to an existing approved site may be permitted providing the
proposed development conforms to and extends the original development as if the
new site has been a part of the originally approved site plan layout.
B. Minimum Lot Area within Minimum Tract: One (1) acre.
C. Minimum Lot Width at Building Setback Line. One hundred and fifty (150) feet.
D. Maximum Floor Area Ratio: .50
12.08 GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. Off street parking and loading and/or unloading shall be provided in accordance with
Chapter 23 of this Zoning Resolution.
B. No lighting shall be permitted which would glare from this zone onto any street, or
into any adjacent property.
C. All outdoor storage shall be screened so as not to be visible from any street or
adjacent property and shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from any residential
property or public or private street.
D. All uses in this zone shall be conducted in such a manner so that no odor, smoke,
glare, vibrations, or other impacts are evident from beyond the property lines.
E. Assurances by the applicant that the use has the ability to comply with all Local,
State, and Federal environmental regulations and standards shall be provided with
an application for a zoning use certificate. A site plan, as regulated by Chapter 27 of
this Zoning Resolution, shall be required for any use in this zone. In cases where the
site plan proposes conditional uses, the site plan review shall precede any action by
the Board of Zoning Appeals.
F. Industrial use performance standards
12-4
1. No land or uses in these districts shall be used or occupied in any manner so
as to create any dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise objectionable
nuisance.
2. The determination of the existence of any dangerous and objectionable
conditions shall be made at the location of the use creating the same or at
such location where such conditions may be more apparent.
3. Environmental Requirements: No land or building in any district shall be
used or occupied in any manner creating dangerous, injurious noxious, or
otherwise objectionable conditions which could adversely affect the
surrounding areas or adjoining premises, except that any use permitted by
this resolution may be undertaken and maintained if acceptable measures
and safeguards are taken to reduce dangerous and objectionable conditions
to acceptable limits as established by the following:
a. Air Pollution - Air pollution shall be subject to the requirements
and regulations established by the Ohio Environmental
Protection Agency.
b. Electrical Disturbance - No activities shall be permitted which
emit electrical disturbance affecting the operation of any
equipment other than that of the creator of such disturbances.
Any generated electrical disturbance shall comply with all
applicable regulations of the Federal Communications
Commission.
c. Erosion - No erosion, by either wind or water, shall be
permitted which will carry objectionable substances onto
neighboring properties.
d. Fire and Explosion Hazards - Adequate safety devices shall be
provided where there are activities involving burning or storage
of flammable or explosive materials, adequate safety devices
shall be provided at any point. Adequate safety devices against
the hazards of fire and exploding and adequate fire fighting and
fire suppression equipment and devices, standard in the
industry shall be provided. Burning of waste materials in an
open fire is prohibited.
e. Glare and Heat - Any operation producing intense light or heat,
such as high temperature processes like combustion or
welding, shall be performed within an enclosed building and
shall not be visible beyond any lot line bounding the premises.
Welding that is required for exterior construction of a structure
shall be exempt from these regulations. No exterior lighting
12-5
shall be positioned so as to extend glare onto an adjacent
property or a public right- of-way.
f. Liquid or Solid Wastes - no discharge at any point into any
public sewer, private sewerage disposal system, stream, or into
the ground, of any materials of such nature or temperature as
can contaminate any water supply, interfere with bacterial
processes in sewage treatment, or otherwise cause the
emission of dangerous or offensive elements, shall be
permitted, except in accordance with minimum standards
approved by the Clermont County Health Department, the
Ohio Department of Health, the Ohio Environmental Protection
Agency, or such other governmental agency as shall have
jurisdiction over such activities. The use of dumpsters or other
types of reasonably accessible waste containers for the
disposal of potentially dangerous liquid or solid waste materials
shall not be permitted.
g. Odors - No odor shall be emitted by any use permitted in any
district in such quantities as to be readily detectable by a
person not located on the premises.
h. Radioactive Materials - No activities shall be permitted which
utilize fissionable or radioactive materials if their use results at
any time in the release of emission of any fissionable or
radioactive material into the atmosphere, the ground, or
sewerage systems.
i. Storm Water Drainage - Due consideration shall be given to
provisions for drainage, with particular reference to the effect
on adjoining and nearby properties and on general drainage
systems in the area. Where major drainage volumes appear
likely and capacity of available system is found marginal or
inadequate, consideration shall be given to possibilities for
recharge of ground water supply on the property, temporary
retention with gradual discharge, or other remedial measures.
j. Trash Collection Facility - A trash collection facility shall include
a large container such as a dumpster, or a small container such
as a garbage can, bag or other similar container. No trash
collection facility shall be located or stored in the front yard of
a premise. A large trash collection facility shall be situated in a
permanent location and placed on a concrete pad of
appropriate size and strength. A dumpster pad shall be of a
dimension that will allow a dumpster to sit entirely on the pad
and permit the wheels of a trash disposal truck to rest on the
pad while emptying said dumpster.
12-6
k. Vibration - Every use shall be so operated that ground vibration
inherently and recurrently generated is not perceptible,
without instruments, beyond any lot line bounding the
premises.
Lot area, bulk yard and screening Requirements in the “I” Planned Industrial Park District
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
REQUIREMENTS “I” DISTRICT
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
LOT REQUIREMENTS:
1. Minimum Tract Area 5 acres
2. Minimum Lot Within Tract 1 acre
3. Minimum Lot Width 150 feet
MAXIMUM HEIGHT:
1. Principal Building
a. Stories 3
or whichever is less
b. Height 40 feet (Note 1)
2. Accessory Structures
a. Stories 1
or whichever is less
b. Height 15 feet
MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS: (Note 2)
1. Front 75/50 feet
2. Side 25 feet (note 3,4)
3. Rear 40 feet (note 3,4)
MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA .50
_____________________________________________________________________
Note 1. A height increase may be permitted in excess of forty (40] feet as a conditional
use according to Section 12.03 of this Chapter.
Note 2. In cases where the property is located adjacent to Federal Highways, the setback
requirements will not apply.
Note 3. Where any yard of any use permitted in this zone abuts a residential zone, a
minimum yard requirement of seventy-five (75) feet for each side and/or rear yard which abuts
said zone shall be provided, ten (10) feet of which shall be maintained by a screening area.
Note 4. No side yard is required for a building abutting an “I” District or a building
adjacent to another building within a Planned Industrial Park District.
13-1
Chapter 13
“T” MOBILE HOME PARK DISTRICT
13.01 USES PERMITTED
A. The parking of mobile homes in areas or lots, constructed in accordance with
specifications and regulations set forth by the Ohio Department of Health, in
the Plan Approval and Design Guide for Manufactured Home Parks dated
September 22, 1995 and the Manufactured Home Park Rules dated May 1999.
B. Office and utility buildings as necessary for the maintenance and operation of
the mobile homes in each park.
C. A building to house the equipment and supplies necessary to maintain the
streets and utilities of each park.
14-1
Chapter 14
“H” RESORT DISTRICT
14.01 USES PERMITTED
A. Any use permitted in the “R-3” Residence district, except that continuous winter
occupancy is not permitted.
B. Summer homes, trailers and cabins, which need not front upon a street or place.
C. Bathing beaches and bathhouses, but an approval of the location and treatment of
these uses must be obtained from the Clermont County Health Department before a
zoning certificate can be issued.
D. Boat docks, private and commercial.
E. The selling or leasing of fishing equipment and bait.
F. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above uses,
including the sale of food and refreshments.
14.02 CONDITIONAL USES
The following may be permitted subject to the approval of the Board of Zoning Appeals:
A. Single family homes with continuous year-round occupancy provided there is approval
by the Clermont County General Health District or the Ohio Environmental Protection
Agency for on-site wastewater treatment.
14.03 HEIGHT REGULATIONS
All of the area regulations, including front, side and rear yards and the intensity of use, are the
same as those in the “R-3” Residence District.
15-1
Chapter 15
“R-PUD” RESIDENTIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
15.01 PURPOSE
This Chapter establishes requirements and procedures for approval of special residential
developments designed as single, distinct, integrated units, providing single and/or multifamily
residential uses, necessary vehicular and pedestrian circulation, and associated open space
and/or recreational uses.
A. GENERAL - It is the purpose of the Residential Planned Unit Development Overlay
District (“R-PUD”) to provide a flexible alternative to strict application of certain
dwelling unit type, lot area, density and other requirements in Residential and
Agricultural Zoning Districts, in order to encourage coherent planned residential
development that are in keeping with modern site planning standards, so as to
promote the general public health, safety, and welfare, and other general purposes
of the Miami Township Zoning Resolution.
B. OBJECTIVES - The "R-PUD" is specifically designed to:
1. Encourage residential land development in consideration of topography,
vegetation, community character, and compatibility with surrounding land
uses;
2. Encourage creative design in the arrangement of buildings, open space,
circulation, and all related factors by permitting maximum flexibility in
design;
3. Achieve the most efficient land use by utilizing the special advantages of
planned development and coordinated planning and design, and
facilitating the economic arrangement of buildings, circulation systems,
and utilities;
4. Create high quality living environments that balance certain permitted
density increases with preservation of green space and/or provision of
recreational amenities.
C. PROCEDURES - To achieve these purposes and objectives, special supplemental
procedures to those applicable in the conventional Residence Districts are
established in this Chapter, under which development plans specifically designed to
meet these objectives may be submitted for review and/or approval. These special
provisions allow for the planned reduction or averaging of individual lot area
requirements or other modifications to further the purposes of the “R-PUD”.
15.02 QUALIFYING CONDITIONS
Any application shall meet the following conditions to qualify for consideration as an "R-PUD"
District.
15-2
A. LOCATION - The "R-PUD" site shall be located within all Residence Districts,
including the “A" Agriculture District and may not be located in any other zoning
district.
B. DEVELOPMENT - The "R-PUD" site shall be no less than five (5) contiguous acres.
Subject to Zoning Commission approval, contiguous property of any size, including
property of less than five (5) acres may be added to a “R-PUD" at any time, after a
final development plan has been approved or after construction of the development
has been initiated or completed in phases or in its entirety, provided its design is an
integral part of and is harmonized with the character of the preexisting "R-PUD"
development. All additional development to an approved “R-PUD” will be
processed, reviewed and approved in accordance with the requirements of this
Chapter. No “R-PUD” development shall be permitted except where public water
and sanitary sewer facilities are made available.
C. SINGLE CONTROL - At the time of application and throughout the development
period, all land included in the "R-PUD" must be under the single control of the
applicant or his successor, except for any portions of the development which are
finished during phased construction and transferred to private ownership in
accordance with the requirements of this Chapter.
15.03 USE REGULATIONS
Contingent upon final development plan approval, as required by the provisions of this
Chapter, the following uses may be permitted within the "R-PUD" District:
A. PERMITTED USES
1. All types of residential housing units (attached or detached) may be
permitted within the "R-PUD" Overlay District, including but not limited to
single family, two-family, and multifamily residential units;
2. Accessory buildings incidental to the principal use, which do not include any
activity conducted as a business.
B. DENSITY, HEIGHT, YARD AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS
1. The overall density of the R-PUD shall not exceed the maximum density
permitted in the underlying zoning district or the maximum lot yield that
can be expected when designing a subdivision that meets the standards of
the underlying zoning, whichever is less;
2. Minimum yard, lot size, type of dwelling unit, height and frontage
requirement of the underlying district may be varied by the Zoning
Commission for the "R-PUD" development, provided that the spirit, intent,
conditions and provisions of this Resolution are complied with in a total
development plan. The Zoning Commission, at its discretion, may require
that adherence to the minimum requirements of the underlying districts be
accomplished within all or a portion of the perimeter of the site;
3. Height, yards, and setbacks shall be as approved in the development plan,
provided the following minimum standards are observed:
15-3
a. Height: The height of any residential structure within an "R-PUD"
district shall not exceed three stories or forty-five (45) feet;
b. Minimum Distance Between Buildings: There shall be a minimum
distance of fifteen (15) feet maintained between residential
structures; and
c. Length of Structures: There shall be no continuous structure of
townhouses, attached dwellings or apartments, containing more
than eight (8) units side by side.
C. FENCES, WALLS - The location, height and type of fences and walls shall be as
approved in the development plan.
D. OFF STREET PARKING - Off-street parking, and when applicable loading, shall be
provided in accordance with Chapter 23 of the Miami Township Zoning Resolution
and additional standards set forth in this Chapter.
E. SIGNS - The number, size, and location of signs for an “R-PUD" development plan
will be in accordance with Chapter 24 of the Miami Township Zoning Resolution
unless otherwise approved by the Zoning Commission.
15.04 STANDARDS AND GUIDELINES
In order to obtain an “R-PUD”, the developer must demonstrate that the preliminary
development and final development plans meet the following standards:
A. SITE PLANNING/OPEN SPACE AND GREEN AREAS
1. To the extent possible, the natural topographic and significant landscape
features of the site shall be incorporated into the development in order to
preserve the site's natural resources and enhance its visual character;
2. Where appropriate, the design of green areas should incorporate plant
materials to define space, provide screening and privacy, define views,
serve as focal points, and soften views of buildings and pavement;
3. Whenever possible a R-PUD must be designed so the proposed green areas
adjoin the green area of any bordering development or any public park in
order to provide an interconnected greenbelt system.
B. GRADING AND DRAINAGE
1. Grading should be performed with sensitivity to existing topography and
other natural resources on the site and on adjacent sites. To the extent
practicable, grading should minimize environmental impacts;
2. Drainage shall be designed and constructed so as to not detrimentally
affect adjacent properties. These systems shall provide for the safety and
convenience of occupants and protection of dwellings, other development,
and usable lot areas from water damage, flooding, and erosion.
15-4
C. NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION AREAS
1. The resource protection standards are intended to preserve valuable and
unique site natural resources which contribute to the ecological well-being
and character of the community, and to prevent damage to the
environment and the public health, safety and welfare that may result
from loss of vegetation, hillside slippage, flooding, erosion or
inappropriate site development;
2. The applicant is required to identify the natural resources present at the
subject site, the limitations they pose to development and the required
resource protection areas not be built upon, altered or disturbed by
development;
3. All resource protection areas identified on the subject site shall be
properly notated and may be designated as permanent open space and be
made an integral part of the required open space in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter;
4. The types of site natural resources that need to be identified and
protected and the preferred method of protection are as follows:
a. Flood plains: The 100-year flood plain and areas of special flood
hazard areas as identified by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, and. in accordance with all applicable State and Clermont
County regulations.
b. Water Courses: Natural streams, ravines and drainageways, which
may or may not have been identified in the Federal Emergency
Management Agency Maps. Any alternations of these site
resources shall meet the provisions of appropriate Clermont
County regulations.
c. Lakes and Ponds: No development or diversion of existing yearround
bodies of water should be permitted except to provide
required roads.
d. Steep Slopes: Site areas where the land surface is inclined from a
horizontal plane twenty percent (20%) or greater characterized by
increased runoff, erosion, sedimentation, and slippage hazards if
disturbed by construction activities. In order to prevent slippage,
loss of vegetation and erosion, the majority of steep slope areas
should not be disturbed through the stripping of vegetation or
grading. The following standards should guide the protection of
steep slopes:
i. Steep Slopes of 20% to 30%
• One hundred percent (100%) of such resource
protection areas should remain undeveloped when
they are incorporated into the open space system for
the “R-PUD” project, in accordance with this section.
• Seventy percent (70%) of such resource protection
areas should remain undisturbed.
ii. Steep Slopes of Greater than 30%:
• One hundred percent (100%) of such resource
protection areas should remain undeveloped when
15-5
they are incorporated into the open space system for
the “R-PUD” project, in accordance with this section.
• Eighty-five percent (85%) of such resource protection
areas should remain undisturbed.
iii. Development of steep slopes should be done with
caution, and excavation and alteration of the ground
should be minimized. When steep slopes are being
proposed for development, the Zoning Commission may
require specific performance standards to be applied to
the development in order to mitigate impacts.
e. Woodland Areas: Areas or stands of trees (measured canopy to
canopy) covering an area greater than one-quarter (l /4) acre in
which:
i. The majority of the trees are young canopy (4”-16” tree
caliper); or
ii. The majority of the trees are fifteen (15) feet in height or
greater and form at least a twenty percent (20%) canopy
cover.
iii. Any grove of trees without regard to a minimum area
consisting of mature canopy (16" and greater tree
caliper).
iv. All development should be planned, designed and
constructed so that existing healthy trees and vegetation
are preserved to the maximum extent possible, according
to the following:
• Young Canopy Woodland: No more than sixty percent
(60%) should be cleared.
• Mature Canopy Woodland: No more than thirty
percent (30%) should be cleared.
D. CIRCULATION
1. The street, access and parking system shall provide for the smooth, safe
convenient and functional movement of vehicles and pedestrians both on
and off-site;
2. Circulation shall:
a. Minimize the conflict between pedestrian and vehicular traffic, and
b. Minimize the number of vehicular turning movements and points of
vehicular conflict, particularly at access points.
3. Vehicular Access:
a. Acceleration, deceleration and/or left turn lanes may be required if
the Township finds that they are necessary to preserve safety
and/or the traffic-carrying capacity of the existing street.
b. A traffic impact study shall be required for all R-PUD developments.
15-6
4. Site Distance Triangles:
a. All sites shall he designed so that plants and structures on the site
do not interfere with the safe movement of motor vehicle traffic,
bicycles or pedestrians.
b. The site distance triangle should be determined in accordance with
the most recent, relevant and applicable standards. The sight
distance triangle should vary depending on the design speed of the
street and the width of the street.
E. PEDESTRIAN CIRCULATION
1. Sidewalks shall be constructed along all public and private streets. These
public sidewalks can be supplemented with pedestrian paths that traverse
the common open space;
2. Sidewalks and/or pedestrian paths shall be constructed and located in
order to provide a convenient, safe, and visible pedestrian path between
parking area and building entrance. Whenever a pedestrian path or a bike
path traverses a parking lot, a safe and efficient pedestrian system shall be
clearly designated;
3. When deemed necessary for proper pedestrian circulation the Township
may require sidewalks and/or pedestrian paths be constructed to provide
access from the end of a cul-de-sac to the nearest adjoining street.
4. Whenever a proposed development adjoins a collector street sidewalks
shall be constructed along the collector the full length of the subject
property.
F. LIGHTING
1. On-site exterior lighting should provide illumination adequate to permit safe
night-time activities;
2. All roadway, street, parking and walkway lights shall be shielded so that
substantially all the directly emitted light falls within the property line.
G. SCREENING AND BUFFERING
1. Screening areas shall be provided for the purpose of minimizing the friction
between incompatible land uses and improving the aesthetic and functional
quality of new development;
2. Where vegetative and/or topographic conditions that provide a natural
screening and buffer exist prior to development of properties in question
every effort shall be made to retain such conditions. In such cases,
additional screening may not be required, provided that provision is made
for maintenance of such areas.
H. LOT REQUIREMENTS - The minimum lot size for a single family home shall be
8,400 square feet with a minimum lot width of 70.
I. DESIGN STANDARDS - The Zoning Commission shall consider quality of design when
reviewing all R-PUD applications. Design standards shall include:
15-7
1. The use of unique street design and landscaping to provide for traffic
calming, including but not limited to, landscaped islands, flared sidewalks,
or street narrowing;
2. A sufficient number of housing types and models are offered to avoid a
monotonous streetscape. Provisions are established to avoid having
identical building elevations constructed on adjoining lots;
3. The development offers a variety of lot sizes, housing types and
construction material including, but not limited to, brick, stone, vinyl or
wood siding;
4. Trees and foundation plantings are proposed for the front yard outside the
public right-of-way.
J. PERIMETER REQUIREMENTS - If topographical or other barriers do not provide
adequate privacy for existing uses adjacent to the “R-PUD” development, the Zoning
Commission shall impose either of the following requirements and may impose
both:
1. Structures and parking areas located at the perimeter of the “R-PUD”
development shall be set back by a distance sufficient to protect the
privacy and amenity of adjacent existing uses within appropriate buffering
as determined by the Zoning Commission;
2. Structures located on the perimeter of the “R-PUD” development shall be
permanently screened in a manner, which is sufficient to protect the
privacy and amenity of adjacent existing uses.
K. COMMON OPEN SPACE RECREATION AREA - The Zoning Commission may
recommend approval of the "R-PUD" development if it finds that the development
plan contains areas to be allocated for common open space in accordance with the
following requirements:
1. Common open space should be set aside for active and/or passive
recreation. Central neighborhood greens and smaller pocket parks are
encouraged. Active recreation can include such activities as golf courses,
swimming pools, tennis courts and playgrounds. Passive recreation can
include sitting areas, walking paths, gazebos or similar uses;
2. Streets, rights-of-way, parking areas and public utility easements having a
width of 50 feet of more cannot be considered as common open space;
3. For “R-PUD” projects to be developed with one hundred percent (100%)
single family units, Twenty percent (20%) of the total (gross) site area of the
proposed “R-PUD” development, shall be set aside and be dedicated to a
public or private agency as common open space and recreation area in
compliance with the covenants attached to final approved development
plan;
4. For projects to be developed with one hundred percent (100%) multi-family
units, a minimum of thirty percent (30%) of the total gross site area of the
proposed “R-PUD” development shall be set aside and be dedicated to a
public or private agency as common open space and recreation area in
compliance with the covenants attached to the final approved development
plan. Required perimeter setbacks and required setbacks between buildings
shall not be considered in the calculation of common open space;
15-8
5. For “R-PUD” projects to be developed with single family and multifamily
units a minimum of twenty percent (20%) of the total (cross] site area of the
proposed “R-PUD” development shall be set aside and be dedicated to a
public or private agency as common open space and recreation area in
compliance with the covenants attached to the final approved development
plan;
6. At least thirty percent (30%) of such required common open space areas
shall be contiguous; they shall constitute autonomous open space and he
exclusive of all streets, structures, single family lots, parking areas,
sidewalks, and landscaped areas incidental to the vehicular circulation
system. Independent trails and bridle paths of sufficient width and design
may be included in the calculation;
7. Such open space areas shall be physically situated so as to be readily
accessible, and available to, all residents of the “R-PUD” development.
L. ACCESS POINTS - At its discretion and in consideration of special project features,
the Zoning Commission may require a specific number of access points to serve the
proposed “R-PUD”, development.
M. UTILITIES - All utilities shall be located underground.
15.05 SPECIAL PUD DEVELOPMENTS - TRADITIONAL NEIGHBORHOOD DEVELOPMENT (TND)
A. PURPOSE - The purpose of this section is to provide standards and guidelines for the
development of a traditional residential neighborhood. A traditional neighborhood:
1. Is compact.
2. Is designed for human scale.
3. Provides for a mix of single family and multi-family housing styles, types and
sizes in close proximity to each other that creates a sense of community.
4. Incorporates interconnected streets, alleys, and sidewalks.
5. Incorporates significant open space, including village greens, active and
passive recreation areas, and pocket parks.
B. APPLICABLE ZONING DISTRICT - The underlining zoning for TND developments shall
be the “R-3” Residence District.
C. APPLICABLE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS - The development standards set forth
within this section are designed to supplement the standards found elsewhere in
this chapter. Where there is a conflict, the standards found in this section will
apply.
D. DENSITY AND LOT SIZE
1. The traditional neighborhood development shall have a gross density of not
more than four (4) units per acre with single-family lot widths of 40-50 feet;
2. Multi-family units shall be limited to row style, town homes with main
entrances at the public sidewalk, garages to the rear accessed from an alley,
and no more than six (6) units in a structure. The design of the multi-family
units must be architecturally compatible with the single-family homes. The
15-9
number of multi-family units shall not exceed 20 percent of the total number
of dwelling units.
E. CIRCULATION
1. Vehicular Circulation – an integrated and interconnected public street
system shall be provided. The streets shall be wide enough to
accommodate on street parking on one side of the street and still have
room for emergency vehicle access. Boulevard entrances into the
development are encouraged. Street trees shall be provided throughout
the development;
2. Alleys - rear alleys shall be provided to access to the garage for each home;
3. Pedestrian Circulation - sidewalks shall be provided along all public streets
F. ARCHITECTURAL STANDARDS
1. The Traditional Neighborhood Development shall provide for the following:
a. A variety of architectural styles with a mix of one and two story
homes;
b. Covered front porches on each house. The porch must extend along
at least 50% of the front elevation of the house. The porches shall
be a minimum depth of six (6) feet;
c. Rear yard garages with access from alleys;
d. Varied landscaping to add to the diversity.
G. SETBACKS
1. Front Yard Setback – the front yard setback shall be no greater than 12 feet
from the right-of-way;
2. Corner lots – on corner lots the maximum setback from the right-of-way
shall be 25 feet;
3. Side Yard Setback – the side yard setback shall be a minimum of 5 feet. Zero
Lot line homes will be permitted provided there is access to the rear yard
and provided there is an easement on the adjoining property to permit
maintenance of the home;
4. Rear Yard Setback – The rear yard setback for the single-family and multifamily
residences shall be 35 feet;
5. Garage Rear yard Setback – the rear yard setback for the garage shall be 30
feet;
6. Garage Side yard Setback – the side yard setback for the garage shall be 5
feet.
H. OPEN SPACE
1. Each TND Development shall have a minimum of 30% open space;
2. Each TND Development shall preserve natural features such as flood plains,
riparian corridors, steep slopes, woodlands, and lakes or ponds;
3. A Village or Neighborhood Square shall be provided in a central area
accessible by walking from anywhere within the development;
4. Gazebos, gardens and other passive parks areas shall be provided and shall
be evenly distributed throughout the development.
15-10
15.06 APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCEDURES
A. INITIATION
1. Application for approval of an “R-PUD” may be initiated only by the owner
of the property or his/her agent proposed for designation as an “R-PUD”;
2. Whenever an “R-PUD” is proposed, before a permit for the erection of a
permanent building in such “R-PUD” shall be granted, and before a
subdivision plat of any part thereof may be filed in the office of the
Township Zoning Commission and County Planning Commission, the
developer or his authorized agent shall apply for and secure approval of
such "R-PUD” in accordance with the procedures set forth in this Chapter;
3. An “R-PUD" may be established by action of the Township Trustees and only
after the Trustees' consideration of a recommendation from the Township
Zoning Commission in accordance with the requirements and procedures of
this Chapter, and all other applicable Ohio Revised Code (ORC)
requirements.
B. PROCEDURE - The application for a “R-PUD” commenced by a property owner,
developer or his authorized agent shall be processed in a three-part procedures which
requires the owner or agent to: Attend a Pre-application Conference; Submit a Formal
Application, the required Review Fee in accordance with the Fee Schedule, and a
Preliminary Development Plan; and Submit a Final Development Plan and Subdivision
Plat as required. Zoning Commission and Township Trustees shall act upon the
application as prescribed by the following provisions of this chapter and in accordance
with all applicable Ohio Revised Code requirements.
1. Pre-application Conference
a. Prior to submitting an application for development plan approval,
an applicant for a “R-PUD” development shall meet with the
Community Development Director to present the concept of the
proposed development prior to the preparation of detail plans and
to discuss the procedures and standards for development plan
approval.
b. The pre-application conference is intended to facilitate the filing
and consideration of a complete application and no representation
made by the Community Development Director during such
conference or at any other time shall be binding upon the Township
with respect to the application subsequently submitted.
c. The pre-application conference presentation shall include
appropriate information and material necessary to explain the
proposed development, including but not limited to, sketch plans
and ideas development, tentative public utilities proposals, site
location, etc.
2. Formal Application and Preliminary Development Plan
a. An application shall be filed with the Community Development
Director by the owner or owners or authorized agent of all property
included in the development. A narrative summary of the
15-11
development objectives shall be prepared and file with the
application, completely documenting the opportunities and
limitations to development, the facts, and studies supporting the
proposed development. Eighteen (18) copies of the application and
preliminary development plan shall be filed with the application.
b. The application must include the written and graphic submittals
specified below. Incomplete applications will not be accepted and
processed.
3. The preliminary development shall include all of the following information:
a. A completed application form provided by the Community
Development Director of Miami Township.
b. The required preliminary development plan review fees in
accordance with the Miami Township fee schedule; and
c. Eighteen (18) copies of the preliminary development plan.
d. For site plans less than 25 acres, the preliminary development plan
shelf be drawn for the subject property to a scale not smaller than
one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet, to be considered
complete. For site plans larger than 25 acres, an appropriate scale
shall be used. All preliminary development plans shall be dated and
shall include the following information as required by this
Resolution.
e. All property lines, shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon
showing directional bearings and distances adjacent streets, and
location with reference to identifiable street intersection. A list of
the names and addresses of the owners of all property owners
located within the subject site, and within two hundred (200) feet in
all directions of the subject site, together with corresponding parcel
numbers.
f. Name of development, legal description of property north arrow,
scale, acreage name and address of record owner and engineer,
architect or land planner, or the person responsible for preparing
the plan.
g. Vicinity map locating the subject property in Miami Township. Both
vicinity map and preliminary development plan shall be oriented
with parallel north arrows. North arrow shall be oriented to the top
of the page.
h. The total lot area of the subject property.
i. The present zoning of the subject property and all adjacent
properties.
j. All public and private rights-of-way and easement lines located on
or adjacent to the subject property which are proposed to be
continued, created, enlarged, relocated or abandoned.
k. Existing topography, and approximate delineation of any
topographical changes shown by contour with appropriate
intervals to ensure accurate review.
l. The location of every existing and proposed building with number
of floors, gross floor area, and number of dwelling units per
building.
15-12
m. Any modifications, changes and additions to existing building(s),
including floor area, heights and setbacks.
n. The amount of area proposed for common open space and
recreational use, including the location and arrangement of
recreational facilities, and identification of unique natural features
to be retained, and a statement of ownership of such facilities and
the means of maintaining all common areas.
o. The proposed finished grade(s) of new buildings supplemented
where necessary with spot elevations.
p. Location and dimensions of all curb cuts, driving aisles, off-street
parking and loading and/or unloading spaces including number of
spaces, angle of stalls.
q. Location of proposed pedestrian walkways, identifying
approximate dimensions.
r. Location of proposed streets, identifying approximate dimensions
of pavement, right-of-way widths, and grades.
s. Location of all existing and proposed water, sanitary sewer, and
storm drainage lines, indicating approximate pipe sizes. Indication
should also be given regarding the provision of electric and
telephone service, including cable service.
t. Limits of existing flood hazard areas within and adjacent to the
property, accurately showing the limits of building encroachments
and earth fill within this area, with 100-year water surface
elevations and proposed finished floor elevations denoted:
u. Identification of the soil types and subsurface geology of the
subject property, indicating anticipated problems and proposed
methods of handling said problems.
v. Existing and proposed location(s) of outdoor lighting, signs, screen
plantings, fences, and landscaping. Any existing woodlands of
mature vegetation, and any other significant natural features, such
as water bodies, drainage courses, wetlands, and wildlife habitats,
must be included, and every good faith effort made to preserve,
maintain, and enhance same.
w. Location and screening or other description to indicate control and
handling of solid waste. Indicate dumpster pad where dumpster is
to be used.
x. A schedule of development, including the staging and phasing of:
i. Streets, utilities, and after public facility improvements, in
order of priority, and
ii. Dedication of land to public use or set aside for common
ownership.
y. Elevations of all faces of buildings and structures, at an appropriate
scale for the graphic representation of the materials employed.
Such elevations must also indicate:
i. Heights of buildings and structures,
ii. Roofs and overhangs, and
iii. Special design features.
15-13
z. Additional information or engineering data, in such form and
content as necessary, to determine that the preliminary
development plan meets the standards of this Chapter and other
requirements and performance standards of the Zoning Resolution
for Miami Township and of other public agencies in Clermont
County, to ensure proper integration of the proposed project in the
area and the prevention of adverse and undesirable impacts an the
community.
4. The aforementioned information required for preliminary development plan
review may be combined in any suitable and convenient manner as long as
the data required is clearly indicated and comprehended;
5. Depending on the nature of the preliminary development plan review
application one or more of the aforementioned preliminary development
plan requirements may be waived by the Community Development
Director. To obtain a waiver the applicant must submit a statement to the
Community Development Director indicating reasons why the requirements
should be waived. Community Development Director may grant waivers
only when the material supplied by the applicant clearly demonstrates that
the required information is unnecessary for a full and adequate review of
the impact the proposed development shall have an the existing character
of the neighborhood and/or the spirit of the Zoning Resolution. The
decision of the Community Development Director with respect to the
waiver is subject to review upon appeal to the board of Zoning Appeals;
6. Review and Approval of Preliminary Development Plans shall Proceed as
follows:
a. The Township shall review the required “R-PUD” Preliminary
Development Plan and accompanying documents using the
procedures, standards, limitations and guidelines set forth in this
Chapter. To be considered complete, a Preliminary Development
Plan shall identify and provide all the information required under
this Section.
b. At the time of the filing of an application for review and approval of
the “R-PUD” Preliminary Development Plan, the applicant is
required to pay the required review fee in accordance with the
Township's effective schedule of fees.
c. The submittal of the application for an “R-PUD” District and all the
required material for review and approval of the Preliminary
Development Plan shall proceed as follows:
i. Step 1 - The applicant shall submit 18 copies of the
Preliminary Development Plan to the Community
Development Director.
ii. Step 2 - The Community Development Director shall
transmit copies of the Preliminary Development Plan and
accompanying documents to the following entities:
• The Township Administrator,
• The Clermont County Planning Commission and other
appropriate county and state review agencies, and
15-14
iii. Step 3 - The Community Development Director shall
within thirty (30) days collect reports from the Clermont
County Planning Commission and other appropriate
review agencies and prepare a staff report and
recommendation for the Township Zoning Commission.
iv. Step 4 - The Township Zoning Commission shall set a time
and place and conduct a public hearing. Notice of such
hearing shall be given by the Township Zoning
Commission by one publication in one or more
newspapers of general circulation in the Township at least
fifteen days before the date of such hearing. Written
notice of the hearing shall also be mailed by the Zoning
Commission by first class mail at least twenty days before
the date of the public hearing to all owners of property
within the subject site and within two hundred (200) feet
in all directions of the subject site.
v. *Step 5a - The Zoning Commission's written report to
the Township Trustees within thirty (30) days of meeting
held as per **Step 5, shall make a recommendation for
approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval and
shall include the following:
• A statement that the plan is consistent with the
intent and purpose-of this section.
• A statement indicating the relationship beneficial or
adverse, of the proposed development to the
adjacent properties and to the neighborhood in
which it is proposed to be established.
• A statement that present or planned utilities,
roadways, and other public services will adequately
service the overall development.
• A statement that the uses permitted in the
development plan serve the area, preserve unique
topographic, historical, special environmental or
other unique features, and/or meet special
requirements set forth in the development
objectives.
• Statements that all specific conditions set forth
previously in this Chapter are met.
[*Editor’s note, “Step 5a” read as “Step 5”. **Editor’s note, “Step
5” read as “Step 4.” See Zoning Cases 446 and 490.]
vi. Step 6 - Upon receipt of the Zoning Commission
recommendation, the Township Trustees shall either
approve, reject, or modify the recommendation of the
Zoning Commission after public hearing. The public
hearing shall be conducted by the Township Trustees
within 30 days of receipt of the of the Zoning
15-15
Commission recommendation and the Trustees shall
render a decision within 20 days of that hearing notice.
Notice of such hearing shall be given by the Township
Trustees by one publication in one or more newspapers
of general circulation in the Township at least fifteen
days before the date of such hearing. Written notice of
the hearing shall also be mailed by the Township
Trustees by first class mail at least twenty days before
the date of the public hearing to all owners of property
within the subject site and within two hundred (200)
feet in all directions of the subject site.
vii. Step 7 - If the Township Trustees grant the “R-PUD”
Overlay District, the Official Township Zoning Map shall be
so modified and appropriately notated for the subject
property by adding the prefix “R-PUD” next to the
underlying zoning district letter, with data of approval and
case number.
7. Final Development Plan:
a. Within nine (9) months following the approval of the Preliminary
Development Plan and the establishment of the “R-PUD” Overlay
District, the applicant shall submit to the Community
Development Director all required items to obtain final
authorization to proceed with construction. Failure of the
applicant to submit the final development plan within nine (9)
months shall nullify the approval and shall cause the Zoning
Inspector to remove the prefix “R-PUD” from the Official Township
Zoning Map.
b. The applicant shall submit the following items to the Community
Development Department:
i. Application and Review Fee;
ii. Final Development Plan;
iii. Site Plan Map(s)/Elevation and Details, and
iv. Supporting documentation.
c. To insure conformance with the purpose and all requirements of
the “R-PUD” Overlay District, the Community Development Director
may require all necessary detailed plans and documents to perform
the adequate review of the Final Development Plan.
d. As a detailed extension of the approved Preliminary Development
Plan, the Final Plan shall contain specifications of all data and
information contained in the previous plan of sufficient detail to
allow for review and approval for Zoning Certificate.
e. The final detailed development plan shall conform substantially to
the preliminary development plan. No changes, erasures,
modifications or revisions shall be made to any approved plan after
approval has been given unless said changes erasures, modifications
or revisions are first submitted to and approved by the Community
Development Director. In determining whether to permit revision
of the preliminary development plan after approval, the Community
15-16
Development Director shall proceed as follows. For minor
modifications, which are defined as follows: with respect to Section
15.06B.3 a 10 percent change in existing buildings, floor area
heights, and setbacks, and any change under Section 15.06B.3.f, g,
s, t or u, the Community Development Director may permit these
changes upon determination that the change does not adversely
impact upon the adjacent property owners. For major modifications
which are any changes in use or in Section 15.06B.3.e, h-l, n-r and vx,
the applicant must submit a new preliminary development plan
which will be reviewed in accordance with the procedures in
Chapter 15.
f. For developments which are designed to be built in phases and for
which the preliminary plan was approved under Chapter 15, further
review of the final development plans shall be in accordance with
this section.
g. The Final Development Plan which shall be submitted in twelve (12)
copies must be at a scale not smaller than one inch equals fifty feet
(1' = 50'). It shall satisfy all corresponding requirements of the
preliminary plan and include all necessary detailed information
regarding site development and building construction.
8. Record Plat - All “R-PUD” developments shall conform to the Clermont County
Subdivision Regulations. The Community Development Director shall review said
record plat for compliance with final “R-PUD” plan.
15.07 COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT
It shall be incumbent upon the Community Development Director or his/her duly authorized
representative to make all inspections and certifications necessary to ensure that development
occurs in accordance with the approved final development plan.
In the event that the Community Development Director finds that a construction in accordance
with the approved final development plan and record plat(s] is not being done, he/she shall
issue a stop work order. It shall be incumbent upon the contractor or developer to correct
those items that are in violation before construction may resume. All action required to bring
development into compliance with the approved final development plan shall be at the
developer's, builder's, or owner’s expense.
15.08 EXPIRATION
If substantial construction has not been completed within a period of twelve (12) consecutive
months from the date of approval of the final development plan, said plan shall be deemed
null and void. The Community Development Director may extend the construction period if
sufficient proof can be demonstrated that the construction was delayed due to circumstances
beyond the applicant’s control: and that prevailing conditions have not changed appreciably to
render the approved final development, plan obsolete. For purposes of this Chapter,
substantial construction shall mean installation of roadways including curbs and utilities.
16-1
Chapter 16
“MU” MIXED USE, INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT
16.01 PURPOSE
The purpose of the Mixed Use, Institutional District is to provide for a variety of land uses at
appropriate locations that support and complement the objective of providing conference,
retreat and educational/religious/cultural/charitable programs by a not for profit organization
including a provision for agricultural, conference/educational/office, residential, retail and
recreational uses. It is the purpose of this district to provide flexibility in site design and to
promote distinct, integrated developments that harmonize with their surroundings.
16.02 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES:
A. Institutions of an educational, religious, cultural, charitable, or philanthropic nature
and associated administrative offices
B. Farming, including the raising of plants and animals
C. Sale of agricultural products
D. Single Family Residences
E. Conference/Retreat Center including dormitories and retreat cottages
G. Book Store
H. Art Gallery
I. Schools and colleges for academic instruction, located not less than seventy-five
(75) feet from a residence district and public buildings including libraries, museums
and art galleries, located not less than seventy-five (75) feet from a residence
district.
J. Parks, playgrounds, school athletic facilities, recreational and community center
buildings and grounds, provided that any principal building used therefore shall be
located not less than seventy-five (75) feet from a residence district.
K. Cemetery
16.03 CONDITIONAL USES REQUIRING BOARD AUTHORIZATION:
A. Buildings in excess of thirty-five (35) feet in height if the following conditions are met
satisfactorily:
16-2
1. For each foot of height increase in excess of thirty-five (35) feet, buildings must be
set back at least an additional two (2) feet from the required minimum setback yard
requirements; and
2. The increased building height will not adversely affect the adjacent properties, and
3. The increased building height is compatible with the existing and future
development character and pattern; and
4. The site plan shows that proper mitigation measures have been proposed to
address conditions 2 and 3 above.
B. Restaurants provided the following conditions are met satisfactorily:
1. The restaurant shall be located not less than seventy-five (75) feet from adjoining
residential properties.
2. The parking for the restaurant shall be located not less than twenty-five (25) feet
from any adjoining residential properties.
3. The parking lot shall be screened with landscaping to obscure its view from
adjoining residential properties.
4. Parking lot and other exterior lighting shall be designed to ensure all lighting
remains on site and does not spill over onto adjoining properties.
5. The applicant can clearly demonstrate the restaurant will not have an adverse effect
on the neighborhood character.
C. Multi-Family Residence provided the following conditions are met satisfactorily:
1. The multi-family development is clearly supports and furthers the purpose of this
chapter.
2. The gross density of the multi-family development will not exceed 2 units per acre
and the net density will not exceed 8 units per acre.
3. Any building within the multi-family development must be setback at least seventyfive
(75) feet from any adjoining single-family residential zoning district.
4. Parking for the multi-family development must be setback at least twenty-five feet
from any single-family residential zoning district.
16.04 ACCESSORY USES:
A. Accessory uses, buildings, or other structures customarily incidental to any aforesaid
permitted use, including barns, stables, and garages under conditions specified
herein.
B. Coffee shop when located totally within a book store
16-3
16.05 SITE PLAN REVIEW
All uses involving new construction and/or additions to existing structures are subject to the
requirements of Chapter 27, Site Plan Review.
16.06 HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building shall exceed two and one-half stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height.
16.07-YARD REQUIREMENTS
All applicable setbacks for this district are contained in Sections 16.08 through
16.11.
16.08 FRONT YARD AREA REGULATIONS:
A. There shall be a front yard fifty (50) feet in depth measured from the right-of-way
line. The right-of-way of any street shall be deemed to be fifty (50) feet unless a
greater width is proposed in the official highway map of Clermont County. In that
case, the front yard shall be measured from the property right-of-way as shown in
said map.
B. Where lots have a double frontage, the required front yard shall be provided on
both streets.
C. Where a lot is located at the intersection of two or more streets, there shall be a
front yard on each street side of a corner lot, except that the buildable width of such
lot shall not be reduced to less than forty (40) feet. No accessory building shall
project beyond the front yard line on either street.
16.09 SIDE YARD AREA REQUIREMENTS:
There shall be a side yard on each side of a building, which yard shall have a width of not less
than twenty (20) feet, except when abutting residential and then the setback shall be seventyfive
(75) feet.
16.10 REAR YARD AREA REGULATIONS:
There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than forty (40) feet, except when abutting
residential and then the setback shall be seventy-five (75) feet.
16.11 MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN BUILDINGS
The minimum distance between buildings shall be fifteen (15) feet unless applicable building or
fire codes require a greater separation.
16-4
16.12 OFF STREET PARKING
All off street parking and loading facilities shall be designed in accordance with Chapter 23 of
the Miami Township Zoning Resolution, Off Street Parking and Loading Regulations.
16.13 SIGNS
All signage must be in accordance with Chapter 24 of the Miami Township Zoning Resolution,
Signs.
16.14 INTENSITY OF USE:
A. Minimum Tract for Mixed Use, Institutional District: Fifty (50) acres. For schoolrelated
athletic or other school facilities, minimum tract size is twenty-five (25)
acres. However, development of a smaller tract adjacent to an existing approved
site may be permitted providing the proposed development conforms to and
extends the original development as if the new site has been a part of the
originally approved site plan layout.
B. Every lot or tract of land shall have a minimum width of one hundred and fifty (150)
feet at the building line and an area of not less than forty thousand (40,000) square
feet.
C. For the purpose of this Chapter all Permitted, Conditional and Accessory uses may
be constructed on a single parcel of land.
16.15 SCREENING AND BUFFERING
All retail and conference uses, when within one hundred (100) feet of adjoining residential, must
be screened from adjoining properties by a minimum twenty-five (25) foot wide landscape
buffer. Existing vegetation may serve as the buffer provided there is sufficient coverage to
produce an opaque screen. Where existing vegetation is insufficient to produce an opaque
screen then a mixture of deciduous and non-deciduous trees must be planted to achieve the
screen. A landscape plan must be submitted to the Township as part of the Site Plan Review
process for review and approval.
17-1
Chapter 17
State Route 28 Urban Village
Planned Unit Development
17.01 PURPOSE
Pursuant to Section 519.021, Paragraph “C” of the Ohio Revised Code, Miami Township is establishing
Planned Unit Development Regulations for the purpose of implementing the State Route 28
Redevelopment/Transformation Plan. The purpose of this Zoning District is to allow development and
redevelopment of land within the Business SR 28 Corridor in Miami Township consistent with the urban
design principles of traditional neighborhoods and town centers and in conformance with the adopted SR
28 Redevelopment/Transformation Plan. The Planned Unit Development District is designed to promote
diversity and integration of uses and structures in a planned development through flexible design
standards that:
1. Are compact,
2. Are designed for the human scale,
3. Provide a mix of uses, including residential, commercial, civic, and open space uses, in
close proximity to one another within the neighborhood,
4. Provide a mix of housing styles, types, and sizes,
5. Incorporate a system of interconnected streets with sidewalks, bikeways, and transit that
offer multiple routes for motorists, pedestrians, and bicyclists and provides for the
connections of those streets to existing and future developments;
6. Incorporate significant environmental features into the design
7. Provide architectural design diversity
8. Are consistent with the SR 28 Redevelopment/Transformation Plan.
17.02 LOCATION AND BOUNDARY AREA
The Planned Unit Development District Site shall be located within the SR 28 Business Corridor and shall
have the same boundaries as the SR 28 Redevelopment/Transformation Plan as adopted by the Miami
Township Board of Trustees and as shown in Exhibit “A” of this Chapter.
17.03 PROCEDURES
To achieve these purposes and objectives, special supplemental procedures to those applicable in the
conventional underlying zoning districts are established in this District, under which development plans
specifically designed to meet these objectives shall be submitted for review and/or approval by Miami
Township. These special provisions allow for the planned modification of the strict requirements of the
underlying zone, an increase in the intensity of development and other modifications to further the
purpose of the District.
17.04 LAND USES AND SETBACKS BY DISTRICT
17-2
The SR 28 Redevelopment/Transformation Plan is divided into specific districts – The Boulevard, The Town
Center, The Civic Center, The Neighborhoods, Retail and the Auto Sales/Service Area. Permitted and
prohibited uses and setbacks for each district is shown below:
A. The Boulevard - Principle permitted uses, conditional uses and accessory uses are as
follows:
1. All uses permitted in the “B-1” Neighborhood Business District and the “B-2”
General Business District, with the addition of residential, institutional, civic, open
space and parks, and with the exception of the following; vehicle sales, self
storage facilities, outdoor storage, contractor storage yards, landscape
businesses,
2. Structures in the Boulevard District have no minimum setback requirement. All
commercial, civic and institutional buildings shall abut a public sidewalk.
• Exception. A commercial structure may be setback from the public
sidewalk when creating a courtyard for uses such as an outdoor café.
B. The Town Center - Principle permitted uses, conditional uses and accessory uses are as
follows:
1. All uses permitted in the “B-1” Neighborhood Business District and the “B-2”
General Business District, with the addition of residential, institutional, civic, open
space and parks, and with the exception of the following, vehicle sales, self
storage facilities, outdoor storage, contractor storage yards, landscape
businesses, drive-thru facilities, gas stations/convenience store
2. Structures in the Town Center District have no minimum setback requirements.
All commercial, civic, and institutional buildings shall abut a public sidewalk.
• Exception. A commercial structure may be setback from the public
sidewalk when creating a courtyard for uses such as an outdoor café.
C. The Civic Center - Principle permitted uses, conditional uses and accessory uses are as
follows:
1. All uses permitted in the “B-1” Neighborhood Business District and the “B-2”
General Business District, with the addition of residential, institutional, civic, open
space and parks, and with the exception of the following, vehicle sales, self
storage facilities, outdoor storage, contractor storage yards, landscape
businesses,
2. Structures in the Civic Center District have no minimum setback requirements. All
commercial, civic and institutional buildings shall front on a public sidewalk.
• Exception. A commercial structure may be setback from the public
sidewalk when creating a courtyard for uses such as an outdoor café.
17-3
C. The Automotive Service/Sales District – Principle permitted uses, conditional uses and
accessory uses are as follows:
1. The purpose of this district is to provide for automobile oriented businesses such
as vehicle sales, vehicle service, drive-thru restaurants and similar businesses.
Permitted uses within this district include all uses in the “B-2” General Business
District.
2. Setbacks in the automotive service/sales district shall be the same as the setbacks
required of the B-2 General Business District.
D. Retail District - Principle permitted uses, conditional uses and accessory uses are as
follows:
1. The purpose of this district is to provide for general retail, restaurant, commercial
and office uses. Permitted uses within this district include all uses in the “B-1”
Neighborhood Business District and “B-2” General Business District.
2. Setbacks in the retail district shall be the same as the setbacks required of the B-2
General Business District.
E. The Neighborhoods – There are three proposed residential neighborhoods.
1. Northwest Neighborhood –
a. Principle permitted uses, conditional uses and accessory uses
are as follows:
• Single-family Detached Dwellings
• Single-family Attached Dwellings, including duplexes,
townhomes and row houses
• Live/Work Units
• Small scale retail and service uses
b. Single family detached residences will have a front setback
between (0 and 20 feet) and a rear yard setback of at least 30
feet. Provision for zero lot line single family dwellings should
be made, provided that a reciprocal access easement is
recorded for both lots and townhouses or other attached
dwellings, provided that all dwellings have pedestrian access to
the rear yard other than through the principal structure. The
minimum distance between single-family detached dwellings
shall be 10 feet.
c. The maximum number of attached single family dwellings,
townhomes, or row houses that an be contain in one
continuous structure is eight (8) units
2. Southern Neighborhood –
17-4
a. Principle permitted uses, conditional uses and accessory uses
are as follows:
• Single Family Detached Dwellings
• Single family Attached Dwellings, including duplexes,
townhomes and row houses
• Live/Work Units
b. Single-family detached residences will have a front setback
between (0 and 20 feet) and a rear yard setback of at least 30
feet. Provision for zero lot line single family dwellings should
be made, provided that a reciprocal access easement is
recorded for both lots and townhouses or other attached
dwellings, provided that all dwellings have pedestrian access to
the rear yard other than through the principal structure. The
minimum distance between single-family detached dwellings
shall be 10 feet.
c. The maximum number of attached single family dwellings,
townhomes, or row houses that an be contain in one
continuous structure is eight (8) units
3. North Central Neighborhood –
a. Principle permitted uses, conditional uses and accessory uses
are as follows:
• Single Family Detached Dwellings
• Single family Attached Dwellings, including duplexes,
townhomes and row houses
b. Single-family detached residences will have a front setback
between (0 and 20 feet) and a rear yard setback of at least 30
feet. Provision for zero lot line single family dwellings should
be made, provided that a reciprocal access easement is
recorded for both lots and townhouses or other attached
dwellings, provided that all dwellings have pedestrian access to
the rear yard other than through the principal structure. The
minimum distance between single-family detached dwellings
shall be 10 feet.
c. The maximum number of attached single family dwellings,
townhomes, or row houses that an be contain in one
continuous structure is eight (8) units
17.05 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
17-5
In order to ensure the proposed development meets the intent and spirit of the SR 28
Redevelopment/Transformation Plan the developer must demonstrate the final development plan meets
the following standards:
A. OPEN SPACE, PLAZAS AND GREEN AREAS
1. Open space shall include neighborhood parks, playgrounds, town squares, plazas and
linear environmental corridors.
2. Where appropriate, the design of green areas should incorporate plant materials to
define space, define views, provide screening of parking lots, provide for privacy,
serve as focal points, and soften views of buildings and pavement.
B. GRADING AND DRAINAGE
1. Grading should be performed with sensitivity to existing topography and other
natural resources on the site and on adjacent sites. To the extent practicable, grading
should minimize environmental impacts.
2. Drainage shall be designed and constructed so as to not detrimentally affect adjacent
properties and be in conformance with Clermont County stormwater management
requirements. These systems shall provide for the safety and convenience of
occupants and protection of dwellings, other development, and usable lot areas from
water damage, flooding, and erosion.
C. LOT AND BLOCK STANDARDS
1. Typical street design should provide for blocks that are two hundred forty (240) feet -
four hundred (400) feet deep by three hundred sixty (360) feet – four hundred eighty
(480) feet wide. Exceptions will be reviewed on a case by case basis.
2. A variety of lot sizes shall be provided in order to facilitate diversity in housing types
and building design.
3. Lot widths should create a relatively symmetrical street cross section that reinforces
the street as a simple unified public space.
D. RESIDENTIAL DENSITY
1. Mixed Residential Area – The maximum number of detached single family residences
permitted shall be six (6) per net acre.
2. Mixed Residential Area – The maximum number of attached single family residences
permitted shall be eight (8) per net acre.
17-6
3. Mixed Residential Area – The maximum number of multi-family units permitted shall
be twelve (12) units per net acre.
4. Town Center/Mixed Use Areas – The maximum number of attached Single family and
multi-family units shall be calculated the same as above.
E. CIRCULATION
The circulation system shall allow for the following:
• Provide for different modes of transportation.
• Provide functional and visual links with the mixed-use areas, residential
neighborhoods and open space.
• Provide links to existing and proposed external developments.
• Shall minimize conflict between vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
1. Vehicular Circulation
a. Vehicular circulation shall be based on a grid street pattern of interconnected streets
that includes a hierarchy of streets including thoroughfares, collectors, local streets
and alleys.
b. Street widths shall be consistent with the guidelines set forth in the SR 28
Redevelopment/Transformation Plan.
2. Pedestrian Circulation
a. Sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of all public and private streets. The
sidewalk system will be designed to minimize pedestrian-vehicle conflicts and will be
provided continuously throughout the Urban Village. Sidewalks are not required
along alleys or service ways.
b. Sidewalks shall provide a connection between business entrances and adjacent
public sidewalk to associated parking areas.
c. Sidewalks shall be a minimum of Five (5) feet wide in the detached single-family
residential areas and a minimum of seven (7) feet wide in mixed use or commercial
areas. Sidewalks fronting on the main Boulevard area shall be a minimum of 10 feet
wide.
3. Bicycle Circulation
a. Bicycle circulation shall be accommodated on the streets and/or on dedicated bicycle
paths or shared use paths.
4. Transit Stops
a. Transit or bus stops shall be designed, located and coordinated with Miami
Township and appropriate transit authorities.
17-7
F. LIGHTING
1. Street lighting shall be provided along all streets. Generally, more smaller decorative
lights, as opposed to fewer high intensity lights should be used. Lighting in all areas shall
provide adequate illumination of sidewalks. Thoroughfare and Boulevards will require
adequate lighting for vehicular and pedestrian safety.
2. All parking lot and private walkway lights shall be shielded so that substantially all the
directly emitted light falls within the property line.
G. PARKING
1. Except as hereinafter modified the requirements of Chapter 23, Off Street Parking and
Loading Regulations, shall apply to this district.
2. In a mixed use area, a commercial use must provide a minimum of one parking space for
every 300 square feet of floor area. The minimum size of a parking stall shall be 9 x 18
feet for 90 degree parking. On street parking within 200 feet of the business may be used
as part of this calculation. A parking plan is required for any new development or
redevelopment within this zoning district.
3. Parking shall be provided to the rear or side of a building. When parking is provided in the
side yard, it shall be screened from the public right-of-way by use of landscaping. Such
landscaping shall be a minimum of three (3) feet high at planting and shall be at least 50%
opaque on a year round basis.
4. Parking lots or garages will not be permitted at street intersections. Residential garages
are permitted at the intersection of a street and an alley or service way, provided the
garage is loaded from the alley or service way and not the street.
5. Shared parking arrangements are encouraged. When a parking area will serve two or
more uses for which the peak parking demand occurs at different times, a parking plan
will be submitted to the Community Development Department for review and approval.
H. DESIGN STANDARDS
Due to the mixed-use nature of the development, architectural compatibility is necessary in order
to visually integrate development and allow for proximity of varied uses. Architectural styles
shall vary in order to add to the authenticity of the built environment, however architectural
design must be within the intent and spirit of the adopted State Route 28
Redevelopment/Transformation Plan. One of the goals of the urban village is to provide for
compact development designed for the human scale. This emphasis on design includes being
sensitive to walking distances, height of buildings, design of streetlights, signage and sidewalks.
1. The front façade of any building shall front on a public street. A public entrance
must be provided from the public street and may be provided from any side or
rear parking lots. The front façade shall not be oriented to face directly toward a
parking lot.
17-8
2. For commercial buildings the architectural features, materials and the articulation
of a building shall be continued on all sides visible from a public street.
3. For commercial buildings, a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the front façade on
the ground floor shall be transparent, consisting of window or door openings
allowing views into and out of the interior.
4. Buildings with facades over 100 linear feet shall incorporate wall projections or
recesses a minimum of 3 foot in depth and a minimum of 20 contiguous feet in
length and shall extend over 20% of the façade length.
5. Porches, pent roofs, roof overhangs, hooded front doors or other similar
architectural elements shall define the entrance to all residences.
6. Side and rear yard fences shall be between four (4) and six (6) feet in height as
needed for screening.
7. Front loading garages shall not be permitted except in the Northwest
Neighborhood. In the Northwest Neighborhood, garages may be accessed as
shown in Figure 1. In all other residential neighborhoods, garages shall be
accessed from alleys.
a. Detached Garage located in the rear
yard accessed from the alley.
b & c. Attached garage recessed behind
the front line of the house accessed from
the street.
d. Detached garage located in the rear yard accessed from the
street.
Figure 1
I. SIGNS
All commercial and office uses must submit signage plans in general compliance with the
requirements and standards set forth in Section 24.13 of the Zoning Resolution. The Zoning
Commission shall review and approve the signage plans as part of the Chapter 27- Site Plan Review
at which time appropriate standards shall be determined for the signage plans that are based on
the character of the State Route 28 Urban Village and further the purpose of the district as a mixed
use walkable community.
J. UTILITIES
All utilities shall be located underground.
17.06 APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCEDURES
A. Application for Development Plan Review for new construction and redevelopment of parcels within
this district shall be commenced by the property owner, developer or his authorized agent and shall be
processed in accordance with the following procedures:
17-9
• Attend a pre-application conference with the Community Development Department,
• Submit a formal application, development plan and review fee,
• Review and approval by the Rural Zoning Commission
1. Pre-Application Conference
a. Before submitting an application for development plan approval, an applicant shall
meet with the Community Development Director to present the concept of the
proposed development prior to the preparation of detail plans and to discuss the
procedures and standards for development plan approval.
b. The pre-application conference is intended to facilitate the filing and consideration of
a complete application and no representation made by the Community Development
Director during such conference or at any other time shall be binding upon the
Township with respect to the application subsequently submitted.
c. The pre-application conference presentation shall include appropriate information
and material necessary to explain the proposed development, including but not
limited to, proposed land use, sketch plans and design ideas, development initiatives,
tentative public utility proposals, site location phasing and schedule expectations, etc.
2. Formal Application and Development Plan Review
a. An application shall be filed with the Community Development Director by the owner
or owners or authorized agent of all property included in the development. A
narrative summary of the development objectives shall be prepared and filed with the
application, completely documenting how the project complies with the intent of the
SR 28 Redevelopment/Transformation Plan, and the facts and studies supporting the
proposed development. Ten (10) copies of the application and development plan
shall be filed with the application.
b. The application must include the written and graphic submittals specified below.
Incomplete applications will not be accepted and processed.
c. The development plan shall include all the following:
i. All property lines, shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon showing
directional bearings and distances adjacent streets, and location with
reference to identifiable street intersection.
ii. Name of development, legal description of property north arrow, scale,
acreage name and address of record owner and engineer, architect or land
planner, or the person responsible for preparing the plan;
iii. The total lot area of the subject property;
iv. All public and private rights-of-way and easement lines located on or
adjacent to the subject property which are proposed to be continued,
created, enlarged, relocated or abandoned;
17-10
v. Existing topography, and approximate delineation of any topographical
changes shown by contour with appropriate intervals to ensure accurate
review;
vi. Stormwater management plan consistent with Clermont County standards;
vii. The location of every existing and proposed building with number of floors,
gross floor area, proposed use and number of dwelling units per building;
viii. Any modifications, changes and additions to existing building(s), including
floor area, heights and setbacks;
ix. The location of any area to be used as common open space or public plaza;
x. The proposed finished grade(s) of new buildings supplemented where
necessary with spot elevations;
xi. Location and dimensions of all curb cuts, driving aisles, off-street parking and
loading and/or unloading spaces including number of spaces, angle of stalls,
etc;
xii. Location of proposed sidewalks and pedestrian walkways, identifying
approximate dimensions;
xiii. Location of proposed streets, identifying approximate dimensions of
pavement, right-of-way widths, and grades;
xiv. Location of existing and proposed water, sanitary sewer, and storm drainage
lines, indicating approximate pipe sizes. Indication should also be given
regarding the location of existing and proposed electric, telephone and cable
service;
xv. Existing and proposed location(s) of outdoor lighting, signs, screen plantings,
fencing, and landscaping.
xvi. Location and screening or other description to indicate control and handling
of solid waste. Indicate dumpster pad where dumpster is to be used;
xvii. Elevations of all faces of buildings and structures, at an appropriate scale for
the graphic representation of the materials employed. Such elevations must
also indicate: Heights of buildings and structures, roofs and overhangs, and
special design features;
xviii. Additional information or engineering data, in such form and content as
necessary, to determine that the development plan meets the standards of
this Chapter, the intent of the SR 28 Redevelopment/Transformation Plan and
other requirements and performance standards of the Zoning Resolution for
Miami Township and of other public agencies in Clermont County.
17-11
3. Review and Approval by Rural Zoning Commission
a. Upon the acceptance of a formal application for development plan review, the
Community Development Director shall forward the application material to the Rural
Zoning Commission within thirty (30) days.
b. Upon receipt of the application, the Rural Zoning Commission will set a public
meeting to review the application within thirty-five (35) days.
c. During the public meeting, the Rural Zoning Commission may ask questions or request
additional information from the applicant.
d. The Rural Zoning Commission shall approve, approve with modifications or
disapprove a development plan within thirty-five (35) days of the close of the public
meeting.
17.07 COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT
It shall be incumbent upon the Community Development Director or his/her duly authorized
representative to make all inspections and certifications necessary to ensure that development occurs in
accordance with the approved final development plan.
In the event that the Community Development Director finds that a construction in accordance with the
approved final development plan and record plat(s] is not being done, he/she shall issue a stop work
order. It shall be incumbent upon the contractor or developer to correct those items that are in violation
before construction may resume. All action required to bring development into compliance with the
approved final development plan shall be at the developer's, builder's, or owners expense.
17.08 EXPIRATION
If substantial construction has not been completed within a period of twelve (12) consecutive months
from the date of approval of the final development plan, said plan shall be deemed null and void. The
Community Development Director may extend the construction period if sufficient proof can be
demonstrated that the construction was delayed due to circumstances beyond the applicants control:
and that prevailing conditions have not changed appreciably to render the approved final development
plan obsolete. For purposes of this Chapter, substantial construction shall mean installation of roadways
including curbs and utilities.
LOT AREA, BULK YARD AND SCREENING REQUIREMENTS IN THE
“URBAN VILLAGE” PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Description Requirements
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
LOT REQUIREMENTS
1. Minimum Lot Area There is no minimum lot area
2. Minimum Lot Width There is no minimum lot width
17-12
MAXIMUM HEIGHT
1. Town Center 6 stories or 75 feet
2. Boulevard District 3 stories or 40 feet
3. Civic District 3 stories or 50 feet
4. Auto Sales/Service District 2 stories or 35 feet
5. Retail District 3 stories or 45 feet
6. Residential Neighborhoods 3 stories or 45 feet
MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS – PRINCIPAL BUILDING
1. Town Center No Minimum setbacks
All Buildings must build to the public sidewalk.
2. Boulevard District No Minimum setbacks
All Buildings must build to the public sidewalk.
3. Civic District No Minimum setbacks
All Buildings must build to the public sidewalk.
4. Auto Sales/Service District 50 feet from r-o-w
15 feet side yard
35 feet rear yard
5. Retail District 50 feet from r-o-w
15 feet from side yard
35 feet from rear yard
6. Residential Neighborhoods 0-20 feet maximum front yard setback
30 feet minimum rear yard setback
0-10 feet maximum side yard setback
MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS –ACCESSORY BUILDING
1. Town Center No Minimum setbacks
Accessory Structure must be located to the rear
of the Principal Building
2. Boulevard District No Minimum setbacks
Accessory Structure must be located to the rear
of the Principal Building
3. Civic Center No Minimum setbacks
Accessory Structure must be located to the rear
of the Principal Building
4. Auto Sales/Service District 10 feet side yard
10 feet rear yard
5. Retail District 10 feet side yard
10 feet rear yard
5. Residential Neighborhoods 10 feet minimum from rear yard
5 feet maximum side yard setback
17-13
14
Chapter 18
RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE
19-1
Chapter 19
PLANNED BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT
OVERLAY DISTRICT
19.01 PURPOSE
A. General
This Chapter establishes requirements and procedures for approval of business
developments within corridors along major transportation arterials which are
planned and designed in a manner which maintain effective traffic flow and
accessibility so as to reduce potential traffic hazards, encourage compatible land
uses, and promote the general public health and safety, and other purposes of the
Miami Township Zoning Resolution.
Business corridors along major transportation arterials are recognized as
principal geographic areas of commercial activity in Miami Township. It is the
purpose of the Planned Business Development Overlay District to provide a
flexible alternative to the strict application of the requirements of the underlying
zoning, in order to encourage effectively planned and designed business
developments, to prevent the deterioration of property and protect private
investments, and to promote public health, safety and welfare.
B. Objectives
This District is specifically designed to:
1. Encourage business development in consideration of existing and
projected traffic, traffic improvements, accessibility, and compatibility
with surrounding land uses;
2. Protect adjacent residential uses and the general quality of life of the
residents wishing to continue to use their property in residential use;
3. Encourage creative planning and design in the arrangement of
buildings, circulation, access, shared ingress/egress arrangements,
elimination of curb cuts, setbacks and buffers;
4. Ensure that existing and anticipated land uses and traffic
improvements will be developed in a manner that protect the general
health and safety;
5. Protect property and private investment;
19-2
6. Maintain an effective and safe level of traffic flow and accessibility so
as to reduce potential traffic hazards; and
7. Encourage business development in accordance with the Miami
Township goals and policies.
C. Procedures
To achieve these purposes and objectives, special supplemental procedures to
those applicable in the conventional underlying business district are established
in this Chapter, under which development plans specifically designed to meet
these objectives may be submitted for review and/or approval. Subject to
Zoning Commission approval, these special provisions allow for the planned
modification of the strict requirements of the underlying zone, an increase in the
intensity of development and other modifications to further the purpose of the
District.
19.02 QUALIFYING CONDITIONS
A. Location and Boundary Area
The overlay District site shall be located within the "B-1” Neighborhood Business
District and the "B-2” General Business District.
B. Development Area
The site area, lot width, setbacks, and building height shall be no less than the
minimum requirements of the underlying zoning district, unless these minimum
requirements are permitted by the Zoning Commission's decision to be modified
in accordance with the provisions of Section 19.04.
19.03 PERMITTED USES
The principal permitted uses, conditionally approved uses, and accessory buildings
incidental to the principal uses are the same as those permitted by the underlying zoning
district or Section 19.04.
19.04 MODIFICATIONS TO THE MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS
A. In order to advance the purposes of this Chapter, the Zoning Commission
may consider and may approve modification to the requirements of the
underlying zoning district as follows:
19-3
1. A reduction to the minimum lot area by a maximum fifteen (15)
percent;
2. A reduction to the lot width by a maximum fifteen percent; (15)
percent
3. A reduction in the rear yard requirements adjacent to a residential
district by a maximum fifteen (15) percent, provided that adequate and
effective buffering will be provided;
4. A reduction in the front yard setback to a distance of not less than
twelve (12) feet from the right of way line, provided however that: a)
parking is provided only in the rear of the property; b) the building's
main facade is oriented towards the street with openings to the
business(s), sidewalks, and street trees to create an attractive
streetscape; c) driveway sight distances are maintained; and d) the
proposed development does not adversely affect adjacent properties.
5. A reduction in the number of on-site required parking spaces by a
maximum of fifteen (15) percent, provided that the applicant
demonstrates that the reduction in the number of spaces will not result
in adversely affecting the general public and/or parking (i.e. for
employees and or special occasions is provided off-site at a different
location through a reciprocal arrangement with the property owner;
and
6. A reduction in the required minimum size of the parking space from
10 x 20 feet to 9x 18 feet;
B. Conditions for Modifications
The Zoning Commission may consider and may approve modifications to the
minimum requirements of the underlying zoning district depending on the quality
and effectiveness of the proposed development, if it is found that the following
has been addressed satisfactorily:
1. The proposed development has been planned and designed effectively
based on the guidelines of this Section, Section 19.05, and applicable
ODOT and County Engineer's Standards.
2. The proposed development will not create inconvenient or unsafe
access; and
3. The proposed development will not create traffic congestion in the
streets, which adjoin the site.
19-4
The Zoning Commission may limit the modifications desired to an amount,
which is sufficient to avoid the creation of any of the above conditions.
19.05 STANDARDS AND GUIDELINES
In order to have a business development approved under the Planned Business
Development Overlay District requirements, the applicant must demonstrate that the site
plan must meet the following standards and guidelines:
A. General
1. The site plan shall reflect all Township goals and policies affecting the
site.
B. Joint and Cross Access
1. Adjacent properties shall provide a cross access drive and pedestrian
access to allow circulation between properties.
2. A system of joint use driveways and cross access easements shall be
established wherever feasible and the building site shall incorporate
the following:
3. A continuous service drive or cross access corridor extending the
entire length of each group of properties served to provide for
driveway separation consistent with the access management planning
and design and standards, and as approved by the County Engineer’s
Office.
4. A design speed of 10 mph and sufficient width to accommodate twoway
travel aisles designed to accommodate automobiles, service
vehicles, and loading vehicles;
5. Stub streets and other design features to make it visually obvious that
the abutting properties may be tied in to provide cross-access via a
service drive;
6. A unified access and circulation system plan that includes coordinated
or shared parking areas is encouraged wherever feasible.
7. Property owners shall record an easement with the deed allowing cross
access to and from other properties served by the joint use driveways
and cross access or service drive;
8. The agreement will be recorded with the deed specifying that the
remaining access rights along the thoroughfare will be dedicated to the
19-5
State and preexisting driveways will be closed and eliminated after
construction of the joint-use driveway;
9. Property owners shall record a joint maintenance agreement with the
deed defining maintenance responsibilities of property owners.
C. Access Connection and Driveway Design
Driveway width shall meet the following guidelines:
1. If the driveway is a one way in or one way out drive, then the
driveway shall be a minimum width of 16 feet and shall have
appropriate signage designating the driveway as a one-way
connection.
2. For two-way access, each lane shall have a width of 12 feet and a
maximum of four lanes shall be allowed.
3. Driveways that enter the major thoroughfare at traffic signals must
have at least two outbound lanes (one for each turning direction) of at
least 12 feet width, and one inbound lane with a 14 feet width.
4. Driveway grades shall conform to the requirements of ODOT
Location and Design Manual, latest edition, and applicable County
Engineer's requirements.
5. Driveway approaches must be designed and located to provide an
exiting vehicle with an unobstructed view. Construction of driveways
along acceleration or deceleration lanes and tapers is discouraged due
to the potential for vehicular weaving conflicts.
6. Driveway width and flair shall be adequate to serve the volume of
traffic and provide for rapid movement of vehicles off of the major
thoroughfare, but standards shall not be so excessive as to pose safety
hazards for pedestrians, bicycles, or other vehicles.
7. The length of driveways shall be designed in accordance with the
anticipated storage length for entering and exiting vehicles to prevent
vehicles from backing into the flow of traffic on the public street or
causing unsafe conflicts with on-site circulation. These measures
generally are acceptable for the principal access to a property and are
not intended .for minor driveways.
19-6
D. Left Turns
1. Left turn lanes, which provide stacking lanes for those automobiles
preparing to turn left, should be utilized when possible in an effort to
prevent traffic slow down and traffic hazards.
E. Acceleration/Deceleration Lanes
1. The use of acceleration/deceleration lanes should be utilized
whenever possible to help prevent traffic slow-down and general
interruptions, thereby avoiding potential traffic hazards.
F. Right-In/Right-Out Only Turns
1. Points of access that allow only right-in/right-out access to major
arterials should be utilized in an effort to prevent traffic slowdown
and additional points of traffic conflicts.
G. Driveway Spacing
1. Driveway spacing along the major arterial will be established by
ODOT and/or the County Engineer's Office.
H. Development Features
1. Building heights shall not exceed the height provided in the underlying
district and shall be designed to not detract from adjacent residential
property and to be compatible with existing development character and
patterns.
2. Development shall be planned, designed and constructed to preserve to
the maximum extend possible existing trees and vegetation; and
a. Utilize existing topography and other natural resources on the site
to provide buffering and limit grading to minimize environmental
impact on adjacent uses; and
b. Include screening and buffering such as the creation of berms and
use of bushes, trees and shrubs to minimize impact on adjacent
uses.
3. Drainage shall be designed and constructed to not detrimentally affect
adjacent properties.
4. Parking lot and walkway lights shall be shielded so that substantially
all directly emitted light falls within the property line.
19-7
5. Perimeter development shall be fenced and/or screened in a manner
which will protect the privacy and amenity of adjacent existing uses
while complying with required site distances provided in Section
23.04 (C ).
19.06 APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCEDURES
The application for a development under the Overlay District requirements shall be
made by the property owner, developer, or his authorized agent and shall be processes as
follows:
A. Properties Already Having the Business District Classification
For properties, which are currently zoned in the Business District according to
the underlying zoning, the application review process shall include the following:
1. Site Plan preparation and review according to the requirements of
Chapter 27 Site Plan Review of the Miami Zoning Resolution.
2. Site plan review and approval of all traffic and access improvements
by ODOT and the County Engineer's office.
3. Following the submission of the Township Planner's review report to
the Township Zoning Inspector's office, the application shall be
placed on the Zoning Commission's agenda for its consideration.
4. Township Zoning Commission shall give notice as required by Section
519.12 of the Revised Code for zone changes.
5. The Zoning Commission shall conduct a public hearing in accordance
with the procedures outlined in Section 519.12 of the Revised Code
and shall either approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the
application and state the reasons for doing so.
6. In accordance with Section 519.12 of the Revised Code the Board of
Township Trustees shall then conduct a public hearing and give notice
of the public hearing. Within 20 days of the completion of the public
hearing the Board of Township Trustees shall either accept the
recommendation of the Zoning Commission, accept the
recommendation of the Zoning Commission with modifications, or
reject the recommendation of the Zoning Commission. Any vote to
either accept with modifications or reject the recommendation of the
Zoning commission must be unanimous.
19-8
7. Following the approval by the Township Trustees, the Zoning
Inspector shall issue a zoning permit after valid application has been
filed.
B. Properties Requesting a Zone Change to Business District
1. For properties, which are not currently zoned in the Business District
classification the application review, procedures shall be the same as
those used to process zoning map amendments and can proceed
simultaneously.
19.07 REVISIONS TO AN APPROVED SITE PLAN
Minor modifications to the approved site plan as described in Section 27.06 of the Zoning
Resolution may be approved by the Community Development Director upon the
submission of a revised plan.
Major modifications to an approved site plan as described in Section 27.06 of the Zoning
Resolution must be reviewed in accordance with the process described in Section 19.06
above.
Effective: Revised June 14, 2007
20-1
Chapter 20
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
20.01 Purpose
It is the purpose and intent of the Chapter to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote
the health and safety of the citizens of the Township and to establish reasonable and uniform
regulations to prevent any deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented
businesses within the Township, thereby reducing or eliminating the adverse secondary effects
from such sexually oriented businesses. The provisions of this Chapter have neither the purpose
nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative material
or expression, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of
this Chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials or expression
protected by the First Amendment or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of
sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of
the Chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material.
20.02 Establishment and Classification of Businesses Regulated.
A. Sexually oriented businesses include the following: adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult
novelty shop, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motion picture theatre, adult
theatre, sexual encounter establishment, or nude model studio.
B. The establishment of a sexually oriented business shall be permitted only in the “I”
Planned Industrial Park District and shall be subject to the following restrictions:
1. No person shall cause or permit the establishment of any sexually oriented business
within seven hundred and fifty (750) feet of another sexually oriented business or within
seven hundred and fifty (750) feet of any religious institution, school, library, public park
or recreational facility that is attended by persons under eighteen (18) years of age, or
within seven hundred and fifty (750) feet of a residential district.
20.03. Location Restrictions and Requirements for Sexually Oriented Businesses.
The Miami Township Zoning Resolution hereby requires that sexually oriented businesses shall
be permitted only as provided in Section 20.02. A zoning certificate shall be required before the
establishment of a sexually oriented business. In addition, any sexually oriented business shall
be subject to the following restrictions:
A. No sexually oriented business shall be operated within seven hundred and fifty (750)
feet of: (a) any religious institution; (b) any school; (c) any library; (d) any public park;
(e) any recreational facility that is attended by persons under eighteen (18) years of age
or (f) any residential zoning district.
20-2
B. No sexually oriented business shall be operated within seven hundred and fifty (750)
feet of another such business, which will include those stated in Subparagraph 20.02
(B)(1).
C. Nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit a person from appearing in a state of nudity for a
modeling class operated:
1. By a proprietary school, licensed by the State of Ohio; a college, junior college,
or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
2. By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational
programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or
university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
3. In a structure:
• Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no
other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing;
• Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least
three days in advance of the class; and
• Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one
time.
20.04. Measurement of Distance.
A. Distances shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures
or topography (i.e., as measured on a map).
B. The distances shall be measured from the exterior faces (including architectural
projections) of the exterior walls of the principal building containing the proposed
sexually oriented business.
C. The distances shall be measured to the exterior faces (including architectural
projections) of the exterior walls of any principal building containing another sexually
oriented business or any religious institution.
D. If the proposed sexually oriented business is to be located within a tenant space, then
the distances shall be measured from the exterior faces (including architectural
projections) of the walls creating the boundaries of the tenant space, and not from that
of the entire multi-tenant building.
E. If another sexually oriented business or any religious institution or school is located
within a tenant space, then the distances shall be measured to the exterior faces
(including architectural projections) of the walls creating the boundaries of the tenant
space, and not from that of the entire multi-tenant building.
F. Regarding distance measurements to a residential district, the distances shall be
measured from the exterior faces (including any architectural projections) of the
exterior walls of the principal building containing the proposed sexually oriented
business to the closest point of the residential district as established by the Miami
Township Zoning Map. If the proposed sexually oriented business is to be located within
20-3
a tenant space, then the distances shall be measured from the exterior faces (including
architectural projections) of the walls creating the boundaries of the tenant space, and
not from that of the entire multi-tenant building.
G. Regarding distance measurements to a public park or school not within a tenant space,
the distances shall be measured from the exterior faces (including any architectural
projections) of the exterior walls of the principal building containing the proposed
sexually oriented business to the closest point of the parcel line (as established by the
Clermont County Auditor) of the parcel containing the public park or school. If the
proposed sexually oriented business is to be located within a tenant space, then the
distances shall be measured from the exterior faces (including architectural projections)
of the walls creating the boundaries of the tenant space, and not from that of the entire
multi-tenant building.
20.05. Zoning Certificate Required.
A. No sexually oriented business shall be permitted to operate without a valid Zoning
Certificate for a sexually oriented business issued by the Township. Upon request, the
Community Development Director or his designee shall provide an applicant for a
sexually oriented business an application for a commercial zoning certificate, which shall
serve as the required application form.
B. An application for a zoning certificate must be made on a form provided by the
Township. Any person desiring to operate a sexually oriented business shall file with the
Township an original and two copies of all materials required for submission.
C. An application fee shall also be submitted in accordance with the schedule determined
by the Board of Trustees.
D. All property included in a sexually oriented business must meet all the underlying
conditions applicable in the “I” Planned Industrial Park District.
E. The completed application shall also contain the following information and shall be
accompanied by the following documents:
1. A map, drawn to scale and marked to show the location of all land uses and
zoning districts within seven hundred and fifty (750) feet of the principal
building or tenant space in which the sexually oriented business is to be located.
For purposes of this Section, a use shall be considered existing or established if
it is in existence at the time an application is submitted.
F. Approval of Application.
1. The Community Development Director or his designee, shall approve the
application for a zoning certificate unless:
• An applicant has failed to provide information required by this Chapter or
the application for the issuance of a zoning certificate.
20-4
• The applicant has falsely answered a question or request for information on
the application form.
• The application fee required by this Chapter was not paid.
• The proposed business does not comply with the zoning locational
requirements for a sexually oriented business.
2. If the Community Development Director or his designee denies the application,
he shall notify the applicant of the denial and state the reason(s) for the denial.
The applicant shall be given an opportunity to correct identified deficiencies.
3. The Community Development Director shall issue the Zoning Certificate or
provide notice and reasons of denial within ten days of the submission of the
application.
20.06. Nonconforming Use.
Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on the effective date of this Chapter that is in
violation of this Chapter shall be deemed a nonconforming use. Such nonconforming uses shall
not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be changed to a
conforming use. If two or more sexually oriented businesses are within seven hundred and fifty
(750) feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business
which was first established and continually operating at the particular location is the conforming
use and the later established business(es) is nonconforming.
20.07. Appeal of Denial or Revocation
After denial of an application or revocation of a zoning certificate, the applicant or permittee
may seek prompt review of such administrative action through the Board of Zoning Appeals. The
Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear and decide the appeal within sixty days (60) of the date the
appeal is filed.
20.08. Advertising and Lighting
A. No sign, advertisement, promotional material or display of any type shall be shown or
exhibited so as to be visible to the public from pedestrian sidewalks or walkways, public
or semi-public areas, nor the public right-of-way of any street or roadway except as
permitted under Subparagraph 20.08 (D)
B. No displays, graphics, exhibits of materials and/or performances at such sexually
oriented business shall be allowed in any advertising which is visible outside the
premises. This prohibition shall not extend to advertising of the existence or location of
such sexually oriented business.
C. The permittee shall not allow any portion of the interior premises to be visible from
outside the premises.
20-5
D. Pursuant to Chapter 24, each conforming sexually oriented business shall be permitted
both wall and freestanding signs, which announces the name of the business. No offpremise
or portable signs shall be permitted.
E. All off-street parking areas and premise entries of the sexually oriented business shall
meet the requirements for parking under Chapter 23 of this Resolution and shall be
illuminated from dusk to closing hours of operation with a lighting system which
provides an average maintained horizontal illumination of one foot candle of light on
the parking surface and/or walkways. This required lighting level is established in order
to provide sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the
sexually oriented business for the personal safety of patrons and employees and to
reduce the incidence of vandalism and criminal conduct. The lighting shall be shown on
the required sketch or diagram of the premise.
F. Nothing contained in this Section of the Chapter shall relieve the operator(s) of a
sexually oriented business from complying with other requirements of this Resolution
as it may be amended from time to time, or any subsequently enacted resolutions.
20.09. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Chapter, certain terms and words are defined.
Sexually Oriented Businesses are those businesses defined as follows:
A. Adult Arcade means an establishment where for any form of consideration, one or
more still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors or similar machines, or other
image producing machines, for viewing by five or fewer persons each, are regularly
used to show films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
B. Adult Bookstore, Adult Novelty Store or Adult Video Store means an establishment
which derives fifty percent or more of its revenue from, or maintains fifty percent or
more of its in-store inventory (either measured by display area or retail value) in, one
or more of the following:
1. Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films,
motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other visual representations which are
characterized by the depiction of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas; instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use or
marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or related to specified
sexual activities.
2. An establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve
the offering for sale, rental or viewing of materials depicting or describing specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, and still be categorized as adult
bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store. Such other business purposes
will not serve to exempt such establishments from being categorized as an adult
20-6
bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store so long as one of its principal
business purposes is offering for sale or rental, for some form of consideration, the
specified materials which depict or describe specified anatomical areas or specified
sexual activities and one or more of the fifty percent thresholds in Subparagraph
20.09 (B) (1) above are met.
C. Adult Cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, bottle club, or similar commercial
establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served, in which persons
regularly appear in a state of nudity in the performance of their duties and that
regularly feature live performances that are characterized by the exposure of specified
anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.
D. Adult Motion Picture Theater means a commercial establishment used for a principal
purpose of presenting motion pictures characterized by their emphasis on portrayals of
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.
E. Adult Theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar building used for a
principal purpose of presenting live acts characterized by their emphasis on individuals
in a state of nudity or specified sexual activities.
F. Nude Model Studio means any place where a person, who regularly appears in a state
of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas, is provided for money or any form of
consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or
similarly depicted by other persons.
G. Sexual Encounter Establishment means a business or commercial establishment, that as
one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration, a place
where two or more persons may congregate, associate, or consort for the purpose of
specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas or activities
when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude. The definition of
sexually oriented businesses shall not include an establishment where a medical
practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the
state engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy.
H. Establishment means and includes any of the following:
1. The opening or commencement of any such business as a new business;
2. The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented
business, to any of the sexually oriented businesses defined in this Chapter;
3. The addition of any of the sexually oriented businesses defined in this chapter
to any other existing sexually oriented business; or
4. The relocation of any such sexually oriented business.
I. Nudity or State of Nudity means the showing of either of the following:
1. The human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a fully
opaque covering; the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering on any
part of the nipple.
20-7
J. Operator means and includes the owner, permit holder, custodian, manager, operator
or person in charge of any sexually oriented business.
K. Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or
other legal entity.
L. Public Park means public land which has been designated for park or recreational
activities including a park, playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic
field, basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, open space, wilderness
areas, or similar public land within the Township which is under the control, operation,
or management of the Township Board of Trustees, the County Commissioners, the
State of Ohio, or the U.S. Government.
M. Religious Institution means any church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building, which
is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities.
N. Residential District means the “A,” “R-1,” “R-2,” “R-3,” “R-4,” “T,” “H” “PUD,” and “RPUD”
zoning districts as defined in the Miami Township Zoning Resolution and shown
on the Miami Township Zoning Map.
O. School means any public or private educational facility including child day care facilities,
nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, primary schools,
intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational
schools, secondary schools, special education schools, junior colleges, and universities.
School includes the school grounds, but does not include the facilities used primarily for
another purpose and only incidentally as a school.
P. Sexually Oriented Business means an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty shop,
adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motion picture theatre, adult theater, encounter
establishment, or nude model studio.
Q. Specified Anatomical Areas means and includes any of the following:
a. The human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a fully
opaque covering; the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering on
any part of the nipple.
R. Specified Sexual Activities means and includes any of the following:
1. The fondling or other intentional touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus, or female breasts; sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or
simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;
2. Masturbation, actual or simulated;
3. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence;
4. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set
forth in subdivisions (1) through (3) of this Subparagraph.
20-8
S. Tenant Space means a securable area separated from other areas by walls and doors
that is available for lease or rent within a multi-tenant building, such as tenant spaces
typically found within a shopping mall or strip center.
20.10 Severability
If any section, subsection, or clause of this amendment shall be deemed to be unconstitutional
or otherwise invalid, the validity of the remaining sections, subsections and clauses shall not be
affected.
21-1
CHAPTER 21
TEMPORARY USES
21.01 AUTHORIZATION
A. Temporary uses as defined in Chapter 28 and as herein specified may be permitted
in accordance with the provisions set forth in this Chapter.
B. The Zoning Inspector may, upon proper application, issue a Temporary Use Permit
for any of the temporary uses listed below. The Zoning Inspector shall either
approve or disapprove such application within ten (10) days of receipt of application
and shall notify the applicant in writing of the decision. In the event that the
application is disapproved, the Zoning Inspector shall explain in writing the reasons
for disapproval and shall include such explanation with the notice of disapproval.
21.02 APPLICATION
A. Each application for a Temporary Use Permit shall contain the following
information:
1. Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant;
2. A description of the property where the temporary use is to occur, including
the location of the property and any existing and/or proposed uses;
3. A statement explaining the need for the temporary use;
4. If applicable, a site plan showing any temporary structures and their
relationship to adjacent land uses and structures;
5. A description of the type, size and location of any signs connected with the
temporary use;
6. The date on which the temporary use will commence and the anticipated
duration of such use;
7. Such other information as may be required by the Zoning Inspector,
8. Any required fees for said permit as may be established by the Board of
Trustees, Miami Township; and
9. A copy of vendor's license, vendor number and Federal I.D. number.
21.03 PERMITTED TEMPORARY USES
A. Permits may be issued for the following temporary uses, provided that they meet
these requirements and are not otherwise in conflict with the provisions of this
Chapter:
1. Mobile homes for use as office structures on construction sites, provided
that such structures shall be located on the lot on which construction takes
place and shall be removed once construction ceases.
2. The temporary outdoor sale of seasonal merchandise such as garden
supplies, pumpkins, and Christmas trees and gifts, not to exceed forty-five
(45) days in duration and only in the Commercial and Industrial Districts.
21-2
3. Retail sales of goods from vehicles in the Commercial and Industrial Districts
only, provided that:
a. Written authorization is filed with the Zoning Inspector from the
owner of record of the lot from where the activity is taking place;
b. That such sales are for no more than five (5) days in any sixty (60)
day period;
c. When not in use, any commercial vehicle from which sales are
conducted is to be stored in an enclosed garage or designated offstreet
loading space; and
d. Provided that such sales are accessory to the existing commercial
development.
4. Farmers markets limited to the sale of food and produce items, raw and
prepared foodstuffs, plants and cut flowers in the Commercial, Industrial,
and Agricultural Districts during the normal growing season for such uses.
5. The temporary outdoor sale of hand-crafted items and artwork is allowed
only in conjunction with a temporary event, except as otherwise provided
by this Chapter.
6. Carnivals and festivals, not to exceed four (4) days in duration.
7. Temporary signs for the period of the temporary permit with the size,
setbacks, and heights as regulated by Chapter 24.
8. Food Vendors as regulated herein.
B. The Zoning Inspector may include any additional conditions or restrictions to the
issuance of a Temporary Use Permit as deemed necessary to insure the public
health and safety.
C. All merchandise, temporary structures, and other uses incidental to the temporary
use shall be setback so as not to interfere with line of sight but not less than fifteen
(15) feet from the road right- of-way.
21.04 FOOD VENDORS
A. Subject to these regulations, a Food Vendor may with approval of the property
owner Appear in the O-1, B-1, B-2, I, H, MU, PBD or in the Miamiville Planned
Business Development Overlay districts.
B. Subject to these regulations, a Food Vendor may Appear in a Residential district if:
1. At a multifamily development with approval of the property owner, or
2. At a school, government property or private club by approval of the
property owner, or
3. At a neighborhood community pool or clubhouse by approval of the
property owner, or
4. At a church with approval of the property owner.
C. The same Food Vendor may make three Appearances at a Location over a period of
three consecutive weeks.
1. No single Appearance may exceed a period of 48 hours.
21-3
2. No Food Vendor shall make more than one Appearance at a Location during
any given week.
3. After three consecutive weeks, the Food Vendor may not make an
Appearance at that Location for at least three weeks.
4. In no event may a Food Vendor Appear more than six times at a Location
over any 10 week period.
5. After the sixth Appearance at a Location over a given 10 week period, the
Food Vendor may not make an Appearance at that Location for at least
three weeks.
D. A Food Vendor may display one advertising sign, not to exceed 16 square feet, and
one menu sign, not to exceed 16 square feet.
1. Signs may not contain lights or be lighted.
2. Signs or menus attached to or permanently painted on a food truck or
trailer are not regulated.
3. No other temporary signs or attention gathering devices are permitted to
be displayed by Food Vendors.
E. Food Vendors shall comply with the following site arrangement and safety
precautions. To determine compliance with these standards, zoning staff may
require that a site plan, application and fee for a temporary use be submitted and
approved prior to a Food Vendor setting up at a Location, or if problems are
identified after setup.
1. Food Vendor equipment and vehicles may conduct operations in parking
lots, unused portions of lots, or empty lots, but may not interfere with
parking, circulation, driveway entrances and exits, sight lines or entrances
to other businesses.
2. A ten foot setback from the right of way shall be maintained for all items
associated with the Food Vendor.
3. Food Vendors and equipment may occupy parking areas, but sufficient
parking for customer traffic for the Food Vendor as well as any existing
businesses at the Location must remain.
4. Temporary tables and chairs may be setup by the Food Vendor, subject to
these same rules.
5. Food Vendors shall be able to demonstrate compliance with applicable fire
and health authority rules and permitting. Necessary permits shall be
produced if requested.
F. Food Vendors must obtain and produce if requested written permission of the
property owner for the premises on which they locate. If permission cannot be
produced, the Food Vendor shall cease operations at the premises.
G. Food Vendors are not required to obtain a Temporary Use Permit as specified in this
Chapter if they remain in compliance with these regulations. However, if
determined to be noncompliant or if determined to be necessary by zoning staff for
22-1
Chapter 22
PUBLIC UTILITIES
22.01 PURPOSE
The purposes of this Chapter to the zoning resolution is to 1) encourage the location of
telecommunication towers in non-residential areas and to minimize the total number of
towers; 2) encourage the joint use of new and existing towers; 3) encourage
telecommunication companies to locate towers in areas of the township where the
adverse impact on the community will be minimal; and 4) to provide for appropriate
locations for public utilities engaged in the business of transporting persons or property.
22.02 TELECOMMUNICATIONS - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
A. Except as provided in Ohio Revised Code Section 519.211 and Section 22.02
(C) 1-8 of this Resolution with respect to any cellular or wireless
telecommunication tower that is owned or used by a public utility, and
proposed to be located in an area zoned for residential use, nothing contained
in this Resolution shall prevent the location, erection, construction,
reconstruction, change, alteration, maintenance, removal, use or enlargement
of any buildings or structures of any public utility, whether publicly or
privately owned, or the use of any land by a public utility for the operation of
its business.
B. In the case of a public utility that plans to construct, locate, erect, reconstruct,
change, alter, use or enlarge a cellular or wireless telecommunication tower in
an area zoned for residential use, the public utility shall provide evidence
satisfactory to the Miami Township Board of Trustees concerning compliance
with the notice provisions of Ohio Revised Code Section 519.211 (B). When
constructing the tower in any other zoning district the applicant must comply
with Ohio Revised Code 519.211, paragraph E relating to the requirement that
all owners and occupants of residential dwellings within 100 feet of a
proposed tower must be notified, in writing, of the intent to construct the
tower.
C. A permit for the location, erection, construction, reconstruction, change,
alteration, maintenance, removal, use or enlargement of a cellular or wireless
telecommunication tower may be issued, upon application and compliance
with Ohio revised Code Section 519.211 and this Resolution, provided the
applicant has satisfied all the following standards:
1. Telecommunication towers shall be subject to the site plan review
requirements of Chapter 27 of the Miami Township Zoning
Resolution.
22-2
2. The applicant shall provide proof in a form satisfactory to the
Township that the proposal has been reviewed and/or approved by all
agencies and governmental entities with jurisdiction, if required,
including, but not limited to, the Ohio Department of Transportation,
The Federal Aviation Administration, the Federal Communication
Commission, or the successors to their respective functions.
3. The applicant shall demonstrate by clear and convincing evidence that
its tower antenna cannot be located on any other communication
tower, building or structure, in the geographic area to be served, and
that all reasonable means have been undertaken to avoid any undue
negative impact caused by the clustering of towers within an area, and
that the antenna must be placed where it is proposed in order to satisfy
its necessary function in the company’s grid system. The evidence
should include, but is not necessarily limited to the following:
a. The relationship of the proposed telecommunication tower to
the applicant’s overall grid.
b. Structural engineering evidence that an existing
telecommunication tower lacks the tolerance to support an
additional antenna array.
c. Engineering evidence that the frequency of the existing antenna
array will interfere with the applicant’s frequency.
d. Engineering evidence that the addition of an antenna to an
existing tower will exceed the FCC RF emissions criteria.
4. In the case of the construction of new facilities by the applicant, the
applicant shall agree to construct the telecommunication tower to
accommodate additional antenna arrays and shall make the tower
available to other cellular and /or wireless communication companies;
telephone, radio, and television companies; and the local police, fire,
and EMS departments.
5. The perimeter of the telecommunication facility shall be landscaped.
The landscaping shall be designed to effectively screen the tower’s
support structure, the fence around the structure, and any other ground
level features. Any combination of existing vegetation, topography,
walls, decorative fencing or other feature may be substituted for new
landscaping. The landscape material shall be non-deciduous to
provide a year round screen.
6. The applicant (or its successor) shall, within thirty (30) days of ceasing
operation at the site of the telecommunication tower, give notice of
22-3
such to the Miami Township Community Development Department.
Facilities shall be removed within twelve (12) months of ceasing
operations.
7. Resale or renting of facilities is permissible only to other
telecommunication systems subject to obtaining a zoning certificate
from the Miami Township Community Development Department.
8. The applicant and/or property owner shall annually file on or before
January 1 of each year a declaration with the Miami Township
Community Development Department as to the current ownership and
operation of every facility located within the Township.
22.03 – PUBLIC UTILITY IN THE BUSINESS OF TRANSPORTING PERSONS
OR PROPERTY
A. In accordance with Ohio Revised Code Section 519.211 (C) Miami Township
restricts the location, erection, construction, reconstruction, change, alteration,
maintenance, removal, use or enlargement of any buildings or structures of a
public utility engaged in the business of transporting persons or property, or
both, or providing or furnishing such transportation service to the “I” Planned
Industrial Park District.
Revised: August 15, 2008
22-4
23-1
Chapter 23
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS
23.01 PURPOSE
The regulations set forth in this Chapter are intended to ensure that all developments
adequately and safely provide for the storage and movement of vehicles in a manner
consistent with good engineering and site design practices; to ensure that adequate offstreet
parking and loading facilities are provided for all developments; to establish
parking standards for a variety of land uses; and to ensure that off-street parking and
loading facilities protect the public health and safety, and, where appropriate, insulate
surrounding land uses from adverse impacts.
23.02 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIRED
In connection with every land use there shall be provided at the time any building or
structure is erected, at the time any use of land is extended, or at the time the use of a
building or structure changes, off-street parking and loading to accommodate all motor
vehicles of occupants or employees, visitors and patrons, and the vehicles used in the
conduct of any business as specified in the standards set forth in Sections 23.04 through
23.06 of this Chapter.
23.03 REQUIRED PARKING AND LOADING PLAN
A parking and loading plan shall be required for all developments requiring site plan
review under Chapter 27 of the Miami Township Zoning Resolution. Said parking and
loading plan may be part of an overall development plan or only a parking and loading
layout for a particular development. The requirements for submitting such parking and
loading plans for approval and the granting of a zoning permit shall be those established
in Chapter 27 of the Miami Township Zoning Resolution.
23.04 OFF-STREET PARKING STANDARDS
A. Utilization
1. Off-street parking Facilities as required in Section 23.06 shall be used
solely for the parking of motor vehicles in operating condition of
patrons, occupants, employees or visitors of such uses.
2. No motor vehicle repair work or service of any kind, except
emergency repairs, shall be permitted in or in association with any offstreet
parking area, except that off-street parking areas for residential
23-2
uses may be used for customary and periodic maintenance of vehicles
owned and operated by the occupant(s).
3. No off-street parking areas shall be used for the parking of a business
or service vehicle or truck larger than a passenger vehicle which can fit
within a space of the size specified in Section 23.04 (B). All such
vehicles shall be parked either in an enclosed building, in a designated
off-street loading area as regulated in Section 23.05, or in an area
specifically designated only for the parking of business vehicles. Such
area designated for the parking of business vehicles shall be located at
least fifteen (15) feet from any right-of-way line, or property line of
adjacent Residential Districts.
4. Off-street parking areas shall not be used for the display of vehicles for
sale unless such display is in conjunction with the operation of an
automobile sales facility.
5. The off-street parking of transportable structures or vehicles in
residential areas shall be regulated by the provision set forth in
Chapter 5, Section 5.08 (G) of the Miami Township Zoning
Resolution.
B. Size and Design
1. Off-street parking spaces shall meet the design standards for typical
parking lot layouts as set forth in subsection 3 below. The minimum
size for an off-street parking space as indicated in Table I shall be
Nine and one half (9.5) by eighteen (18) feet.
2. Car Overhang:
a. Off-street parking areas may incorporate car overhang space
as a part of the required parking space dimension for the
purpose of reducing the overall amount of hard surface
paving. In such instances, concrete curb or wheel stops shall
be used and the car overhang space shall not be utilized for
pedestrian movement. The required design standards are
shown in Illustrations B-1.
3. Dimensions of Required Parking Spaces and Aisles
a. Each required parking space shall meet the minimum
dimensional requirements set out in Table I and Illustration
B-2. The minimum required length of a parking space shall be
greater where there is a wall or fence at the end of the parking
space. However, the minimum required length may be reduced
23-3
where a strip of unpaved ground at the end of the space is
provided according to the requirements of 23.04 (B) (2).
b. For office uses in industrial parks and office parks, the 90
degree parking space may be reduced to a minimum
dimension of nine (9) feet by eighteen (18) feet, as part of the
site plan review process, upon a showing by the applicant that
the parking will be used primarily by occupants of the offices
and not for general public.
TABLE I
MINIMUM PARKING STALL AND AISLE DIMENSIONS
A B C D E F
Parking Stall Length of Aisle Center to Center Width
Angle Width Stall Width Width of Two Row of Access
Bay/W Aisle Drive
Between
Parallel 10’ 23’ 12’ 30’ 22’
45 degree 9.5 18 13’ 53’ 22’
60 degree 9.5 18 18’ 58’ 22’
90 degree 9.5 18 24’ 64’ 22’
Illustration B-1
23-4
Car Overhang Dimension
Illustration B-2
Parking Configuration Diagram
4.
23-5
Design and Construction Standards
a. Design - Off-street parking may be open to the sky, or enclosed
in a building or structure, either above or below ground. Offstreet
parking areas shall meet acceptable engineering
standards as set forth by Miami Township and Clermont
County Building Department for such things as driveway
widths, island design, curbs, barriers, grades, radii vertical
clearance, stacking and waiting areas and drainage.
b. Aisles - Each required parking space shall have direct and
unrestricted access to an aisle of the minimum width set out in
Table I and Illustration B-2.
c. Handicapped Persons - The dimension of parking spaces for
handicapped persons shall conform to the requirements of the
Ohio Basic Building Code.
d. Turn-Around Area - Where more than three (3) parking spaces
are served by a single driveway, a turn- around area shall be
provided, or other provision shall be made, to permit cars to
exit the parking lot or garage without backing onto any street
or sidewalk.
e. Back -up Area - Each parking space shall be provided with a
sufficient back-up area to permit egress in one maneuver,
consisting of one backward and one forward movement.
f. Surface - Every off-street parking lot shall be surfaced with an
asphaltic or portland cement binder pavement providing an allweather,
durable and dustless surface. Individual stalls shall be
clearly identified by marking four inches (4") to six inches (6")
in width.
g. Lighting - Fixed lighting shall be so arranged to prevent direct
glare of beams onto any public or private property or street.
h. Car Wheel Stops and Curbs - Suitable car stops shall be
provided, located and designated to protect required screening
devices and landscaping from damage by vehicles and to
provide necessary traffic control in the parking area.
i. Slope - No area of any parking lot excluding access ramps,
shall have a slope in excess of five percent (5%). No ramp shall
have a slope in excess of eight percent (8%).
23-6
5. Location of Required Parking Spaces
a. Required off-street parking spaces for any use shall be located
on the same parcel as the use they are intended to serve.
b. Required off-street parking areas adjacent to residential
districts shall be set back a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from
the property line and shall be maintained as a landscaped area
pursuant to Subsection 6 below.
6. Perimeter Screening and Landscaping
a. Parking Lots Adjoining Residential - off street parking areas
for more than five (5) vehicles shall be effectively screened on
each side which adjoins or faces premises situated in
Residential District, or institutional premises, by a masonry
wall or solid fence of acceptable design, which ensures its
structural integrity and is compatible with the general character
of the residential neighborhood. Such wall or fence shall be not
less than four (4) feet or more than six feet (6') in height and
shall be maintained in good condition without any advertising
thereon. The space between such wall or fence and the lot line
of the adjoining premises in any Residential District shall be
landscaped with grass, hardy shrubs or evergreen ground cover
and maintained in good condition. In lieu of such wall, or
fence, a strip of land not less than fifteen feet (15') in width and
planted with an evergreen hedge or dense planting of evergreen
shrubs not less than five (5) feet in height with or without an
earth mound, may be substituted, and this shall be maintained
in good condition. In cases where existing mature vegetation
exists screening may be achieved through the preservation and
maintenance of such vegetation within an area of not less than
fifteen (15) feet with additional supplemental planting as may
be required.
b. Parking Lots Adjoining Streets - All off-street parking areas in
non-residential districts located within the required front yards
shall be setback a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from the street
right-of-way fine and the setback space shall be maintained as
a permanent landscaped strip, planted with a minimum of one
(1) deciduous shade tree and ten (10) non-deciduous shrubs per
35 linear feet of street frontage. Shrubs shall be at least 2 feet
in height at planting and trees shall be at least 2.5-3 inch in
caliber at planting
23-7
7. Interior Parking Lot Landscaping
a. The design of parking lots shall include deciduous and nondeciduous
trees to provide shade and to break up the expanse of
asphalt.
b. Terminal Islands – Landscape islands shall be provided at the ends
of every row of parking and shall have a minimum dimension of
10 feet in width by 15 feet in length. At least one (1) tree that is
2.5 – inch in caliber at planting and (4) shrubs at least 2 feet in
height at planting shall be included in each terminal island. This
standard shall not apply to any parking that directly abuts a
building.
c. Any row of parking that contains twenty-five (25) or more
contiguous parking spaces must add a landscape island, that is a
minimum of 10 feet in width and 15 feet in length that is
approximately equal distance from the two terminal islands. At
least one (1) tree that is 2.5 – inch in caliber at planting and (4)
shrubs at least 2 feet in height at planting shall be included in each
terminal island. This standard shall not apply to any parking that
directly abuts a building.
8. Protection of Perimeter Screening and Landscaped Areas
a. All screening and landscaped areas adjacent to off-street
parking areas shall be protected from vehicular damage by a
raised concrete curb or wheel stop concrete barrier. The
barriers need not be continuous.
b. Landscape areas adjacent to parking spaces shall be
landscaped so that no plant material greater than twelve (12)
inches in height is located within two feet of the curb or other
protective barriers.
9. Maintenance Responsibility for Landscaped Areas
The plantings that constitute a landscaped area must be properly
maintained in order for the landscaped area to fulfill the purposes for
which it is established. The owner of the property and any tenant on the
property where a landscaped area is required shall be jointly responsible
for the maintenance of all plant material within the landscaped area. Such
maintenance shall include all actions necessary to keep the landscaped
areas free of litter and debris and to keep plantings healthy and orderly in
23-8
appearance. Any vegetation that constitutes part of a landscaped area
shall be replaced in the event that it dies.
C. Clear View Requirements
1. In order to provide a clear view to the motorist (from the motorist's
eye at 3.75 ft. above street level to an object 4.5 ft. above the road
surface) there shall be a triangular area of clear vision free of any
obstructions where two driveways, alleys and/or streets intersect. The
size of this triangular area shall be a function of street width and
speed (see also Table II and illustration C-1).
2. On any portion of a site that lies within the triangle described and
illustrated in C-1, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed
to grow in such a manner as to impede vision between a height of
three (3) feet and eight (8) feet above the driveway, alley and/or street
grades.
3. The triangular area shall be formed by a point at the location of the
drivers eye (fifteen (15) feet behind the curb or edge of roadway), the
approaching vehicle, and the potential point of impact. When the
cross street has more than two lanes, sight triangles shall be formed
using the vehicle in the lane nearest the centerline approaching from
the right and the vehicle nearest the curb approaching from the left.
Table II sets forth the minimum sight distance required.
TABLE II
MINIMUM REQUIRED SIGHT DISTANCE
Per 10 mph of posted cross street speed limit
(See “2”in Figure below)
2 Lane 4 Lane 6 Lane
Approach Street Type Cross Street Cross Street Cross Street
Driveway 100 ft. 120 ft. 130 ft.
23-9
23.05 OFF STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS
The following requirements shall apply to off-street loading:
A. Location
Loading spaces shall be located on the same lot as the building or structure to
which they are accessory. No loading space shall be located in any required front
yard.
B. Setback of Screening Requirements Adjoining Residential Uses
1. Loading spaces shall be setback a minimum distance of fifty (50) feet
from the adjoining residential property lines.
2. Loading spaces and loading docks adjacent to residential and
institutional uses shall be screened in an effective manner able to
visually insulate the residential use from all operations, materials and
vehicles within any loading space.
23-10
3. Loading spaces located within one hundred (100) feet of a residential
district shall have all material handling activities relating thereto
enclosed.
C. Design Standards
1. Dimensions - No required loading space shall be less than twelve (12)
feet in width or thirty-five (35) feet in length or have a vertical
clearance of less than fourteen (14) feet.
2. Access - Loading spaces shall be designed and arranged to provide
access to a street or alley in a manner which will create the least
possible interference with a traffic movement.
3. Surface - Every loading space shall be surfaced with an asphaltic or
Portland cement binder pavement providing an all-weather, durable
and dustless surface. Individual stalls shall be clearly identified by
markings four inches (4") to six inches (6") in width.
4. Lighting - Fixed fighting shall be so arranged to prevent direct glare of
beams onto any public or private property or street.
5. Signs - No signs shall be displayed in any loading area except such
signs as may be necessary for the orderly use of the loading space.
D. Number of Off-Street Loading Spaces Required
Off-street loading spaces shall be provided as required for non-residential uses
having a floor area of greater than 10,000 square feet as follows: one (1) offstreet
loading space plus one (1) additional such loading space for each twenty
thousand square feet (20,000) or major fraction there of' gross floor area so used
in excess of twenty thousand square feet.
23.06 NUMBER OF OFF-STREET SPACES REQUIRED
In computing the number of parking spaces required by this Chapter, the following shall
apply:
A. Where floor area is designated as the standard for determining parking space
requirements, floor area shall be the sum of the gross leasable horizontal area
of all floors of a non-residential building, and shall exclude mechanical
space, stair cases/stairwells, and other such similar spaces within a building.
B. Where seating capacity is designated as the standard for determining parking
space requirements, the capacity shall mean the number of seating units
installed or indicated or, each twenty (20) lineal inches of benches or pews.
23-11
C. Fractional numbers shall be increased to the next highest whole number.
D. Parking space requirements for a use not specifically mentioned in this
ordinance shall be determined by using the most similar and restrictive
parking space requirement as specified by the Zoning Inspector or the Zoning
Commission.
23-12
USE PRIMARY SPACES
Residential Number per Measurement Unit
Single family detached 2.00 Dwelling Unit
Single family detached, clustered 2.50 Dwelling Unit
Two family detached 2.50 Dwelling Unit
Townhouse 2.50 Dwelling Unit
Multi-family 2.50 Dwelling Unit
Manufactured home 2.00 Dwelling Unit
Day Care, residential 1.00 Staff Person
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Office and Business Use Number per Measurement Unit
Offices, general 4.00 1000 sf gross floor area
Medical or Dental offices/clinic 1.00 175 sf gross floor area
Day Care Centers 1.00 staff person, plus
1.00 for each five children
Financial institutions w/o drive thru 1.00 350 sf gross floor area
1.00 Teller station (includes ATM)
Financial institutions w/ drive thru 1.00 400 sf gross floor area
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Retail Sales & Related Services Number per Measurement Unit
Retail establishments (Note 1) 1.00 200 sf gross floor area
Automotive filling stations 1.00 fuel pump, plus
1.00 per employee
Automotive Services 2.00 For each service bay
Automotive sales 1.00 800 sf of sales gross floor area
Convenience store 1.00 100 sf gross floor area
Shopping Center (Note 1) 1.00 200 sf gross floor area
Restaurant, carryout or drive-in 1.00 40 sf gross floor area
Restaurant, full service 1.00 Customer based 30% of Building
capacity
Restaurant, w/ entertainment 1.00 Customer based 30% of Building
capacity
Tavern 1.00 Customer based 30% of Building
capacity
23-13
Industry and Heavy Commercial Number per Measurement Unit
Manufacturing 1.00 1000 sf gross floor area
Warehousing, enclosed/open 1.00 2000 sf gross floor area
Wholesale sales 1.00 2000 sf gross floor area or
1.00 two (2) employees on maximum
work shift, whichever greater
Contractor Yard 1.00 1000 sf gross floor area plus
1.00 for each facility vehicle
Freight & parcel Terminals 1.00 1000 sf gross floor area
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Uses Number per Measurement Unit
Religious institutions 1.00 3 seats
Convalescent homes 0.33 bed
Hospitals 1.00 bed
Nursing Homes 1.00 six (6) beds, plus
1.00 Two (2) employees
Governments buildings 3.50 1000 sf gross floor area
Kindergartens 1.50 Teacher or staff person
Libraries 1.00 350 sf gross floor area
Elementary, Middle, Jr. High 2.00 classroom
High Schools 2.00 classroom, plus
1.00 five (5) students
Colleges 1.00 two (2) students
Schools, vocational, professional 1.00 four (4) students
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Recreation, Cultural, Entertainment Number per Measurement Unit
Auditoriums 1.00 5 seats
Community & recreation centers 1.00 User, based upon building capacity
Gymnasiums 1.00 User, based 0n 30% building
capacity
Movie theaters 1.00 three (3) seats
Museums, commercial/non profit 1.00 User, based 0n 30% building
capacity
Outdoor theaters, not drive-in 1.00 User, based 0n 30% building
capacity
Roller & ice skating Rinks 1.00 User, based 0n 30% building
capacity
Stadiums & Arenas 1.00 three (3) seats
Video game arcades 1.00 300 sf gross floor area
Clubhouse/country clubs 1.00 350 sf gross floor area
Golf Course 9.00 golf hole plus 25 space
Swimming pools 1.00 50 sf of water area
23-14
Miscellaneous Number per Measurement Unit
Civic, Social and Fraternal
Association Mtg Places 1.00 250 sf gross floor area
Funeral Homes & Mortuaries 1.00 250 sf gross floor area
Animal clinics or hospitals 1.00 200 sf gross floor area
Animal pounds 2.00 minimum
Botanical 1% of land area for parking
Florist shop, wholesale 1.00 500 sf gross floor area
Greenhouse, commercial 1.00 500 sf gross floor area
Kennels 2.00 minimum
Nurseries 1.00 500 sf gross floor area
NOTE 1 – For Retail Establishments and Shopping Centers the maximum number of
parking spaces shall not exceed 10% more than the minimum requirement.
Effective: July 1, 2004; revised August 15, 2008
24-1
Chapter 24
SIGNS
24.01 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL SIGNS AND DISTRICTS
A. A sign may be erected, placed, established, painted, created, or maintained in the Township only in
conformance with the standards and other requirements of this Zoning Resolution.
B. All signs require a zoning certificate, unless stated within these regulations that no zoning certificate is
required.
C. Signs shall be located on the same premises as the entity advertising thereon except for as provided in the
regulations governing off-premises signs.
D. A fee in accordance with the schedule of amounts posted in the Community Development Department, as
established by the Board of Trustees, shall accompany each application for a Zoning Certificate.
E. All freestanding signs shall be monument style. See Sign Size and Height Measurement Standards Section
24.09.
F. For single-tenant businesses, the monument sign shall include the street number. Monument signs for multitenant
buildings shall include the street number if the building has only one number, or the number range if
tenant spaces are individually numbered. The street number shall be located on the monument sign base. The
address numbers shall be of a contrasting color with the background to allow easy identification from the
street. The numbers shall have a minimum height of five inches.
G. Any illumination source:
1. Shall employ only light emitting a constant intensity and shall not contain flashing, rotating, or moving
light or lights.
2. Shall not create a hazard to traffic.
H. A projecting sign may be allowed in substitution of a wall sign. Projecting signs shall be setback at least five
feet from property lines and right-of-way lines, have a minimum clearance of at least ten feet, have a height
to width ratio of not less than 3:1 (except for uniformly round or uniformly square signs), a maximum sign
height dimension of ten feet, and have a maximum sign face areas of 30 square feet.
I. Electronic Message Signs
1. Electronic message signs are permitted as part of a larger business monument sign.
2. The electronic reader portion of the monument sign shall not exceed 50% of the total sign face area.
3. Electronic message signs shall not be allowed on wall signs but may be allowed on the entirety of a
projecting sign.
4. Electronic message signs shall contain an auto-dimming feature and not cause excessive nighttime
brightness.
J. No sign shall be placed on the roof of any building, except those integral roof signs whose supporting structure
is concealed in such a manner that the sign appears to be a continuation of the face of the building. However,
wall mounted and projecting signs may extend up to 25% above the roof line (excluding gasoline canopy signs).
K. No signs maintained in the window of a building shall occupy more than 50% of the window surface.
24-2
L. Should any sign become unsafe, such as in danger of falling, the owner or responsible person shall restore such
sign to a safe and secure condition or remove the sign. Nonconforming signs in such condition shall be
removed and not restored.
M. Temporary signs shall not be displayed on any property except as provided within this Chapter.
N. For corner lots, ingress/egress points, railway crossings and the like, signs shall be located in such a way so to
maintain a Clearview Zone as defined in this Chapter.
O. A zoning permit is not required for sign maintenance (such as replacing bulbs, painting cabinets, etc.) however,
a zoning permit is required to reface an existing sign. Nonconforming signs are allowed to be maintained and
refaced. Cabinet replacement, cabinet reconstruction and/or adding an electronic reader element is
considered to be a new sign, not maintenance.
P. Within this Chapter, allowed sign area shall be “per face” with a maximum of two faces per sign.
Q. Wall signs are not allowed on accessory buildings or structures.
24.02 SIGNS IN VIOLATION
A. This Chapter has been drafted and shall be interpreted consistently with guiding judicial requirements within
the State of Ohio, including but not limited to Reed v. Town of Gilbert, Arizona, 135 S. Ct. 2218. As such, this
Chapter is drafted and shall be applied in a content-neutral manner. The message or content of a sign shall
not be considered when applying these regulations.
24.03 PROHIBITED SIGNS
The following types of signs shall not be permitted in any district:
A. Portable signs such as signs on wheels, signs on other mobile devices such as a trailer, signs not permanently
installed and permitted, and the like (except as provided within the Temporary Sign section of this Chapter).
B. Vehicles containing signage, including wrapped vehicles, which are primarily dormant but prominently placed
to advertise the business premises.
C. Animated, beacon and flashing signs.
D. Abandoned signs (however, panels may be continued until a replacement business fills the space).
E. Pole/pylon signs.
F. Electronic message signs mounted as wall signs.
G. Any sign which, by reason of its size, location, content, coloring or manner of illumination, constitutes a traffic
hazard by obstructing driver vision, or obstructs or detracts from the visibility of any traffic sign or control
device on public roads.
H. Any unsafe or dilapidated sign.
I. Any signs which mislead or confuse traffic.
J. Any signs which imitate or resemble official traffic or government signs or signals.
24-3
24.04 PROHIBITED SIGN LOCATIONS
A. Sign locations shall be in accordance with the regulations of this Chapter. Other than those exempted by this
Chapter, a sign shall not be located in a right-of-way. Signs also shall not be attached to trees, utility poles,
supporting structures for street signs, governmental signs, bus shelters, benches, trash receptacles or the like.
Any sign or device located within a public right-of-way may be removed by Miami Township staff.
24.05 EXEMPTED SIGNS
The following signs shall not be subject to the provisions of this Zoning Resolution:
A. Governmental and public utility signs.
B. Political signs.
C. Any governmental entity flag, emblem or sign.
D. Signs within a stadium, theatre, arena, or similar outdoor structure, provided that such sign(s) can be viewed
primarily by persons within such structure.
24.06 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT SIGNS (A, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-PUD, SRUV, T)
In a residential district the following signs may be permitted:
A. Subdivision and apartment complex signs:
1. Each development may have one sign at each major street entrance to the development, but not to
exceed two entrance signs per development.
2. Each development may have a third internal sign announcing a common facility such as a swimming pool,
clubhouse or the like.
3. Such signs shall be a monument sign or part of a decorative wood, brick, or stone or masonry support
structure.
4. Each sign shall have a total message area not greater than 32 square feet, shall be no more than seven
feet in height, and shall be set back at least ten feet from any right-of-way or property line.
5. Such signs may be externally illuminated as long as the light source is shielded in such a way as to prevent
glare on public streets or neighboring properties. Signs may contain backlit solid channel letters but not
panels.
B. Institutional signs:
1. Monument signs for institutional users shall be permitted. The face area of the monument sign shall not
exceed 32 square feet, shall have a maximum height of seven feet (including ancillary structures), and be
located not closer than ten feet from any right-of-way or property line. Signs may contain backlit solid
channel letters but not panels.
2. Electronic reader boards are prohibited except as follows: If the sign fronts on a collector, arterial or
expressway (existing or proposed) as identified in the Imagine Miami Vision 2025 Plan (2019), and the sign
is located at least 25 feet from any other property zoned Residence District, then the sign serving the
institutional user may contain an electronic reader board consistent with the General Requirements
above.
3. If the parcel on which the institutional user is located is one acre or greater, excluding right of way, then
the maximum face area allowed shall be increased to not exceed 50 square feet.
4. Institutional users in any zoning district may in addition display on site up to two informational bulletin
boards, not to exceed 32 square feet in face area (no zoning permit is required for a bulletin board).
5. Institutional users may display one wall sign for each building elevation that fronts on a public road or
primary center drive. Wall signs may be uplit, but wall signs may not be internally lighted unless the sign
24-4
consists of individually backlit channel letters. The maximum wall sign area shall be one square foot of
sign area per one liner foot of the building elevation length on which the sign will be located, not to exceed
50 square feet on any one elevation.
6. Institutional users located in business districts are allowed the same monument and wall sign allocation
and dimensions as other users within those business districts.
24.07 BUSINESS, OFFICE, INDUSTRIAL AND MIXED USE INSTITUTIONAL SIGNS
A. In all cases, signage in the Mixed Use Institutional District shall not exceed signage allocations as allowed for
buildings or building complexes in the 0 to 24,999 square foot dimension.
B. Second story signage will be permitted as follows: For buildings containing two or more floors, one sign may
be placed on the second floor or higher on each side of the building that faces a public right-of-way line or the
primary drive into a building complex, regardless of the number of upper floor tenants. The area shall not
exceed 1.5 square foot of sign area per one linear foot of the building length upon which the sign will be
located.
C. In multi-occupancy buildings, the end cap tenant space may display a side wall sign as well, up to one-half the
area of its primary wall sign.
D. Building or building complexes ranging from 0 to 24,999 square feet:
1. Single occupancy:
a. One monument sign not to exceed seven feet in height and 50 square feet face area. A two-foot
height bonus can be granted if a two-foot-high stone or brick base is provided. The sign shall be
setback at least ten feet from any right-of-way or property line.
b. At most, two wall signs may be installed for each building elevation that faces a right-of-way or a
primary drive into a building complex. The total sign area for a given building elevation shall not
exceed one square foot of sign area per one linear foot of the building elevation length upon which
the sign will be located. In total, a maximum of four wall signs may appear on a single occupancy
building, even if there are more than two frontages.
2. Multiple-Occupancy:
a. One monument sign not to exceed seven feet in height and 50 square feet face area. A two-foot
height bonus can be granted if a two-foot-high stone or brick base is provided. The sign shall be
setback at least ten feet from any right-of-way or property line.
b. One wall sign for first-floor tenants of a multi-tenant building having their own public entrance.
The area shall not exceed 1.5 square feet of sign area per one linear foot of the width of the exterior
tenant space.
E. Building or building complexes ranging from 25,000 to 99,999 square feet:
1. Single occupancy:
a. One monument sign not to exceed seven feet in height and 100 square feet face area. A two-foot
height bonus can be granted if a two-foot-high stone or brick base is provided. The sign shall be
setback at least ten feet from any right-of-way or property line.
b. At most, two wall signs may be installed for each building elevation that faces a right-of-way or a
primary drive into a building complex. The total sign area for a given building elevation shall not
exceed one square foot of sign area per one linear foot of the building elevation length upon which
the sign will be located. In total, a maximum of four wall signs may appear on a single occupancy
building, even if there are more than two frontages.
24-5
c. If the building exceeds 60,000 square feet in floor area and the length of its elevation that faces a
right-of-way or a primary drive equals or exceeds 300 linear feet, then up to four wall signs may
be placed on that elevation (a maximum of six wall signs total for the building).
2. Multiple-Occupancy:
a. One monument sign not to exceed seven feet in height and 100 square feet face area. A two-foot
height bonus can be granted if a two-foot-high stone or brick base is provided. The sign shall be
setback at least ten feet from any right-of-way or property line.
b. One wall sign for first-floor tenants of a multi-tenant building having their own public entrance.
The area shall not exceed 1.5 square feet of sign area per one linear foot of the width of the exterior
tenant space.
F. Building or building complexes greater than 99,999 square feet.
1. Single Building:
a. One monument sign not to exceed 15 feet in height and 150 square feet face area. The sign shall
be setback at least ten feet from any right-of-way or property line.
b. At most, two wall signs may be installed for each building elevation that faces a right-of-way or a
primary drive into a building complex. The total sign area for a given building elevation shall not
exceed one square foot of sign area per one linear foot of the building elevation length upon which
the sign will be located. In total, a maximum of four wall signs may appear on a single occupancy
building, even if there are more than two frontages.
c. If the length of the building elevation that faces a right-of-way or a primary drive equals or exceeds
300 linear feet, then up to four wall signs may be placed on that elevation (a maximum of six wall
signs total for the building).
2. Building Complex with multiple occupancy:
a. One monument sign not to exceed 32 feet in height and 200 square feet face area. The sign shall
be setback at least ten feet from any right-of-way or property line.
b. One wall sign for first-floor tenants of a multi-tenant building having their own public entrance.
The area shall not exceed 1.5 square feet of sign area per one linear foot of the width of the exterior
tenant space.
c. An individual building (not tenant space) within a building complex greater than 99,999 square feet
may have one monument sign not to exceed five feet
in height and 20 square feet face area for identification
or directory purposes. The sign shall be setback at least
ten feet from any right-of-way or property line and be
located within 50 feet of the building’s primary
entrance.
d. If the tenant floor area exceeds 60,000 square feet and
the length of its tenant elevation that faces a right-ofway
or a primary drive equals or exceeds 300 linear
feet, then up to four wall signs may be placed on that
elevation.
e. A building complex greater than 99,999 square feet
may have up to two monument signs not to exceed
five feet in height, and 20 square feet face area for
directory purposes within the complex. The sign shall
be setback at least ten feet from any
right-of-way or property line. Example Directory Sign
24-6
24.08 ALTERNATIVE WALL SIGN PLACEMENT
A. A building sign typically is placed on the elevation facing the right-of-way or primary access drive, as applicable.
A portion of the allowed sign square footage may be shifted to another elevation that does not face the rightof-
way or primary access drive. The portion shifted shall be deducted from the allocation to the original
elevation. The square footage shifted to another elevation shall not exceed the maximum area that elevation
would support based upon its own width. Shifted square footage from a given elevation may only be applied
to one other elevation, not multiple.
B. Other than as provided herein for gasoline canopy signs, wall signs may not be placed on accessory buildings
or structures.
24.09 SIGN SIZE AND HEIGHT MEASUREMENT STANDARDS
A. The length of the base of the monument sign shall be at least 90% of the length of the sign face.
B. In business districts (B-1, B-2, I, O, PBD), the total area of support structures and ancillary elements (such as
bases, columns, veneers and caps) of the sign shall not exceed two times the maximum allowed sign face area.
In business districts, support and ancillary sign elements are subject to maximum sign height restrictions.
C. A monument sign may include a sign supported by two columns, but in such circumstance, the sign face shall
be placed no higher than 24 inches from grade. See example below.
D. The height of a monument sign shall be determined by measuring the distance between the top part of a sign
or its structure; whichever is highest, to the elevation of the ground directly beneath the sign. In cases where
a sign is located on a human-made berm or similar ground structure, the height shall be measured from the
top part of the sign or its structure to the elevation of the edge of street pavement nearest to the sign.
E. Residential subdivision and commercial park signs are anticipated to contain additional ornamental features
such as masonry walls, trellis’ or metal finishes. For individual business or apartment complexes, however,
ornamental features shall be limited to the width of the sign face area, with the exception of columns which
shall be in proportion to the sign face area.
F. Sign face area shall be clearly defined and shall be determined by boxing the text and images within a single
squared shape. Clearly separated symbols or message components will be viewed as two signs.
24-7
G. Free-standing Monument Signs Suitable for Residential Subdivisions:
24-8
H. Free-standing Monument Signs Suitable for Businesses:
24-8
24-9
I. Free-standing Monument Signs Suitable for Commercial Parks:
24.10 INCIDENTAL SIGNS
A. A sign discouraging solicitation may be posted at the entrance of a residential subdivision outside of the right
of way. A permit is not required
B. Directional and Informational Signs: Parking lot and other private directional signs, such as “Entrance,” “Exit,”
“Parking,” “Service,” “Parts,” and the like, each not exceeding four feet in height, four square feet in face area
and located at least ten feet behind the right-of-way or any property line, are allowed. Such signs are to be
limited to guidance information within the premises on which they are located and are not to display the
name of a product, service, or any other advertising. Such signs may be internally illuminated. A permit is not
required.
C. Menu Boards and Ordering Canopies: Menu boards may be 100% digital and shall only have one sign face.
For each ordering lane, up to three ground-mounted menu boards are permitted. The total allowable sign
square footage per ordering lane shall not exceed 80 square feet. However, no single menu board sign shall
exceed 50 square feet or seven feet in height. For each ordering lane, an ordering canopy may be constructed
which incorporates a screen to display the order information. Menu boards and ordering canopies described
in the subsection shall be limited to vehicle drive thru lanes only.
D. Minor signs: One minor sign, four square feet in area and indicating hours of operation, credit card
information, etc. shall be permitted on the entrance door or door recess area to each business establishment.
Additional minor signs located on the premises not to exceed four square feet in area may include secondary
site information such as loading area, cart return, gasoline pump information, address and the like. A zoning
24-10
permit is not required for these minor signs. Minor signs which exceed these dimensions shall be treated as
a primary monument or wall signs for permitting purposes. Restaurants may place outdoor menu signs (such
as sandwich board signs) within ten feet of the building entrance.
E. Canopy signs for fuel service. Separate signs are allowed on fuel service canopies as follows:
1. Signs may be placed on all sides of a canopy that are visible to passing traffic; normally this will be on
three sides and exclude the side facing inward.
2. The maximum allowance of signs to be displayed on the canopy shall be determined by measuring the
longest length of the canopy. One square foot of canopy signage may be displayed per one linear foot of
length. There shall be no more than one sign on each canopy-face visible to passing traffic. If the canopy
is painted with branding colors, the color scheme will not count as part of the sign allowance. No canopy
sign shall extend more than one foot above the top line of the canopy and may not extend beyond the
bottom or side lines of the canopy.
3. In addition to the allowed signage, a maximum of one canopy face may contain digital signage with pricing
information. The digital signage shall count toward the maximum signage allowance.
24.11 OFF-PREMISES SIGNS
A. Off-premises signs are prohibited except as follows:
1. Such signs that have a face area of not more than one 100 square feet are permitted in the B-2 and I
districts. If visible to approaching traffic, the off-premises sign shall be setback at least 100 feet from all
road right-of-way lines, unless required by the Ohio Department of Transportation to have greater setback
distances along state roads or highways. Off-premises signs may be increased to a maximum of 300
square feet, provided that for every two square feet of face area over 100 square feet, the sign shall be
setback an additional one foot from any right-of-way line.
2. Such signs shall be placed not closer than 400 feet to any residential or resort district.
3. Such signs shall be placed not closer than 100 feet to any other property lines.
4. The height of any commercial off-premises signs shall not exceed 32 feet.
5. Off-premises signs shall be placed so as to maintain a spacing of at least 1,800 feet between signs along
any single road corridor. In the event of intersecting streets, roads or highways, off-premises signs shall
in no case be spaced closer than 900 feet from one another.
6. Off-premises sign shall be considered the principal use of the lot upon which it is placed and precludes
any other principal use on the same lot.
7. Off-premises signs may be 100% digital.
B. For the construction of a residential subdivision of four or more houses, the developer may install up to two
signs not to exceed seven feet in height and 50 square feet face area for informational purposes. Such signs
shall be removed when the subdivision is completed, or there has been no sale in that subdivision by the
advertising company for longer than one year. Such signs shall be located no more than 1.5 miles from the
subdivision entrance and shall be located at least ten feet from the right-of-way.
24.12 TEMPORARY SIGNS
A. For all temporary signs:
1. No temporary sign shall be illuminated
2. Signs shall be installed in a manner so that Clearview requirements are maintained.
3. Signs shall be placed no closer than ten feet from any right-of-way or property line.
4. Reference “Prohibited Signs” above.
24-11
B. Residential real estate:
1. Signs may be used to direct prospective purchasers to houses for sale. One customary sized residential
for sale sign may be placed on each frontage of the lot containing the house for sale. In addition, up to
two customary sized residential directional signs may be allowed, located not more than one mile from
the house for sale and not within right-of-way. In no event may more than one such sign shall be erected
at any entrance to a subdivision, even if the subdivision contains multiple homes for sale. This provision
also applies to rental properties, apartments and attached condominium units.
2. Signs announcing a yard sale or similar events are permitted in residential districts. Such signs shall be no
larger than six square feet, shall have a maximum height of five feet, and be displayed for a time period
not greater than four consecutive days. One sign shall be permitted on the premises of the sale and
additional signs not to exceed two in number, shall be permitted to be placed on nearby private property
with the written permission of the owner. A zoning permit is not required.
C. Commercial real estate:
1. For single-tenant structures actively for sale or lease, one sign up to 50 square feet may be placed on the
building or installed as a stand-alone sign. Such sign shall not exceed seven feet in height and shall be of
rigid construction (e.g., no banners).
2. Multi-tenant:
a. One sign is allowed on the wall of a tenant space until sold or leased.
b. The sign may be up to 32 square feet and shall be of rigid construction (e.g., no banners).
c. Standalone signs are not allowed; however, the sign may be contained within a tenant panel of a
permanent standalone sign.
D. Construction:
1. Construction signs indicating the name of architects, engineers, contractors and similar persons or firms
involved in the design or construction of a structure or project are allowed, provided:
a. For businesses and residential subdivision developments, such sign shall not exceed 50 square feet
in face area or seven feet in height. For individual residential lots, the sign shall not exceed six square
feet in face area or five feet in height.
b. Signs may be located only on the property where the construction is occurring.
c. One sign shall be permitted for each five acres of property area, not to exceed a total of three signs
for any project.
d. Signs may be erected for a period of 60 days prior to construction and extend throughout the
construction period. All such signs shall be removed upon the issuance of the county occupancy
permit, or in the case of a residential subdivision, the issuance of county occupancy permits to 80
percent of the lots. If the project becomes dormant for more the sixty days, all signs shall be
removed.
E. Nonprofit and cultural gatherings such as festivals:
1. On lots where the event is occurring located within business districts and upon the premises of institutional
land uses:
a. Up to two signs are allowed with a face area not exceeding 32 square feet face area and a maximum
of five feet in height.
b. Use of such signs shall be limited to a period of 60 days in a calendar year, with a minimum of two
months between any display period.
2. In residential districts and business districts where the event is not occurring:
a. One sign is allowed per parcel.
b. The sign may be displayed a maximum of 30 days in a calendar year per event.
24-12
c. The sign shall not exceed six square feet in area or five feet in height.
d. A zoning permit is not required.
F. Special event signs authorized in business districts only:
1. Such signage may include banners or rigid changeable copy signs.
2. Signs shall have a face area not exceeding 32 square feet face area and a maximum of five feet in height.
Alternatively, one or both signs may be placed on the building face.
3. No more than two signs may be displayed per road frontage or main shopping center entry of the business
premises.
4. Special event signs shall be limited to three display periods, not exceeding 20 days per period, during each
calendar year.
5. Additional allowance for grand openings:
a. Permitted signage includes banners, pennants, streamers, balloons, and the like.
b. Banners shall not exceed 32 square feet, and there shall be no more than four banners.
c. A cold air balloon must be securely fastened to the ground or building.
d. No sign or inflatable device shall exceed 12 feet in height.
e. The grand opening must be specific to the premises.
f. Signage for a grand opening may be displayed for not more than 31 days, and there shall only be one
display period.
24.13 CLEARVIEW ZONE
In order to provide a clear view to the motorist, there shall be a triangular area of clear vision free of any obstructions
where driveways, alleys, tracks and/or streets intersect. The size and configuration of this area shall be as illustrated
in Chapter 23.
24.14 SPECIAL SIGN DEFINITIONS
ABANDONED SIGN: A sign which no longer identifies or advertises a bona fide business, lessee, service, owner,
product, or activity, and/or for which no legal owner can be found.
ANIMATED SIGN: Any sign that uses movement or change of lighting to depict action or create a special effect or
scene.
AUTO DIMMING FEATURE: A sensor or other device that automatically determines the ambient illumination and
programmed to automatically dim the Electronic Message Sign according to ambient light conditions. To determine if
nighttime brightness of Electronic Message Signs is excessive, the Community Development Director may reference
standards developed by the International Sign Association (“ISA”), and as contained in the ISA publication “Nighttime
Brightness Level Recommendations for On-Premise Electronic Message Centers” (Updated August 2016), and/or
other standards determined to be authoritative by the Director.
BANNER: A sign of lightweight fabric, vinyl or similar material that may be mounted to a pole or a building by a frame
or grommet tie down. National, state or township flags shall not be considered banners. All banners shall be
considered temporary signage.
BUILDING COMPLEX: A group of buildings with shared parking and shared entrances, that are functioning as a single
or related complex as indicated by shared signage, shared landscaping, shared maintenance, overlapping facilities and
the like. Common ownership and placement on a single parcel is a strong indicator of a Building Complex. However,
absence of a single parcel or single ownership does not necessarily disqualify properties that have sufficient common
elements.
24-13
BULLETIN BOARD SIGN: Any sign or structure located on the property of a public, institutional, religious or charitable
organization containing a changeable message format used to announce its activities, rules, and the like (commonly,
of cork and wood construction).
BUSINESS DISTRICTS: O-1, B-1, B-2, I, PBD.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN: A sign or portion thereof with characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changed or
rearranged without altering the face or the surface of the sign.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE SIGN: Any sign that incorporates the use of video boards, lights, neon, liquid crystal display,
LED, or other lighting devices that display a message or pattern to be viewed.
ERECT: To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix, and shall also include the painting of signs directly
upon surfaces.
FLAG: Any fabric, or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols, used as a symbol of government, or
political subdivision.
FLASHING SIGN: Any sign which contains an intermittent or blinking light source, or which includes the illusion of
blinking or intermittent light by means of animation or an externally-mounted intermittent light source.
IDENTIFICATION SIGN: A sign indicating the name and/or address of a building, institution, or person and/or the
activity or occupation being identified.
INSTITUTIONAL USER: Those types of uses identified in Section 5.03A.
ILLUMINATED SIGN: A sign with an artificial light source incorporated internally or externally for the purpose of
illuminating the sign.
MAINTENANCE: For the purposes of this Chapter, the cleaning, painting, repair, or replacement of defective parts of a
sign in a manner that does not alter the basic copy, design, or structure of the sign.
MENU BOARD: Any sign used to aid a patron in ordering services from a business from the outside.
MONUMENT SIGN: A free-standing sign containing a proportional base, and includes the two column sign exception
described in Section 24.09.
NONCONFORMING SIGN: A sign which was erected legally but which does not comply with subsequently enacted
regulations.
OFF PREMISES SIGN: A sign which directs attention to a business, use, service, activity, commodity, or profession which
is not conducted, sold, or offered upon the same lot where the sign is located.
OCCUPANCY: The portion of a building or premises owned, leased, rented, or otherwise occupied for a given use.
OWNER: A person recorded as such on official records. For the purposes of this Chapter, the owner of the property
on which a sign is located is presumed to be the owner of the sign unless facts to the contrary are brought to the
attention of the Zoning Inspector.
24-14
PARAPET: The extension of a false front or wall above a roofline.
PENNANT: Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind,
suspended from a rope, wire, or string, usually in a series, often designed to move in the wind.
POLITICAL SIGN: A sign which announces the candidacy of a person or slate of persons running for elective office, or
a political party or issue.
PRIMARILY DORMANT VEHICLE: A vehicle which is not moved for 15 days or longer from a set location or is unlicensed
or inoperable. The word “moved” as used herein means taken from the set location to a point at least 150 feet away
for a period not less than two consecutive days.
PROJECTING SIGN: Any sign affixed to a building or wall in such a manner that the face of the sign is perpendicular to
the building wall or corner.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: Public road space.
ROOFLINE: The top edge of a roof or building parapet, whichever is higher, excluding any cupolas, pylons, chimneys,
or minor projections.
ROOF SIGN: Any sign erected and constructed wholly on or above the roof of a building, and supported by the roof
structure, and extending vertically above the roof.
REFACE: The replacement of any visible side of a sign containing text or images, but not the replacement of the sign
cabinet or structural components.
SETBACK: The distance from the property line and right-of-way to the nearest part of the applicable building, structure,
or sign (including sign cabinet, support structure or ancillary portions such as base or veneer).
SIGN FACE: Any visible side of a sign containing text or images. One sign normally has two faces unless wall mounted.
Also referred to herein as “sign area”, “face area” or “sign face area”. See graphic examples contained herein.
SIGN STRUCTURE: Any structure which supports has supported or is capable of supporting a sign, including decorative
cover.
SUBDIVISION SIGN: A monument or wall sign identifying a recognized subdivision, condominium, apartment complex,
or residential development.
TEMPORARY SIGN: Any sign that is not permanently mounted.
WALL SIGN: Any sign attached to or erected against the wall of a building or structure, and having the exposed face of
the sign in a plane parallel to the plane of such wall.
WINDOW SIGN: Any sign, pictures, symbols, or a combination thereof, designed to communicate information about
an activity, business, commodity, event, sale, or service, that is placed inside a window or upon the window panes or
glass and is visible from the exterior of the window.
25-1
Chapter 25
GENERAL PROVISIONS AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
25.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. No buildings shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally
altered, nor shall any building or land be used which do not comply with all of the
district regulations established by this Resolution for the District in which the
building or land is located.
B. Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be located on a lot as
herein defined.
C. Uses which are not specifically permitted are prohibited. Marijuana cultivators,
processors and retail dispensaries are prohibited within all Districts.
D. In any Residence District placing a trailer shall be prohibited, except that one (1)
trailer may be parked or stored in a garage or other accessory building, provided
that no occupancy for human habitation be maintained or business conducted
therein while such trailer is so parked or stored.
E. In any Resort District, the wheels or any similar transporting device of any trailer
shall not be removed nor shall such trailer be otherwise temporarily or permanently
fixed to the ground or attached to something having a temporary or permanent
location on the ground by any person, firm or corporation in any manner.
F. Except as authorized by Section 519.21 of the Ohio Revised Code, nothing contained
in this Resolution shall prohibit the use of any land for agricultural purposes or the
construction or use of buildings or structures incident to the use for agricultural
purposes of the land on which such buildings or structures are located, and no
zoning certificate shall be required for any such use, building or structure.
G. Nothing contained in this Resolution or amendments thereto shall require any
change, in the plans, construction, size, or designated use of a building, for which a
valid permit has been issued or lawful approval given before the effective date of
this Resolution or amendments thereto; provided, however, construction under
such permit shall have been started within six (6) months and the ground story
framework including structural parts of the second floor shall have been completed
within one (1) year and the entire building completed within two (2) years after the
effective date of this resolution.
25.02 YARD SALES AND GARAGE SALES
Yard sales, garage sales and any other type of personal property sales in residential districts are
permitted but limited to the sale of used personal property of the occupants of the premises,
25-2
and shall be restricted to a duration of three consecutive days with no more than three such
sales conducted by any household in any single calendar year. The length of time of display of
property shall be for the duration of the sale only. A Zoning Certificate is not required for the
first two sales conducted on the premises during a single calendar year, however, a permit shall
be required for the third such sale within the same calendar year at a cost as set forth in an
approved fee schedule. Signs associated with yard and garage sales may be erected in
accordance with Chapter 24 with no additional fee.
25.03 NON-CONFORMING USES
In conformance with Section 519.19 of the Ohio Revised Code, the lawful use of any dwelling,
building, or structure and of any land or premises, as existing and lawful at the time of
enactment of a zoning resolution or amendment thereto, may be continued, although such use
does not conform with such resolution or amendment, but if any such use is voluntarily
discontinued for two years or more, any future use of said land shall be in conformity with this
Zoning Resolution and Sections 519.01 et seq inclusive of the Ohio Revised Code.
Property Owners may complete construction of a lawful non- conforming use as set forth in
25.01 (G).
In the event of natural disasters such as storms and fire non-conforming uses may be restored
and/or reconstructed provided restoration and/or reconstruction commences within six (6)
months and is complete within one year.
Non-conforming uses may be extended and/or substituted provided the extension and/or
substitution will not adversely impact upon adjacent properties; complies with all existing setback
and height restriction provisions of the district in which the property is located; is
compatible with and of the same general character as the non-conforming use and does not
violate the spirit of this resolution. To extend or substitute a non-conforming use the property
owner must file an application with the Board of Zoning Appeals and demonstrate to the Board
of Zoning Appeals compliance with this section.
25.04 COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS
Except as hereinafter provided:
A. No land shall be used except for a purpose permitted in the district in which it is
located. If a use is not specifically permitted it is prohibited.
B. No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved or
structurally altered, nor shall any building or land be used except for a purpose
permitted in the district in which the building or land is located. If a use is not
specifically permitted it is prohibited.
C. No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or structurally
altered to exceed the height limit herein established for the district in which the
building is located.
25-3
D. No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or structurally
altered except in conformity with the area regulations of the district in which the
building is located.
E. The minimum yards, parking space, open spaces, including lot area per family,
required by this Resolution, for each and every building existing at the time of
passage of this Resolution, or for any building hereafter erected, shall not be
encroached upon or considered as required yard or open space for any other
building, nor shall any lot area be reduced below the requirements of this
Resolution for the District in which the lot is located.
F. Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be located on a lot as
herein defined and in no case shall there be more than one (1) main building on one
(1) Lot.
25.05 CONVERSION OF DWELLINGS
The conversion of any building into a dwelling or the conversion of any dwelling so as to
accommodate an increased number of dwelling units or families, shall be permitted only within
a district in which a new building for similar occupancy would be permitted under this
Resolution, and only when the resulting occupancy will comply with the requirements governing
new construction in such district with respect to minimum lot size, lot area per dwelling unit,
percentage of lot coverage, dimensions of yards and other open spaces.
25.06 TRAFFIC VISIBILITY ACROSS CORNER LOTS
In any Residence District on any corner lot, no fence, structure or planting shall be erected or
maintained within twenty (20) feet of the "corner" at a height of more than three (3) feet above
the curb or street grade, or to as to interfere with traffic visibility across the corner.
25.07 PENDING APPLICATION FOR BUILDING PERMITS
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the overall layout, plans, construction,
size or designated use of any development- building, structure or part thereof, for which official
approvals and required building permits have been granted before the enactment of his
Resolution or amendments thereto, the construction of which, conforming with such plans, shall
have been started prior to the effective date of this Resolution or amendments thereto and
completion thereof carried on in a normal manner with the subsequent six (6) months period
and not discontinued until completion, except for reasons beyond the builder's control.
25.08 SIDEWALKS
A. Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of the street for all single family lots
platted in an A, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, and R-PUD residential zoning district except for
large lot developments (2 acre lots or greater) as defined in the Clermont County
Subdivision Regulations unless the subdivision offers neighborhood amenities such
as a swimming pool, tennis court or clubhouse.
25-4
B. Sidewalks shall be required within all multi-family residential developments. The
sidewalk system shall provide a pedestrian connection between all buildings within
the development and between the buildings and any amenities.
C. In any case where a platted subdivision or multi-family development abuts a
collector or arterial street, sidewalks shall be provided along the collector or arterial
for the entire distance the property abuts said street.
D. Alternative pedestrian pathways will be considered for any Planned Unit
Development provided all lots and/or buildings within the PUD have access to the
pathway system. Such alternatives shall be presented during the site plan review
process and must be approved by the Board of Trustees.
25.09 HOME OCCUPATION
A Home Occupation may be conducted in residential zoning districts after issuance of a zoning
certificate approving the Home Occupation and subject to the following.
A. There shall be no display that will indicate from the exterior that the home is being
utilized in whole or in part for any purpose other than that of a dwelling.
B. Any item sold upon the premises in association with the Home Occupation shall be
stored within an enclosed building, with the exception of firewood, that may be
stored outdoors in a single location in the rear yard in an area not to exceed 10 feet
x 10 feet, and four feet in height. This outdoor storage exception for firewood shall
apply for household use as well.
C. Any activity associated with the Home Occupation must be conducted within a
completely enclosed permanent building, with the exception of Household Pets
being watched that may be let out within a controlled yard area.
D. Any person who is an employee or contractor who reports to the premises or
works at the premises may be only a member of the immediate family residing
permanently at the premises, otherwise there shall be no employees reporting to,
visiting or staging at the premises of the Home Occupation.
E. No mechanical equipment except that which is normally present for customary
domestic or household purposes shall be used, stored or parked at the premises in
association with the Home Occupation.
1. Mechanical equipment not customary for normal domestic household
purposes may be parked or stored at a residential property, however, only
within a completely enclosed structure.
25-5
F. Activities associated with the Home Occupation shall create no more noise,
disruption or delivery trips within the neighborhood except as would otherwise be
found with ordinary residential use.
G. Deliveries for the Home Occupation, including pickup, will not exceed one per day
(not averaged) by a normal residential scale delivery vehicle plus mail delivery.
H. The Home Occupation shall generate no more than a maximum of two
customer/client trips to the premises in any given day (not averaged).
I. The maximum area within all buildings used for the Home Occupation shall not
exceed 400 square feet.
25.10 AGRICULTURAL USES in R-1, R-2, R-3, H, R-PUD, SRUV and T residential districts in
accordance with Ohio Revised Code Section 519.21 are allowed as follows:
A. For properties described in Ohio Revised Section 519.21(B)(1) (generally, lots under
one acre), agricultural uses are limited to the keeping of Household Pets only.
1. Structures designed for the temporary or permanent habitation or containment
of Household Pets shall be located in rear yards only and no closer than 15 feet
from side or rear lot lines.
2. Any doghouse, dog run or other accessory structure for Household Pet
habitation, except for a chicken coop, shall be no larger than 24 square feet. No
chicken coop shall exceed 30 square feet and seven feet in height.
3. No more than six chickens may be kept on a property. Chickens shall be securely
confined to the rear yard area by fencing or structure.
4. Bees may be maintained as a hobby. Any beehive or bee structure must be
located in the rear yard area at least 25 feet from any property line, and there
shall be no more than two beehives per lot.
5. Anyone using their residential property for animal rescue shall at no time have
more than a total of four Household Pets on the premises.
B. For properties described in Ohio Revised Code Section 519.12(B)(2) (generally lots
from one to five acres), buildings or structures incident to the use of land for
agricultural purposes are regulated as follows:
1. Structures for Household Pets and bees are subject to the conditions set forth in
Section 25.10A.
2. The keeping of other animals or fowl (other than chickens) is permitted only in
suitable structures located a minimum of 200 feet from rear and side lot lines
26-1
	






	


 
 	
 

 		
  		 	 	
  	

 






 
	

	!






	
!	

"	





 
 	
 
 
 #
! 
 
!  

  
 
"

 
 
	 
  

   
 	 


 
	 $	"
	
 
 

  
"  
	 	  
   !
%

&



	

!	
!		



& '
  
 	  


 (
	
 
	
 
 	 

#


	



	



		

	
!$!"
		
	!


!	

	

"

 	
 
 
		
  
 		
  	

 	
 

"  

	



"

	&

  !
 
	


!
)
*& +	!	



	


	
	
 #
! 
!  
 " 	  	,
 
	" 
	
	
"

"


		!
!
"

& (	

,
	


!	




	
!




			
		

-

.& +	! 	
 
!  
 !  		!
  
!" 	

"
"

/& 

	
	
#
!

!"

0& +	 

 #
!  

 
   
	 	
 

 

	

	


!	


-

1& (	

		
	


-

2& 
  
   

  
	 
  

   
 	




	$	-
26-2

 
  
 	  ,
" 
 


 		 
 



  


	
!
	
	

  
	
"
	  

 
 

 ! 

 
 ,
 

 


 	 	 3	 	
&  
 	 

 	 
 




	
		

	
!$"	






	

	
	
	
 
	
&

	
	"#$

 %
 	
  
	
 4
 

  

 
 
  5	
   
	
 


&(


&

 
&
	
	

" 

 		 

)


	


 
	
"	

	6&

 #

'(




		

	
!$!
	


)

*& %				
.0
	




	
	&

& 	
6

2
&7	
		
	


	

  
   
   ,! 

  
! 
  	
		
&

.& 8 	
  
 	
 	 
6 
  


 
 
6  
!



,!		
&8




6	
09

		&	
			





*9
	

 	!
   
" 	 	 

) : 	6!  
  
 		  

		
": 

! ; 	
 
	 
 
	

! 


 
6  
	
 
	 
 	
  

	
 
	
- : 	 !


	
-:
	


	


,
		
&

/& <		 

" 
 
6 	  
	
 	!
 

  *9 
" 
 		 	

6 

  .0 
  
  	 
6 

  2 
" 	 

 *0
 



!  ,!
!& 	
 		 	


	
!




!	


&

0& <
	



4
*=&9/&
26-3
	
) *+

 %
>
 $

0"999 & 
&
.9? 
 

	 !	 @
	"
"	!	:

 $*

*& 
! 
	
  
  

 
 
 
	 
	  
 #
!

!&8	

	
 
	!
"	
!"	

		!

& 
! !
	
 

  


 #
! 
	
	  

 

"
"	6
&

.& 
!




1"999


	
#	

	


	
."999	
&

/& 
!




!
.0
&

0& 8	
!
	


!


	
.9?

 			  	& 

 		
! 

!

#


*999	
&

 #'$,&
%

 
! 	
 
# 
 	

 	

  
  
	


	 
	 	
 


!	 	


	
4
0&90
!%

&

 *$$  -    . 
   #  *$
'$#	/#0$'

*& 4!


	

 # 
 !&  !
	
!!	!&
	!

!		,
!!&

& A	
!!




!
/B#	0	
&

.&  	
	
	




!		
"	






	

	!	!

/& (
!		
&



26-4
1 2$3



*& C	
	6!



	

		

!&

& 	
	
	6!	
		,!	


	!


!"
!	


&

.& 8#
!	@
	"	!	:



	!

	6!	
		&

4 %$$
(	6! 

 
6 
!
! 

  
  

 



 

 
!
 





		

&

 %$
>!


			
	


&

5 
4

*&  




"!
	

		

#
#


#
!
	!

-
	!	!

	
	"
		
$


,
&

&  




 
6  	
 

 


B 


	
	!!	 
!&  	!

!
	
 



	



,
		
&

6 .
8




!#	,




	
		
<
	2
!	

&

7 

4
		'

 

)7<
	





#
!

	
	&7
	


		
!
	#
!
!

!!
"	"
!"
@
!	#
&:

26-5


8


98

4
		'

 

)7<
	





#
!

	
	&7
	
	
#.0
!
&'






		
!
	#
!
	
	&



8







98
26-6
4
		'

 

)7
	





#
!

	
	&


6







&




8




98




%
4
	*"99D
A	

!	.3*39*D
27-1
Chapter 27
SITE PLAN REVIEW AND APPROVAL
27.01 PURPOSE.
The purpose of zoning as set forth in Section 519.02 of the Ohio Revised Code is to
protect public health, safety and welfare. This chapter sets requirements; guidelines
and procedures for site plan review. In developments for which site plan reviews are
required, though generally suitable for location, in a particular district or on a
particular site, are because of their nature, size, or other indicators of probable impact,
capable of adversely affecting the purposes of this Zoning Resolution unless careful
consideration has been given to critical design elements. The Board finds that all
requests for zone change have a significant impact an the Zoning Resolution and the
developments set forth below also have a substantial impact such as to require site
plan review.
A. It is the purpose of this Chapter to insure that all developments are
reviewed for compatibility with the regulations and intent of this Zoning
Resolution, Township policies and plans, and good site planning practices.
27.02 APPLICABILITY:
Site plan review and approval is required for the following:
A. Any zone change application, except those initiated by the Township; or
B. Any development involving:
1. Any non-farming or non-single family development in the “A”
Agricultural District,
2. Any development in the ‘R-1’, ‘R-2’, or ‘R-3’ Residence District
which is not single-family development,
3. All development in the following districts:
a . “O-l” Office Business District
b. “B-1” Neighborhood Business District
c. “B-2” General Business District
4. Developments in the following Districts:
a. “T” Mobile Home park
b. “H” Resort District
c. “I” Planned Industrial Park
27-2
27.03 SITE PLAN REVIEW PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS:
The Township shall review all required site plans using the following procedures,
standards, limitations and guidelines. Site plans submitted for review shall demonstrate
the proposed development meets the guidelines and performance standards set forth in
the Zoning Resolution. The site plan shall contain sufficient detailed information about
existing and proposed site conditions to allow an informed decision to be made by the
Community Development Director, Zoning Commission, Township Trustees, and County
Planning Commission as may be required concerning the general acceptability of the
proposed development.
To be considered complete, a site plan shall identify and provide all the information
Required under Section 27.05.
Prior to filing an application for site plan review, an applicant may request a preapplication
conference with the Community Development Director for the purpose of
reviewing the proposed plan and requirements for submittal.
At the time of the filing of an application for site plan review, the applicant is required to
pay the required site plan review fee in accordance with the Township's effective
schedule of fees.
Upon receipt of an application for site plan review under Section 27.02 (A), the following
review shall occur:
A. Step 1 - The applicant shall submit 6 copies of the site plans to the
Community Development Director.
B. Step 2 - The Community Development Director shall:
1. Transmit copies of the site plan application to the following entities:
a. The Township Administrator,
b. The appropriate county and state review agencies, and
C. Step 3 - The Community Development Director shall within thirty (30) days
collect reports from the appropriate review agencies and will prepare a staff
report for presentation to the Zoning Commission.
D. Step 5 - The Township Zoning Commission shall then take all steps necessary
to complete the zone change process as set forth in Revised Code Section
519.12.
For site plan review under Section 27.02 (B) the following steps shall occur:
27-3
A. Step 1 - The applicant shall submit 6 copies of the site plan to the Community
Development Director.
B. Step 2 -The Community Development Director shall:
1. Transmit copies of the site plan application to the following entities:
a. The Township Administrator,
b. The appropriate county and state review agencies
C. Step 3 - The Community Development Director then shall within ten (10)
days of receipt of reports and recommendations prepare a report on the
proposed site plan and shall either approve, disapprove or approve with
conditions the submitted site plan. If approved, a Zoning Certificate may be
issued for the proposed project.
D. Step 5 - The applicant can then take whatever action the applicant deems to be
appropriate with respect to the decision of the Community Development
Director’s including an appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance
with Chapter 29 of the Zoning Resolution.
27.04 SITE PLANNING GUIDELINES
In reviewing the site plan, the Community Development Director shall determine whether
the site plan as proposed meets the requirements of the Zoning Resolution for the
particular district to which the site plan applies. In making this determination the
Community Development Director’s review of the site plan shall be based on, but not
limited to, the following standards:
A. General
1. The site plan shall reflect all Township plans and policies affecting the
site, including neighborhood plans, key area plans, master concept plans
or previously adopted planned unit development plans; and
2. The site, plan should be consistent with the statement of intent for the
zoning district in which it is located or proposed.
B. Site Planning/Open Space and Green Areas
1. To the extent possible the natural topographic and significant landscape
features of the site shall be incorporated into the development in order to
preserve the site's natural resources and enhance its visual character;
27-4
2. Where appropriate, the design of green areas should incorporate plant
materials to define space, provide screening and privacy, define views,
serve as focal points, and soften views of buildings and pavement.
C. Grading and Drainage:
1. Grading should be performed with sensitivity to existing topography and
other natural resources on the site and on adjacent sites. To the extent
practicable, grading should minimize environmental impacts.
2. Drainage shall be designed and constructed so as to not detrimentally
affect adjacent properties. These systems shall provide for the safety and
convenience of occupants and protection of dwellings, other development
and usable lot areas from water damage, flooding, and erosion.
D. Circulation
1. The streets, access and parking system shall provide for the smooth
safe, convenient and functional movement of vehicles and pedestrians
both on and off site.
2. Circulation shall:
a. Minimize the conflict between pedestrian and vehicular traffic,
and
b. Minimize the number of vehicular turning movements and
points of Vehicular conflict, particularly at access points,
3. Vehicular Access:
a. Acceleration, deceleration and/or left turn lanes may be
required if the Township finds that they are necessary to
preserve safety and/or the traffic-carrying capacity of the
existing street.
b. The Township may require a traffic impact study if one or
more of the following conditions exist:
·  If the proposed development or redevelopment may
increase the number of trips entering or leaving the
property by ten percent or more:
·  If the proposed development or redevelopment may
adversely change the type of traffic generated within
the property, for example, addition of truck traffic;
27-5
·  The scale or use of the proposed development might
cause deterioration of service levels on the street and/or
deterioration of safety or service levels at intersections
in the vicinity.
·  The proposed development is in the vicinity of a street
or intersection with a history of safety and/or accident
problems; and
·  The geometry of existing or proposed improvement
might cause a safety hazard.
4. Site Distance Triangles:
a. All sites shall be designed so that plants and structures on the
site do not interfere with the safe movement of motor vehicle
traffic, bicycles or pedestrians.
b. The site distance triangle should be determined in accordance
with the most recent relevant and applicable standards. The
sight distance triangle should vary depending on the design
speed of the street and the width of the street.
E. Pedestrian Circulation
1. Sidewalks and/or pedestrian paths shall be constructed and located in
order to provide a convenient safe, and visible pedestrian path between
parking area and building entrance. Whenever a pedestrian path or
bike path traverses a parking lot, a safe and efficient pedestrian system
shall be clearly designated.
F. Lighting
1. On site exterior lighting should provide illumination adequate to
permit safe nighttime activities.
2. All roadway, parking lot, and walkway lights shall be shielded so that
substantially all the directly emitted light falls within the property line.
G. Buffer Yards
1. The purpose of a buffer yard is to minimize friction between non-compatible
land uses, and to protect the public health and safety through the reduction of
air, noise and visual pollution. The amount and type of screening material
required shall be based on the intensity of the proposed land use.
27-6
2. Where vegetative and/or topographic conditions that provide a natural
screening and buffer exist before development of properties in question, every
effort shall be made to retain such conditions. In such cases, additional
screening may not be required, if provision is made for maintenance of such
areas.
3. If a wall or fence is used as part of the buffer yard, the wall or fence must be
of solid, opaque construction. Chain link fence with wood or vinyl slats will
not be permitted to satisfy the buffer yard requirements.
4. The minimum width of a buffer yard shall be fifteen (15) feet measured from
the property line into the lot, unless otherwise regulated in the Resolution.
5. Buffer yard landscaping shall be diverse consisting of both deciduous and
non-deciduous trees and shrubs. Deciduous trees shall have a minimum
caliber of 2.5 inches at the time of planting. Evergreen trees shall be a
minimum of 6 feet in height at the time of planting. Shrubs and hedges shall
be a minimum of 3 feet at planting and must have a mature height of 6 feet
within four years of planting.
6. Earth mounds may be required as part of the buffer yard. The mounds shall
be designed with physical variations in height. The landscaping material
installed on the earthen mound shall be arranged to accentuate the physical
variation of the mound and achieve a natural appearance.
7. No part of any buffer yard shall be used for active recreation, parking or other
interior access drives.
8. Where the minimum setback for the applicable zoning district differs from the
required buffer yard, the more restrictive standard shall apply.
27.05 SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
A. All applications for site plan review shall be accompanied by:
1. A completed application form provided by the Community
Development Director of Miami Township;
2. The required site plan review fee in accordance with the Miami
Township fee schedule; and
3. Six (6) copies of the site plan.
B. For site plans less than 25 acres, the site plan shall be drawn for the subject
property to a scale not smaller than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100)
feet, to be considered complete. For sites larger than 25 acres, an appropriate
scale should be used. All site plans shall be dated and shall include the
following information as required by this Resolution:
1. All property lines, shape and dimension of the lot to be built upon
showing directional bearings and distances, adjacent land ownership
and streets, and location with reference to identifiable street
intersection. For site plans under Section 27.02 (B) identification of
adjacent property owners is not required.
27-7
2. Name of development, legal description of property, north arrow,
scale, acreage name and address of record owner and engineer,
architect or land planner, or the person responsible for preparing the
site plan;
3. Vicinity map locating the subject property in Miami Township. Each
vicinity map and site plan shall be oriented with parallel north arrows.
North arrow shall be oriented to the top of the page;
4. The total lot area of the subject property,
5. The present zoning of the subject property and all adjacent properties;
6. All public and private rights-of-way and easement lines located an or
adjacent to the subject property which are proposed to be continued,
created, enlarged, relocated, or abandoned,
7. Existing topography, and approximate delineation of any
topographical changes shown by contour with appropriate intervals to
ensure accurate review,
8. The location of every existing and proposed building with number of
floors and gross floor area;
9. Any modifications, changes and additions to existing building(s),
including floor area, heights and setbacks;
10. Delineation of all existing and proposed nonresidential uses in the
project:
·  Commercial uses - location and type of all uses including
approximate number of acres, gross floor area and heights of
buildings,
·  Open Space-Recreation -the approximate amount of area proposed
for open space, including the location of recreational facilities, and
identification of unique natural features to be retained, and/or
·  Other public and semi-public uses location and type of all uses,
including approximate number of acreage, and height of buildings;
11. The proposed finished grade(s) of new buildings supplemented where
necessary with spot elevations:
27-8
12. Location and dimensions of all curb cuts, driving aisles, off-street
parking and loading and/or unloading spaces including number of
spaces and of stalls:
13. Location of proposed pedestrian walkways, identifying approximate
dimensions:
14. Location of proposed streets, identifying approximate dimensions of
pavement, right-of-way and grades;
15. Location of all existing and proposed water, sanitary sewer, and storm
drainage lines, indicating approximate pipe sizes. Indication should
also be given regarding the provision of electric and telephone service;
16. Limits of existing flood hazard areas within and adjacent to the
property, accurately showing the limits of building encroachments and
earth fill within this area, with 100 year water surface elevations and
proposed finished floor elevations denote;
17. Identification of the soil types and geologic formations on the subject
property, indicating anticipated problems and proposed methods of
handling said problems;
18. Existing and proposed location(s) of outdoor lighting, signs, screen
plantings, fences, and landscaping. Any existing woodlands of mature
vegetation, and any other significant natural features, such as water
bodies, drainage courses, wetlands, and wildlife habitats, must be
included, and every good faith effort made to preserve, maintain, and
enhance same;
19. Location and screening or other description to indicate control and
handling of solid waste. Indicate dumpster pad where dumpster is to be
used:
20. A schedule of development, including the staging and phasing of:
a. Streets and other public facility improvements in order of
priority,
b. Dedication of land to public use or set aside for common
ownership, and
c. Nonresidential buildings and uses, in order of priority,
21. Elevations of all faces of buildings and structures at an appropriate
scale for the graphic representation of the materials employed. Such
elevations must also indicate:
27-9
a. Heights of buildings and structures;
b. Roofs and overhangs; and
c. Special design features; and
22. Additional information or engineering data, in such form and content
as necessary to determine that the site plan meets the standards of this
Chapter and other requirements and performance standards of the of
the Zoning Resolution for Miami Township and of other public
agencies in Clermont County to ensure proper integration of the
proposed project in the area and the prevention adverse and
undesirable impacts on the community.
C. The aforementioned information required for site plan review may be
combined in any suitable and convenient manner as long as the data required
is clearly indicated and comprehended.
D. Depending an the nature of the site plan review application, one or more of
the aforementioned site plan requirements may be waived by the Township
Community Development Director. To obtain a waiver the applicant must
submit a statement to the Community Development Director indicating
reasons why the requirements should be waived. Community Development
Director may grant waivers only when the material supplied by the applicant
clearly demonstrates that the required information is unnecessary for a full
and adequate review of the impact, the proposed development shall have on
the existing character of the neighborhood and/or the spirit of the Zoning
Resolution. The decision of the Community Development Director with
respect to the waiver is subject to review upon appeal to the board of Zoning
Appeals.
27.06 REVISIONS OF SITE PLAN AFTER APPROVAL
No changes, erasures, modifications or revisions shall be made to any site plan after
approval has been given unless said changes, erasures, modification or revisions are first
submitted to and approved by the Community Development Director. In determining
whether to permit revision of the site plan after approval, the Community Development
Director shall proceed as follows: for minor modifications, which are defined as follows:
with respect to Section 27.05 (B) (9) a 10 percent change in existing buildings, floor area,
height, and setbacks, and any change under Section 27.05(B) (2) (3) (15), (16), or (17),
the Community Development Director may permit these changes upon the determination
that the change does not adversely impact on adjacent property owners. For major
modifications, which are any changes in use or in Section 27.05 (1) (4-8) (10-14) and
(18-22) the applicant must submit a new site plan, which will be reviewed in accordance
with the procedures in Chapter 27.
27-10
For developments which are designed to be built in phases and for which further review
of the site plan was approved under Section 27.02 (A), further review of the site plans
shall be in accordance with paragraph 1 of this section.
27.07 COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT
It shall be incumbent upon the Community Development Director or his/her duly
authorized representative to make all inspections and certifications necessary to ensure
that development occurs in accordance with the approved site plan.
In the event that the Community Development Director finds that a construction in
accordance with the site plan is not being done, he/she shall issue a stop work order. It
shall be incumbent upon the contractor or developer to correct those items that are in
violation before construction may resume. All action required to bring development into
compliance with the approved site plan shall be at the developer's, builder's, contractor's,
or owner's expense.
27.08 EXPIRATION
If substantial construction has not been initiated within a period of twelve (12)
consecutive months from the date of approval of the site plan, said site plan shall be
deemed null and void. The Community Development Director may extend the
construction period if sufficient proof can be demonstrated that the construction was
delayed due to circumstances beyond the applicant's control: and that prevailing
conditions have not changed appreciably to render the approved site plan obsolete.
28-1
Chapter 28
DEFINITIONS
Words in this Zoning ordinance are normally used in their ordinary English usage. Certain
terms, are, however, defined in this Chapter and whenever used in this Zoning Ordinance, they
shall have the meaning set forth in the Section and Subsections of this chapter, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Words used in the present tense shall include
the future; the singular number shall include the plural and the plural the singular; word
"building" shall include the word "structure" and the word "shall" is mandatory not directory.
ACCESSORY BUILDING: A subordinate building or a portion of the main building; the use of
which is incidental to that of the main building or to the use of the premises.
AGRICULTURE: The use of land for agricultural purposes, including farming, dairying, pasturage,
apiculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture and animal and poultry husbandry, and the
necessary accessory uses for packing, treating, storing or selling the produce; provided,
however, that the operation of any such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of the
normal agriculture activities, and provided further, that the above uses shall not include the
commercial feeding of garbage or offal to swine or other animals.
ALLEY: A public way which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property.
APARTMENT: A room or suite of rooms in a multiple dwelling intended or designed for use as a
residence by a single family.
APARTMENT HOUSE: See Dwelling, Multiple.
ARTERIAL STREET: Roadways intended to serve as primary connectors between residential and
other types of development. Generally, these are state and county roadways.
BASEMENT: A story having part but not more than one-half (1/2) height below grade. A
basement is counted as a story for purpose of height regulations.
BOARD: Township Board of Zoning Appeals as created by this Resolution.
BOARDING HOUSE: A building other than a hotel where, for compensation, meals or lodging
and means, are provided for three but not more than 20 persons.
BUFFER YARD: An area of natural or planted vegetation adjoining or surrounding a land use
and unoccupied in its entirety by any building, paving or recreational use.
BUILDING: Any structure designed or intended for the support, enclosure, shelter, or
protection of persons, animals, chattels, or property.
28-2
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF: The vertical distance from the grade to the highest point of the coping
of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean height level between eaves
and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs.
CELLAR: A story having more than one-half (1/2) of its height below grade. A cellar is counted
as a story for the purpose of height regulations only if used for dwelling purposes other than by
a janitor employed on the premises.
CELLULAR OR WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION TOWER - any freestanding structure used to
support cellular, PCS or wireless communication antennas.
CHILD DAY-CARE: Administering to the need of infants, toddlers, pre-school children, and
school children outside of school hours by persons other than their parents or guardians,
custodians, or relatives by blood, marriage, or adoption for any part of the twenty-four hour
day in a place or residence other than the child's own home. The following are child day-care
facilities:
1. Child Day Care Center, means any place in which child day-care is provided, with or
without compensation, for 13 or more children at any one time, or any place that is
not the permanent residence of the licensee or administrator in which child daycare
is provided, with or without compensation, for 7 to 12 children at any one
time. In counting children for the purposes of this definition, any children under 6
years of age who are related to a licensee, administrator, or employee and who are
on the premises shall be counted.
2. Type A Family Day Care Home, means a permanent residence of the administrator
in which child day-care is provided for 4 to 12 children at any one time, if 4 or more
children are under 2 years of age. In counting children for the purposes of this
definition, any children under 6 years of age who are related to a licensee,
administrator, or employee and who are on the premises of the Type A home shall
be counted. The term "Type A family day-care home" does not include a residence
in which the needs of children are administered to, if all such children are siblings
of the same immediate family and the residence is their home.
3. Type B Family Day Care Home, means a permanent residence of the provider in
which child day-care or child day-care services are provided for I to 6 children at
one time and in which no more than 3 children may be under 2 years of age at any
one time. In counting children for the purposes of this definition, any children
under 6 years of age who are related to the provider and are on the premises of
the Type B home shall be counted. The term "Type B family day-care home" does
not include a residence in which the needs of children are administered to, if all
such children are siblings of the same immediate family and the residence is their
home.
COLLECTOR STREET: Roadways intended to collect traffic generated in major residential areas
and carry it to one of the roads in the arterial network. Generally, the existing primary
collectors are portions of county roads originally built to accommodate through traffic.
28-3
Residential development tributary to these roads, however, has or will create a situation where
the arterial function is subordinate to the collector function.
DEVELOPMENT: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, or the
subdividing of land into two or more parcels. For the purposes of this Resolution, the following
activities or uses shall be considered "development:"
1. Any change in a structure including the reconstruction, or alteration of its size, or
change in its external appearance.
2. A change in the intensity of use of land, such as an increase in the number of
dwellings in a structure or on land or an increase in the number of businesses,
manufacturing establishments, offices, or dwellings in a structure or on land.
3. Clearing of land, including clearing or removal of vegetation other than customary
yard and/or grounds maintenance and including any significant disturbance of
vegetation or soil manipulations.
4. Deposit of refuse, solid or liquid waste, or fill on a parcel of land.
"Development" includes all other activity customarily associated with it. When appropriate to
the context, "development" refers to the act of developing or to the result of development.
Reference to any specific operation is not intended to mean that the operation or activity is not
development. Reference to particular types of operations is not intended to limit the scope of
this definition.
DISTRICT: A section or sections for the unincorporated territory of Miami Township, Clermont
County, for which the regulations governing the use of buildings and premises, the height of
buildings, size of yards and the area lots are uniform.
DWELLING: Any building or portion thereof designed, or intended t0 be used exclusively for
residence purposes, but not including a tent, cabin, trailer, or trailer coach.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A building designed or occupied exclusively by one family.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A building designed or occupied exclusively by two families.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE: A building or portion thereof designed for or occupied by more than two
families.
FAMILY: A person or a group of persons occupying a premises and living as a single
housekeeping unit, whether or not related to each other by birth or marriage, as distinguished
from a group occupying a boarding house, lodging house or hotel, as herein defined. The term
"Family" shall include household pets other than large animals which are the property of the
family and which are not for the purpose of consumption or for the purpose of commerce.
FRONTAGE: All the property on one side of a street between two intersecting streets (crossing
or terminating) measured along the line of the street, or if the street is dead ended, then all of
the property abutting on one between an intersecting street and the head end of the street.
28-4
GARAGE, STORAGE: Any building or premises used for housing only, of motor-driven vehicles
pursuant to previous arrangements and not to transients, and at which automobile fuels and
oils are not sold, and motor-driven vehicles are not equipped, repaired, hired or sold.
GRADE: For buildings having walls adjoining one street only, the elevation of the sidewalk at
the center of the wall adjoining the street. For buildings having walls adjoining one street only,
the elevation of the sidewalk at the center of the wall adjoining the streets. For buildings
having no wall adjoining the street, the average level of the finished surface of the ground
adjacent to the exterior walls of the building. Any wall approximately parallel to and not more
than five feet from a street line is to be considered as adjoining the street.
GROUP RESIDENTIAL FACILITY: A community residential facility, licenses and/or approved and
regulated by the State of Ohio, which provides rehabilitative or rehabilitative services. There
are two classes of group residential facilities:
1. Class I, means any state, federal, or locally approved dwelling or place used as a
foster home for children or adults (not including nursing homes) or as a home for
the care or rehabilitation of dependent or predelinquent children, for the
physically handicapped or disabled, or for those with mental illness or
developmental disabilities. A Class I Type A group residential facility contains
exclusive of staff. A Class I facility contains five or staff. A class I Type B group
residential facility contains five or less residents, exclusive of staff.
2. Class II, means any state, federal, or locally approved dwelling or place used as a
home for juvenile offenders; a halfway house providing residential care or
rehabilitation for adult offenders in lieu of institutional sentencing; a halfway
house providing residence for persons leaving correctional institutions; and
residential rehabilitation centers for alcohol and drug abusers, provided that
detoxification is expressly prohibited on such premises. A Class II Type A group
residential facility contains six or more residents, exclusive of staff. A Class II
Type B group residential facility contains five or less residents, exclusive of staff.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any activity conducted in a residential district for compensation, such as
an occupation or profession, which is carried on by a member of the immediate family who
resides at the premises.
HOTEL OR MOTEL: A building in which lodging is provided offered to the public for
compensation and which is open transient guests, in contradistinction to a boarding house
lodging house.
INSTITUTION: A building occupied by a non-profit corporation or a non-profit establishment for
public use.
LODGING HOUSE: A building where lodging only is provided for compensation to three or more
but not more than 20 persons.
28-5
LOT: A parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by a use permitted in this Resolution
and the open spaces required by this Resolution and having its principal frontage upon a street
or place.
LOT, CORNER: A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection or upon two parts
of the same street, and in either case forming an interior angle of less than 135 degrees.
LOT, DEPTH OF: Horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A lot having a frontage on two non-intersecting streets, as
distinguished from a corner lot.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot which is a part of a subdivision, the map of which has been recorded in
the office of the Recorder of Clermont County; or a parcel of land, the deed to which was of
record on or prior to the effective date of this Resolution.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT: Massage Establishment means any fixed place of business where a
person offers massages:
1. In exchange for anything of value; or
2. In connection with the provision of another legitimate service.
MINERALS.- Minerals are any naturally occurring, homogenous inorganic substances having a
definite chemical composition and characteristic crystalline structure,. color, and
hardness. Minerals also include elements such as gold or silver; mixtures of inorganic
compounds, such as hornblende or granite; ores; organic derivatives such as coal or petroleum;
and/or any other substance which is neither animal or vegetable, such as gravel or clay.
NON-CONFORMING USE: Any building or land lawfully occupied by a use on the effective date
of this Resolution or any amendment or supplement thereto, which does not conform with the
Use Regulations of the District in which it is situated.
PARCEL: Any quantity of land and/or water capable of being described with such definiteness
that its location and boundaries may be established as distinct from other quantities of land
and/or water.
PARKING LOT: A parcel of land devoted to unenclosed parking spaces.
PARKING SPACE: A permanently surfaced area of not less than one 160 square feet either
within a structure or in the open, exclusive of driveways or access drives, for the parking of the
motor vehicle.
PLACE: An open unoccupied space at least 30 feet wide, other than a street or alley
permanently reserved as the principal means of access to abutting property.
SHELTER SAFETY STATION: A structure with at least three sides and a roof used to protect the
public from the natural elements while awaiting pick up by a private or public conveyance.
28-6
SIGN: GROUND: Any structure or natural object such as a tree, bush and the ground itself or
part thereof or device attached thereto or painted or represented thereon, which shall be
used to attract attention to any object, product, place, activity, person, institution,
organization or business or which shall display or include any letter, word, model, banner,
flag, pennant, insignia, device or representation used as, or which is in the nature of an
announcement, direction, or advertisement.
SIGN, FREE STANDING: Any sign which is supported by structures or supports in or upon the
ground and independent of support from any building.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED: Any Sign illuminated in any manner by artificial light source.
SIGN, LIGHTING DEVICE: Any light, string of lights, or group of lights located or arranged so as to
cause illumination of a sign.
SIGN, NON-CONFORMING: Any sign which does not conform to the regulations of this
resolution.
SIGN, OFF-PREMISES: Any sign that relates to a business, person, activity, goods, products or
services not sold or offered on the premises, or that directs persons to a different location from
where the sign is installed, also commonly known as a "billboard," "off-site," or "outdoor
advertising sign."
SIGN, ON-PREMISES: Any sign that relates to a business, person, activity, goods, products, or
services sold or offered on the premises where the sign is installed.
SIGN, PROJECTING: Any sign other than a wall sign affixed to any building or wall in which the
leading edge extends beyond such building or wall.
.
SIGN, TEMPORARY: Any sign which is not permanently affixed to a structure or mounted in the
ground and is of a temporary nature and which advertises and calls attention to community or
civic projects or activities, charitable projects or activities, grand openings, special sales or
other temporary business promotions including garage sales and flea markets.
SIGN, WALL: Any sign painted on or attached to and erected parallel to the face of, or erected
and confined within the limits of, the wall of any building and supported by such wall or
building and which displays only one advertising surface.
STORY: That portion of a building, other than a cellar as defined herein, included between the
surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there be no floor above it,
then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.
STORY, HALF: A space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection of roof decking and
wall face not more than three feet above the top floor level, and in which space not more than
two-thirds (2/3) of the floor area is finished off for use.
STREET: All property dedicated or intended for public or private street, highway, freeway, or
roadway purposes or subject to public easements therefore.
28-7
STREET LINE: A dividing line between a lot, tract, or parcel of land and a contiguous street.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent location on
the ground or attached to something having a permanent location on the ground, including but
without limiting the generality of the foregoing, advertising signs, billboards, back stops for
tennis courts, and pergolas.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as
bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any increase in the area or cubical
content of the building.
TRAILER: The word "trailer" shall include trailer coach, house trailer, mobile home, automobile
trailer, camper or any self- propelled or non-self-propelled vehicle constructed or added to
by means of accessories in such a manner as will permit the use or occupancy thereof for
human habitation, storage or conveyance of machinery, tools or equipment whether resting on
wheels, jacks or other foundation and used or so constructed that it is or may be mounted on
wheels or any similar transporting devices and used as conveyance on highways and streets,
but not including those vehicles that are attached to an automobile or truck for the sole
purpose of transporting goods or farm animals. Trailers shall not be considered buildings,
dwellings, or structures for the purpose of this Resolution.
TRUSTEES: The Board of Trustees of Miami Township Clermont County, Ohio.
YARD: An open space on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and unobstructed by any
portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein. In
measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a side yard, the depth of a front
yard or the depth of a rear yard, the mean horizontal distance between the lot line and the
main building shall be used.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending across the front of a lot between the side lot lines and being the
minimum horizontal distance between the street line and the main building or any projection
thereof, other than the projection of the usual steps or entranceway.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending across the rear of a lot between the' side lot lines and being the
minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the main building or any projection
thereof, other than the steps, unenclosed balconies or unenclosed porches. On corner lots the
rear yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least
dimension. On both corner lots and interior lots the rear yard shall in all cases be the opposite
end of the lot from the front yard.
YARD, SIDE: A yard between the main building and the sideline of the lot. The side yard
extends from the front line of the building to the rear line of the building or any projection
thereof other than steps, unenclosed balconies or unenclosed porches.
YARD, CORNER SIDE: A yard between the closest point of the main building and the side line of
the lot that abuts a street and extending from front line of the building to the rear lot line.
28-8
TEMPORARY USE: A prospective use, established for a fixed period of time with the intent to
discontinue such use upon the expiration of the time period.
Revised - January 29, 2018
29-1
Chapter 29
TOWNSHIP BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
29.01 GENERAL
A. Township Board of Zoning Appeals is hereby created. Such Board shall consist of
five (5) members, to be appointed by the Township Trustees, who shall be residents
of the unincorporated territory of Miami Township included in the area zoned. The
terms of all members shall be of such length and so arranged that term of one
member will expire each year. Each member shall serve until his successor is
appointed and qualified. Members of the Board shall be removable for nonperformance
of duty, misconduct in office or other cause by Trustees upon written
charges having been filed with the Trustees after a public hearing has been held
recording such charges, a copy of the charges having been served upon the member
so charged ten (10) days prior to the hearing, either personally, or by registered
mail, or by the same at his usual place of residence. The member shall be given the
opportunity to be heard and answer such charges. Vacancies shall be filled by the
Trustees and shall be for the unexpired term.
B. The Board shall organize and adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of this
Resolution. Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairman, and at
such other times as the Board may determine. The Chairman, or in his absence
the acting chairman may administer oaths and the Board may compel the
attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. The
Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon
each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep
records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be
immediately filed in the office of the Trustees and shall be a public record. The
Board shall act by resolution, in which three (3) members concur and every variance
or conditional use granted or denied shall be accompanied by a written finding of
fact, based on testimony and evidence and specifying the reason for granting or
denying the variance or conditional use.
C. Appeals to the Board may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer of the
Township affected by any decision of the administrative officer. Such appeal shall
be taken within twenty (20) days after the decision by filing with the Officer from
whom the appeal is taken and with the Board a notice of appeal specifying the
grounds. The Officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forth with transmit to the
Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from
was taken. The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give
at least ten (10) days notice in writing to the parties in interest, give notice of such
public hearing by one publication in one or more newspapers of general circulation
in the Township at least ten days before the date of hearing, and decide the same
within a reasonable time after it is submitted. Upon the hearing any party may
appear in person or by attorney. Any party adversely affected by a decision of the
Board may appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Clermont County, Ohio on the
29-2
around that such decision was unreasonable or unlawful. The Court may affirm,
reverse, vacate or modify the decision complained of in the appeal.
29.02 POWERS OF THE BOARD
A. The Board shall have the following powers:
1. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative Official
in the enforcement of this Resolution.
2. To authorize, upon appeal, in specific cases, such variances from the terms
of the Zoning Resolution, as will not be contrary to the public interests
where owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions
of the Resolution will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit
of the Resolution shall be observed and substantial justice done.
3. To permit a variation in the yard requirements of any District where there
are unnecessary hardships in the carrying out of these provisions due to an
irregular shape of the lot, topographic or other conditions provided such
variation will not seriously affect any adjoining property or the general
welfare.
4. Grant conditional zoning certificates for the use of land, buildings, or other
structures if such Certificates for specific uses are provided in the zoning
resolution.
5. Revoke an authorized variance or conditional zoning certificate granted for
the extraction of minerals, if any condition of the variance or certificate is
violated. The board shall notify the holder of the variance or certificate by
mail of its intent to revoke the variance or certificate under 29.02 (D) of this
section and of his right to a hearing before the board, within thirty days of
the mailing of the notice, if he so requests. if the holder requests a hearing,
the board shall set a time and place for the hearing and notify the holder. At
the hearing, the holder may appear in person, by his attorney or other
representative, or he may present his position in writing. He may present
evidence and examine witnesses appearing for or against him. If no hearing
is requested, the board may revoke the variance or certificate without a
hearing. The authority to revoke a variance or certificate is in addition to
any other means of zoning enforcement provided by law.
B. To authorize by conditional use certificates for the following uses provided the
following conditions are met to the satisfaction of the BZA.
1. In the Planned Industrial Park District “I” the extraction of raw materials
and related operations provided these conditions are met:
29-3
a. There shall be a buffer zone with a minimum width of 200 feet
from non-industrial zones; and
b. Upon completion, abandonment, or other discontinuance of
extraction operations, the land shall be restored in accordance with
applicable State and Federal Reclamation statutes and/or rules and
regulations; and
c. There shall be screening and fencing along the perimeter to
prevent unauthorized access to the property; to limit visibility of
the operations; and to prevent odor, dust, gas, or similar nuisances
arising from the operations from adversely affecting adjacent
properties; and
d. The screening and fencing required in 29.02 (b) (1) (c ) shall be of
materials generally utilized as screening and fencing such as
mounding, shrubbery, trees, chain link fencing, and/or wood
fencing; and
e. Vehicular truck traffic from the operations over streets, highways,
or roads within the unincorporated area of Miami Township shall
not delay traffic, leave residue, or create a hazard to other
vehicular or pedestrian traffic; and
f. No vehicle shall transport loads in excess of tonnage permitted by
State or Federal Regulations; and
g. Operations shall begin no earlier than dawn and cease no later
than dusk; and
h. In granting this conditional permit, the Board of Zoning Appeals
may impose additional conditions such as time periods for
commencement and termination of operations and such other
conditions to reduce the adverse effect of this use upon the
preservation of the character and development of the surrounding
area.
2. In the Planned Industrial Park District, “I” airports and/or landing fields
provided the following conditions are met:
a. In granting a conditional use permit for an airport, the Board of
Zoning Appeals shall impose reasonable requirement or restrictions
designed to ensure the safety of aircraft in landing and taking off
and the safety of persons occupying or using the area and the
security of property thereon. In determining these requirements
and/or restrictions the Board of Zoning Appeals shall consider the
character of the flying operations expected to be conducted at the
airport, the percent of slope or grade customarily used in descent
29-4
or ascent of the aircraft expecting to use the airport with reference
to their size, speed, and type, the nature of the terrain within the
airport hazard area, the character of the neighborhood, and the
uses to which the property is put or is adaptable.
b. In determining the "airport hazard area," the Board of Zoning
Appeals, prior to approval of a conditional use permit, shall consult
with the Division of Aviation, to formulate and adopt an airport
approach plan. Each plan shall indicate, the airport hazard area,
the circumstances under which structures, objects of natural
growth, public highways, and certain uses of land would be airport
hazards and the height limits of structures and objects of natural
growth and what other restrictions should be contained in the
airport zoning regulations. The actions of the Division of Aviation
shall be in accordance with Section 4563.08 of the Revised Code.
3. In all districts, parking lots provided the following conditions are met:
a. The parking area shall be located on an adjacent property not more
than two hundred (200) feet from the boundary of Industrial,
Commercial, or Office Districts.
b. Parking shall be limited to non-commercial passenger vehicles; and
c. The area used for parking meets all requirements of Chapter 23 of
this Zoning Resolution.
C. To the extension of a non-conforming use or building upon a lot or tract of land
occupied by such use or building, where such extension is necessarily incident
to the existing use, provided, however, that the floor area of such extension or
extensions shall not exceed in all fifty (50%) per cent of the floor area of the
existing building or buildings devoted to a non-conforming use on the effective
date of this Resolution, and provided further, that such extension or extensions
shall be undertaken within five (5) years of the effective date of this Resolution
or amendments to this Resolution.
D. In exercising the above-mentioned powers, the Board may reverse or affirm,
wholly or partly or may modify the order, requirement, decision or
determination appealed from, and may make such order, requirement,
decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all
the powers of the Officer from whom the appeal is taken.
E. In granting conditional use permits, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall provide a
specific period of time in which the property owner and/or applicant must
commence operation. In no case shall the time period for commencement of
operations exceed eighteen (18) months from the date the conditional use
permit is granted.
30-1
Chapter 30
ENFORCEMENT
30.01 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR AND ZONING INSPECTOR
A. It shall be the duty of the Community Development Director and Zoning
Inspector or his representative, who shall be appointed by the Board of
Trustees, to enforce this Resolution. It shall also be the duty of all officials
and employees of the Township to assist the Community Development
Director and Zoning Inspector or his representative by reporting to him upon
new construction, reconstruction or land uses or upon seeing violations.
B. Appeal from the decision of the Community Development Director and
Zoning Inspector or his representative, may be made to the Board of Appeals,
provided in Chapter 29.
30.02 FILING PLANS
A. Every application for a zoning certificate shall be accompanied by plans in
duplicate, drawn to scale in black line or blueprint showing the actual shape
and dimensions of the lot to be built upon or to be changed in use, in whole or
in part; the exact location, size, height of any building or structure to be
erected or altered, in the case of a proposed new building or structure, or
proposed alteration of an existing building or structure as would substantially
alter its appearance, drawings or sketches showing the front, sides and rear
elevations of the proposed building or structure of the structure as this will
appear after the work for which the permit is sought shall have been
completed; the existing and intended use of each building or structure or part
thereof; the number of families or housekeeping units the building is designed
to accommodate, and when no buildings are involved, the location of the
present use and proposed use to be made of the lot; and other information with
regard to the lot and neighboring lots as may be necessary to determine and
provide for the enforcement of this Resolution. One (1) copy of such plans
shall be returned to the owner when such plans have been approved by the
Community Development Director and Zoning Inspector, together with such
zoning certificate as may be granted. All dimensions shown these plans
relating to the location and the size of the lot to be built upon shall be based
on actual survey. The lot and the location of the building thereon shall be
staked out on the ground before construction is started.
30.03 ZONING CERTIFICATE
A. It shall be unlawful for an owner to use or to permit the use of any structure,
building or land, or part thereof, hereinafter created, erected changed,
30-2
converted or enlarged, wholly or partly, until a zoning certificate shall have
been issued by the Community Development Director and Zoning Inspector or
his representative. Such zoning certificate show that such building or
premises or a part thereof, and the proposed use thereof are in conformity with
the provisions of this Resolution. It shall be the duty of the Community
Development Director and Zoning Inspector or his representative to issue a
certificate provided he is satisfied that the structure, building, or premises and
the proposed use thereof conforms with all the requirements of this
Resolution. No permit for excavation or construction shall be issued by the
Community Development Director and Zoning Inspector unless the plans,
specifications, and the intended use conform to the provisions of this
resolution.
B. Under written request from the owner or tenant, the Community Development
Director and Zoning Inspector or his representative shall issue a zoning
certificate for any building or premises existing at the time of enactment of
this Resolution certifying, after inspection, the extent and kind of use made of
the building or premise and whether such use conforms to the provisions of
this Resolution.
30.04 CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH CERTIFICATES ARE REQUIRED
A zoning certificate shall be required for any of the following, except as herein provided:
A. Construction or alteration of any building, including accessory buildings.
B. Change in use of an existing building or accessory building to a use of a
different classification.
C. Occupancy and use of vacant land.
D. Change in the use of land to a use of a different classification.
E. Any change in the use of a non-conforming use
F. As required in Chapter 24- Signs
30.05 CONSTRUCTION AND USE AS PROVIDED IN APPLICATIONS, PLANS
AND CERTIFICATES
A. Zoning Certificates issued on the basis of plans and applications reviewed and
approved by the Community Development Director and Zoning Inspector or
his representative, authorize only the use and arrangement set forth in such
approved plans and applications and no other use, arrangement or
construction. Zoning Certificates issued on the basis of plans approved as
part of a zoning amendment and/or approved under the Site Plan Review
regulations of this Resolution, can only be issued for the approved use,
building size and site arrangement.
30-3
30.06 APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE OF ZONING CERTIFICATE
A. Written application for a zoning certificate for the construction of a new
building or for the alteration of an existing building shall be made at the same
time as the application for a building permit. Said certificate shall be issued
within ten (10) days after a written request for the same has been made to the
zoning inspector or his agent, provided such construction or alteration is in
conformity with the provisions of this Resolution.
B. Written application for a zoning certificate for the use of vacant land or a
change in the use of land or of a building, or for a change in a non-conforming
use, as hereinafter provided, shall be made to the Community Development
Director and Zoning Inspector or his representative; if the proposed use is in
conformity with the provisions of this Resolution, the certificate therefor shall
be issued within fifteen (15) days after the application for the same has been
made.
C. A fee in accordance with the schedule of amounts posted in the Community
Development office shall accompany each application for a zoning certificate.
30.07 ZONING CERTIFICATE FOR NON-CONFORMING USES.
A. A zoning certificate shall be required for all lawful non-conforming uses of
land or buildings created by adoption or amendment of the Resolution.
Application for such certificate for non-conforming use shall be filed with the
Community Development Director and Zoning Inspector or his representative
by the owner or lessee of the building or land occupied by such nonconforming
use within one (1) year of the effective date of this Resolution or
within six (6) months of the effective date of such amendment. It shall be the
duty of the Community Development Director and Zoning Inspector or his
representative to issue a certificate for a lawful non-conforming use, but
failure to apply for such certificate for a non-conforming use or refusal of the
Community Development Director and Zoning Inspector to issue a certificate
for such non-conforming use may be evidence that said non-conforming use
was either illegal or did not lawfully exist at the effective date of this
Resolution or amendment thereto.
31-1
CHAPTER 31
BOUNDARIES OF DISTRICTS
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts as shown
on the maps accompanying and made a part of this resolution, the following rules apply:
A. The district boundaries are the center lines of streets or alleys, unless
otherwise shown, and where the districts designated on the maps
accompanying and made apart of the resolution are bounded approximately by
street or alley center lines, such center lines shall be construed to be the
boundary of the districts.
B. Where the District boundaries are not otherwise indicated, and where the
property has been or may hereafter be divided into blocks and lots, the District
boundaries shall be construed to be the lot lines, and where the districts
designated on the maps accompanying and made apart of this Resolution are
bounded approximately by lot lines, the lot lines shall be construed to be the
boundary of the district unless the boundaries are otherwise indicated on the
maps.
C. In unsubdivided property, the district boundary lines on the maps
accompanying and made a part of this resolution shall be determined by
dimensions or the use of the scale appearing on the maps.
32-1
CHAPTER 32
INTERPRETATION, PURPOSE AND CONFLICT
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Resolution, they shall be held to be
minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals, comfort
and general welfare. Wherever the regulations of this resolution require greater width or
size of yards or other open spaces or require a lower height of building of less number of
stories or require greater percentage of lot to be left unoccupied or require a lower density
of population, or require a more restricted use of land, or impose other higher standards
than are required in any other resolution or regulations, private deed restrictions or
private covenants, these regulations shall govern, but if the requirement of the other
resolution, regulation, private deed restriction or private covenant is more restrictive, than
those requires shall govern.
33-1
CHAPTER 33
AMENDMENTS
Amendments or supplements to the Zoning Resolution may be made in the same manner
and for the same purposes provided in section 519.12 et seq., of the Ohio Revised Code.
34-1
CHAPTER 34
REPEAL
In any Township in which there is in force a plan of zoning, the same may be repealed as
to said Township in the following manner: The Trustees (a) may adopt a resolution upon
its own initiative, and (b) shall adopt a resolution if there is present to it a petition signed
by a number of qualified voters residing in the unincorporated area of such Township
included in the zoning plan equal to not less than eight (8%) percent of the total vote cast
for all candidates for Governor in such area of the last preceding general election at
which a Governor was elected, requesting the question of whether or not the plan of
zoning in effect in said township shall be repealed to be submitted to the electors residing
in the unincorporated are of the Township included in the Zoning plan, at the next
primary or general election. In the event of a majority of the vote cast on said question in
said Township is in favor of repeal of zoning, then said regulations shall no longer be of
any force or effect in said Township. Not more than one such election shall be held in
any two calendar years.
35-1
CHAPTER 35
APPLICABLE PROVISIONS
This resolution has been passed under the authority of Section 519.01 et seq., of the Ohio
reviewed Code and embraces the provisions thereof regarding enforcement and penalties
for violations.
36-1
CHAPTER 36
VALIDITY
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this resolution is for any reason
held to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of
this resolution. All Resolutions or parts of resolutions of Miami Township, in conflict
with any regulation, provision, amendment or supplement of this resolution, are to the
extent of such conflict hereby repealed.
37-1
CHAPTER 37
WHEN EFFECTIVE
This resolution shall be in full force and effect from and after the earliest period allowed
by law.
Adopted this _________________________________
Board of Township Trustees
of Miami Township
Clermont County, Ohio
Attest: ___________________________________

BOARD OF TRUSTEES
K ARL 8. SCHULTZ
K ENDAL A. TRACY
MARY MAKLEY WOLFF
FISCAL OFFICER
ERIC C. FERRY
ADMINISTRATOR
JEFFREY A. WRIGHT
MIAMI TOWNSHIP
6101 MEIJER DRIVE • MILFORD, OH 45150-2189
RESOLUTION 2016-44
ADMINISTRATION
248-3725
248-3730 (FAX)
COMMUNITY D EVELOPMENT
248-3731
SERVICE D EPARTMENT
248-3728
POLICE D EPARTMENT
248-3721
F1RE1EMS
248-3700
PARKS I R ECREATION
248-3727
WHEREAS, the Board of Trustees of Miami Township, Clermont County, Ohio, met in
Regular Session on July 19, 2016 at the Miami Township Civics Center with the following
members present Karl Schultz and Ken Tracy.
MR. TRACY ·?lade a motion to adopt the following Resolution:
RESOLUTION ADOPTING PARKING REGULATIONS FOR MIAMI TOWNSHIP,
DISPENSING WITH A SECOND READING AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY
WHEREAS, the Board of Trustees of Miami Township seek to regulate parking on
streets under the control of the Township for the safety of residents and others traveling on such
streets.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED by the Board of Trustees of Miami Township,
Clermont County, Ohio by authority of Section 505.17 of the Ohio Revised Code, as follows:
SECTION 1: The attached Parking Resolution shall be adopted for the safety of residents and
others traveling on such streets.
SECTION 2: that this Resolution may be modified by resolution at any time to allow parking
on streets previously designated as no parking or restricted parking and to prohibit
or restrict parking on streets on which parking was previously permitted.
SECTION 3: that the Township Fiscal Officer shall cause a copy of this Resolution to be posted
in five (5) 'Conspicuous places in the Township for a period of thirty (30) days.
Additionally, the entire Resolution shall be posted on the Township website and
shall be available as a printed document at the Township Administrative Offices
during normal business hours.
SECTION 4: That this Board hereby finds and determines that all formal actions relative to the
passage of this Resolution were taken in an open meeting of this Board, and that
all deliberations of this Board and of its Committees, if any, which resulted in
formal action, were taken in meetings open to the public, in full compliance with
applicable legal requirements, including Section 121.22 of the Ohio Revised
Code.
www.MiamiTwpOH.gov
SECTION 5: That the Board does hereby dispense with the requirement that this Resolution be
read on two separate days, pursuant to Section 504.10 of the Ohio Revised Code,
and authoriies the adoption of this Resolution upon its first reading.
SECTION 6: This Resolution is declared to be an emergency measure necessary for the
preservation of the health, safety and well-being of the residents of the Township in
order to immediately begin regulation of parking in the Township.
SECTION 7: This Resolution shall take effect at the earliest period allowed by law.
First Reading:
Second Reading:
Effective:
July 19, 2016
Dispensed with
July 19, 2016
MR. SCHULTZ seconded the motion to adopt the Resolution. On the roll call being called the
vote resulted as follows:
Mr. Schultz
Mr. Tracy
Resolution 2016-44 adopted July 19, 2016
ATTEST:
APPROVED AS TO FORM:
AYE
AYE
CERTIFICATION OF FUNDS
I hereby certify that at the time of making of this certification the amount required to meet the
obligations set forth in this Resolution has been lawfully appropriated for such purpose and is in
the treasury or in the process of collection to the credit of an appropriate fund free from any
previous encumbrance.
Eric C. Ferry
Fiscal Officer, Mi
MI~I TOWNSHIP PARKING REGULATIONS
Chapters and Sections:
Chapter 1 Scope and Administration Sections
101 General
102 Applicability
Chapter 2 Definitions
201 General
202 General Definitions
Chapter 3 Street Parking Restrictions
301 General Prohibitions
302 Permits Required for Temporary Parking of Moving Vans, Trailers, SemiTrailers,
Dumpsters, and Portable Storage Units (PODS)
Chapter 4 Fire Lane Parking Prohibitions
401 General Prohibitions
Chapter 5 Special Event/Temporary Parking Prohibitions
501 General Prohibitions
Chapter 6 Enforcement
601 Unlawful Acts
602 Penalties and Fines
603 Towing and Impoundment
604 Abatement and Other Lawful Remedies
CHAPTER 1: SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION
SECTION 101 GENERAL
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Miami Township Parking
Regulations, hereinafter referred to as "these regulations" or "the Township Parking Resolution."
101.2 Repeal of Prior Parking Resolutions. These regulations are enacted pursuant to
Ohio Revised Code Sec!ion 505.17 and repeal and replace all of the previously-enacted
resolutions of the Township pertaining to parking except for the Township's annual Snow
Emergency Resolution which governs the procedures for declaring a Snow Emergency in the
Township.
101.3 Scope. The provisions of these regulations shall apply to all vehicle parking in
Miami Township, including, but not limited to, parking on any township street, or highway,
parking on established roadways proximate to buildings, and parking on private property as
necessary to provide access to the property by public safety vehicles and equipment.
101.4 Intent. These regulations shall be construed to secure its expressed intent, which is
to ensure public health, safety and welfare insofar as they are affected by parked vehicles
impeding travel.
101.5 Severability. If a section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of these
regulations is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of these regulations.
SECTION 102 APPLICABILITY
102.1 General. T11e provisions of these regulations shall apply to all matters affecting or
relating to parking in Miami Township. ·
102.2 Existing remedies. The provisions of these regulations shall not be construed to
abolish or impair existing remedies of the Township or its officers or agencies relating to the
citation or removal of illegally or dangerously parked vehicles.
CHAPTER 2: DEFINITIONS
SECTION 201 GENERAL
201.1 Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the
purposes of these regulations, have the meanings shown in this chapter.
201.2 Interchangeability. Words stated in the presence tense include the future; words
stated in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; the single number includes the
plural and the plural, the singular.
201.3 Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined in these regulations the usual
customary definition shall apply.
201.4 Capitalization. Defined words may begin with an uppercase or lower case letter,
interchangeably and without significance as to their meaning.
SECTION202 GENERAL DEFINITIONS
BICYCLE. A bicycle is a device, other than a tricycle designed solely for use as a play
vehicle by a child, propelled solely by human power upon which any person may ride having
two tandem wheels, or one wheel in the front and two wheels in the rear, or two wheels in the
front and one wheel in the rear, any of which is more than fourteen inches in diameter.
DRIVER OR OPERATOR. A driver or operator is any person who drives or is in actual
physical control of a vehicle, trackless trolley, or streetcar.
DUMPSTER. Any container designed or used for the collection and hauling of waste or
debris, including but not l~mited to roll-off containers or boxes and bin containers.
MOTORIZED BICYCLE. A motorized bicycle is any vehicle having either two tandem
wheels or one wheel in the front and two wheels in the rear, that is capable of being pedaled and
is equipped with a helper motor of not more than fifty cubic centimeters piston displacement that
produces no more than one brake horsepower and is capable of propelling the vehicle at a speed
of no greater than twenty miles per hour on a level surface.
MOVING VAN. A truck with an enclosed cargo space generally used for the moving of
residential or commercial property from one location to another.
OWNER. Any person having a legal or equitable interest in property or otherwise having
control of the property.
PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership or any group acting as a unit.
PORTABLE STORAGE UNIT (POD). Any container transported to a designated
location for storage or moving purposes (typically known as PODS, MODS, etc.).
PREMISES. A 19t, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way, including any
structures thereon.
PROPERTY. Property has the same meaning as "premises" as that term is defined
herein.
PUBLIC WAY. Any street, alley or similar parcel of land essentially unobstructed from
the ground to the sky, which is deeded, dedicated or otherwise permanently appropriated the
public for public use.
SEMITRAILER. Semitrailer means every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons
or property with another and separate motor vehicle so that in operation a part of its own weight
or that of its load, or both, rests upon and is carried by another vehicle.
STREET OR HIGHWAY. A street or highway is the entire width between the
boundary lines of every way open to the use of the public as a thoroughfare for purposes of
vehicular travel.
TRAILER. A trailer means every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or
property wholly on its own structure and for being drawn by a motor vehicle, including any such
vehicle when formed by or operated as a combination of a "semitrailer" and a vehicle of the
dolly type, such as that commonly known as a "trailer dolly," a vehicle used to transport
agricultural produce or agricultural production materials between a local place of storage or
supply and the farm when drawn or towed on a street or highway at a speed greater than twentyfive
miles per hour, and a vehicle designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a
place of storage and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or
highway for a distance of more than ten miles or at a speed of more than twenty-five miles per
hour.
TRUCK. A truck is every motor vehicle, except trailers and semitrailers, designed and
used to carry property.
VEHICLE. A vehicle is every device, including a motorized bicycle, in, upon, or by
which any person or property may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except that
"vehicle" does not include any motorized wheelchair, any electric personal assistive mobility
device, any device that is moved by power collected from overhead electric trolley wires or that
is used exclusively upon "stationary rails or tracks, or any device, other than a bicycle, that is
moved by human power.
TOWNSHIP. Township refers to Miami Township, Clermont County, Ohio.
CHAPTER 3: STREET PARKING RESTRICTIONS
SECTION 301 GENERAL PROHIBITIONS
301.1 Street Parking Prohibition. On any Township street that is less than twenty four
(24) feet wide, parking is to be limited to the non-fire hydrant side of the roadway.
301.2 Cul-De-Sac Prohibition. Parking is prohibited in the cul-de-sac portion of any
Township street.
301.3 Intersection Prohibitions. Parking is prohibited on both sides of any street at any
point between zero (0) and thirty (30) feet from the end of the radius of an intersecting street.
301.4 Fire Station Prohibitions. Parking is prohibited on both sides of any street at any
point between zero (0) and one hundred (100) feet from the driveway entrance/exit of a fire
station. •
301.5 Fire Hydrant Prohibitions. Parking is prohibited within ten (10) feet of a fire
hydrant on the fire hydrant side of any street which is greater than twenty four (24) feet wide.
301.6 Unpaved Rights-of-Way. Parking is prohibited on any unpaved portion of any
right-of-way.
301.7 Truck/Trailer/Semitrailer Parking Prohibitions. Except as authorized by permit
in Section 303 of this Resolution, and with the exception of vehicles which have been registered
and licensed as a passenger vehicle or a non-commercial truck and/or unless otherwise posted,
no moving van, truck, trailer, or semitrailer shall be permitted to park along any Township street
other than to load or unload. Moving vans, trailers and/or semitrailers so parked for loading or
unloading must be connected to a towing vehicle at all times.
301.8. Portable Storage Unit (POD) and Dumpster Parking Prohibitions. Except as
authorized by permit in Section 303 of this Resolution, no portable storage unit (POD) or
dumpster shall be permitted to park along any Township street other than to load or unload.
Portable storage units (PODS) and dumpsters so parked for loading or unloading must be
connected to a towing vehicle at all times.
301.9. Seventy-Two (72) Hour Parking Limitation. Parking is prohibited for longer
than seventy-two (72) hours on any street or other property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular travel, or upon or within the right-of-way of any street unless the owner of the vehicle
notifies the chief of police of the need to leave the vehicle parked in such areas for longer than
seventy-two (72) hours and receives permission to so park the vehicle.
SECTION302 PERMITS REQUIRED FOR TEMPORARY PARKING OF
MOVING VANS, TRAILERS, SEMI-TRAILERS, DUMPSTERS,
AND PORTABLE STORAGE UNITS (PODS).
302.1 General St~tement. The parking prohibitions/permitting structure set forth in this
section have been established due to specific traffic hazards and safety concerns which occur
when large vehicles are parked on Township streets, especially for extended periods of time.
302.2 General Prohibition. As is established in Section 301 of this Resolution, the
parking of moving vans, trailers, semi-trailers, dumpsters, and portable storage units (PODS) is
generally prohibited on any Township street except to load or unload. In addition, such vehicles
and containers so parked for loading or unloading must be connected to a towing vehicle at all
times.
302.3 Permit For Temporary Parking Beyond Short Unloading/Loading Period. A
temporary parking permit may be issued to allow for the parking of moving vans, trailers, semitrailers,
dumpsters and portable storage units (PODS) beyond the short loading/unloading period
permitted by Section 301 of this Resolution.
302.4 Duration of Temporary Parking Permits. Temporary Parking Permits issued
pursuant to this Section shall be for the shortest duration possible to fulfill the purposes for
which the Temporary Parking Permit was requested. Unless extraordinary circumstances are
established by the person requesting the Permit, no Temporary Parking Permit shall be issued for
longer than seven (7) days and no more than four (4) Temporary Parking Permits shall be issued
to the same person or address in any calendar year.
302.5 Application Process. In order to obtain a Temporary Parking Permit, persons must
provide the Township Administrative Office with a completed application which includes the
following information:
a) Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant;
b) Address and proposed location of the moving van, trailer, semi-trailer, dumpster
or portable storage unit (POD);
c) Type of vehicle or container for which the application is filed;
d) Size of the moving van, trailer, semi-trailer, dumpster, or portable storage unit
(POD) for which the application is filed;
e) Name, contact person (including his/her direct telephone/mobile telephone
number), address, and general telephone number of the company providing the
moving van, trailer, semi-trailer, dumpster, or portable storage unit (POD);
f) Beginning and ending date for which a Temporary Parking Permit is being
requested; and
g) Statement of extraordinary circumstances warranting the granting of a Temporary
Parking Permit for longer than seven (7) days or more than four( 4) such permits
in one (1) calendar year.
302.6 Criteria for Granting a Temporary Parking Permit. Temporary parking permits
for moving vans, trailers, semi-trailers, dumpsters, and portable storage units (PODS) will be
issued to persons:
a)
b)
Who cannot reasonably locate the moving van, trailer, semi-trailer, portable
storage unit (POD), or dumpster on an impervious surface other than on the
Township street or in the Township right-of-way; and
Who are utilizing the moving van, trailer, semi-trailer, dumpster, or portable
storage unit (POD) for bona fide moving, rehabilitation and/or construction
purposes.
302. 7 Extension of Temporary Parking Permit Period. Persons who have been issued
a Temporary Parking Permit may have the time period for which parking is permitted extended
by requesting an extension of the permit period in writing prior to the expiration of the issued·
Temporary Parking Permit. The extension of any Temporary Parking Permit period is within the
sole discretion of the Township.
302.8 Revocation of Temporary Parking Permit. The Township reserves the right to
revoke any Temporary Parking Permit issued if it determines, in its sole discretion, that the
moving van, trailer, semi-trailer, dumpster, or portable storage unit (POD) creates a hazard or
danger to the travelling public or pedestrians. If the Township determines the hazard or danger to
be significant or if the moving van, trailer, semi-trailer, dumpster, or portable storage unit (POD)
can be reasonably and quickly moved to another, safer location, the Township will require the
immediate relocation of the moving van, trailer, semi-trailer, dumpster, or portable storage unit
(POD). In all other cases, the Township will require that the moving van, trailer, semi-trailer,
dumpster, or portable storage unit (POD) is moved within twenty-four (24) hours of the
notification that it must be relocated.
CHAPTER 4: FIRE LANE PARKING PROHIBITIONS
SECTION 401 GENERAL PROHIBITIONS
401.1 Fire Lane Prohibitions. Parking is prohibited in any area designated as a fire lane.
CHAPTER 5: SPECIAL EVENT/TEMPORARY PARKING
PROHIBITIONS
SECTION 501 GENERAL PROHIBITIONS
501.1 General Statement. The parking prohibitions set forth in this section have been
established due to specific traffic hazards and safety concerns associated with temporary events
and conditions. The Township shall post temporary "No Parking" signs in the affected areas at
least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of such temporary events unless such notice is not
possible or practical given the nature or timing of the event.
501.2 Miscellaneous Temporary Parking Prohibitions. Parking is prohibited at any
location and for any duration deemed necessary by the Township as a result of conditions,
events, or activities which render parking hazardous or contrary to the public safety and welfare.
501.3 Public Assemblage Permits. Parking may be limited on any Township street as
provided for by the Township Public Assemblage Permit Policy which allows for certain streets
to be closed; or parking to be limited, for limited special events as approved by the Chief of
Police, the Fire Chief and the Township Administrator.
CHAPTER6:ENFORCEMENT
SECTION 601 UNLAWFUL ACTS
601.1 Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for a person to be in conflict with or in
violation of any of the provisions of these regulations.
SECTION602 PENAL TIES AND FINES
602.1 Violation Penalties. Any person who violates any of these regulations or any
regulation or order adopted pursuant to these regulations is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
SECTION603 TOWING AND IMPOUNDMENT
603.1 Right to Tow/Impound Vehicles. The Township Chief of Police, or any
Township police officer may order into storage and tow, or have towed, any vehicle parked in
violation of these regulations. The owner or any lien holder of a vehicle ordered into storage may
claim the vehicle upon presentation of proof of ownership, which may be shown by a certificate
of title to the vehicle, and payment of all expenses, charges, and fines incurred as a result of the
parking violation and removal and storage of the vehicle.
SECTION604 ABATEMENT AND OTHER LAWFUL REMEDIES
604.1 Abatement of violation. The imposition of the fines and penalties herein
prescribed shall not preclude Miami Township from instituting, by and through its law director,
appropriate action to enjoin, restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to stop an illegal act.